 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
AND RELATED ISSUES 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
…..………NOVEMBER
….…NOVEMBER, 2011
 
REPORT NO. 
 236 
 

 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
C.S. (H.A.)-464      
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED TWENTY NINTH REPORT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF COVID-19 
PANDEMIC AND RELATED ISSUES 
                                
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYM (iii) - (v) 
4.  REPORT      1 - 63 
 Chapter   -   I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
3 - 21 
 Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 
22 - 35 
 Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
36 - 60 
 Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
 
61 - 63 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE-  
AT A GLANCE 
 
64 - 72 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
73 - 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1.    Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri Brijlal  
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
7. Shri Derek O’Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
12. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
17. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
18. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
21. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
22. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
23. Shri Mohammed Faizal P. P.   
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
25. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
26. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
27. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
28. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
29. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi  
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Vanga Geetha Viswanath  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Thirty S ixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Ninth Report on the 
'Management of COVID-19 Pandemic and Related Issues'. 
 
2. The Two Hundred Twenty Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was virtually presented through video conferencing to the Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21 st December, 2020 and was forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on the same day. Thereafter, the said Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on the 2 nd February, 2021.  After virtual presentation of the Report to the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and forwarding the same to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21 st 
December, 2020, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to 
furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The 
Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said Report to the Committee on 30th July, 2021.  
 
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated                               
24th September 2004.     
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Thirty S ixth Report and adopted the same 
at its meeting held on 8th December, 2021. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
8th December, 2021 
New Delhi 
Agrahayana 17, 1943 (Saka)                                   
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                          
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
ATNs Action Taken Notes  
AAC Alternative Academic Calendar  
ACC Advance Chemistry Cell  
ABRY Atmanirbhar Bharat Rozgar Yojana  
AIR All India Radio  
ABA Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan  
AHPI Association of Health Care Providers-India  
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy  
BBIL Bharat Biotech International Ltd  
BIBCOL Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Limited  
CHAMPIONS Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern Processes for Increasing 
the Output and National Strength  
CVC COVID Vaccination Centre  
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Organization  
CSCM Centrally Sponsored Centrally Managed  
GKRA Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan  
CHCs Community Health Centres 
CLCS-TUS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy- Technology Upgradation Scheme 
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises  
CDMC COVID Drugs Management Cell  
CGSSD Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt  
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
DCGI Drug Controller General of India  
DCC Drugs Coordination Committee ( 
DDMA Delhi Disaster Management Authority 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer  
DAC&FW Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare  
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade  
DLTFC District Level Task Force Committee  
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing 
DOP Department of Pharmaceuticals 
DFS Department of Financial Services  
EPFO Employees' Provident Fund Organisation 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme  
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme  
ECRP Emergency COVID Response Plan  
EMD Earnest Money Deposit  
EBR Extra Budgetary Resources  
FAQ Frequently Asked Question 
FCU Fact Check Unit  
FCI Food Corporation of India 
 
(iii) 
 

GeM Government e Marketplace 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GIS Geographic Information System  
GKRA Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan  
GNCT Government of National Capital Territory 
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
IMNCI Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illness  
iGOT Integrated Government Online Training 
IS Interest Subvention  
IMA Indian Medical Association  
IDSP Integrated Disease Surveillance Project  
ICT Information and Communication Technology  
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
JNV Jawahal Navodaya Vidyalaya 
LE Learning Enhancement  
LTC Leave Travel Concessions  
KCCs Kisan Credit Cards  
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MLIs Member Lending Institutions  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MSMEs Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises  
MNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
MCCD Medical Certification of Cause of Death  
MIS Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome  
MFIs Micro Finance Institutions 
MSE-CDP MSE Cluster Development Programme  
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
NBFCs Non-Banking Financial Companies 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NSD News Services Division  
NDMP National Disaster Management Plan  
NEGVAC National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19  
NHM National Health Mission 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation  
NIC National Informatics Centre  
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd.  
NISHTHA National Initiative for School Heads’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement 
NIMHANS National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences 
NTAGI National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization  
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority  
NDUW National Database for Unorganized Workers  
 
(iv) 
 
 

 
 
NGOs Non- Governmental Organisations  
NVS Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
NFSA National Food Security Act 
NCDC National Centre for Disease Control  
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  
OSH Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions  
ONOR One-Nation One ration card  
PDS Public Distribution System 
PMGKY Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana 
PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee  
PLI Production-Linked Incentive  
PRI Prompt Repayment Incentive  
PMAY Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana  
PHC Primary Health Centre 
PMBJK Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadh Kendras  
PIPs Programme Implementation Plans ( 
PMGKP Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package  
PM-GKAY Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana  
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction  
SARS Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome  
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund  
SAATHI System for Awareness, Assessment and Training for Hospitality Industry  
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures  
SLF Special Liquidity Facility 
TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System  
TAT Turn Around Time  
UGC University Grants Commission 
UTs Union Territories 
UAM Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum  
VUR Vaccine Utilization Reports  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the 'Management of 
COVID-19 Pandemic and Related Issues'. The 229 th Report of the Committee was virtually presented 
through video conferencing to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21 st December, 2020 and was 
forwarded to the Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on the same day. Thereafter, the said Report was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 2nd February, 2021. 
 
2. In view of the importance and sensitivity of the subject, the Committee held a meeting on 28 th 
June, 2021, to keep itself abreast of the latest situation in the country and steps taken by the 
Government of India on the recommendations made by the Committee in its 229 th Report. In the 
meeting, the representatives of the MHA, Ministries of Finance, Commerce & Industry, Health & 
Family Welfare and Labour & Employment briefed the Committee on the „Socio -Economic Fallout of 
the COVID-19 Pandemic‟s Second Wave‟. The Committee was informed about the rise in COVID -19 
case in different places in different time; implementation of micro containment strategy at the district, 
city level;  localised lockdowns; coordination with States/UTs by providing overall guidance; number 
of cases, deaths, recovery rate and case fatality rate; institutional arrangeme nts and advisories issued to 
manage the second wave; challenges faced during second wave; five-fold strategy of test- track-treat-
vaccination and adherence to COVID-19 appropriate behaviour; status on production of vaccines; 
infrastructure, testing, local containment and clinical management; efforts to fulfil augmented oxygen 
demand; guidelines for preparedness on paediatric care; release of funds to States under State Disaster 
Relief Fund (SDRF); augmentation of health infrastructure; extension of Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan 
Package by 180 days for the intended beneficiaries; vaccination drive; economic recovery post-second 
wave; food procurement/distribution and employment generation under MNREGA, etc. 
3. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by the Govern ment:  
Paras: 2.6.12, 3.2.7, 3.10.5, 3.10.9, 3.10.10, 3.10.19, 3.10.20, 3.15.7, 4.4.10, 4.4.11, 4.5.7, 4.6.7, 4.7.7, 
4.7.8, 4.10.8, 5.6.3, 5.7.14, 5.10.5, 6.1.7, 6.1.8, 6.2.4, (of the Two Hundred and Twenty Ninth 
Report) Total recommendations- 21 Accepted.  
 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted 21 of its recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s repli es: - Paras: 2.6.9, 2.6.10, 2.6.11, 3.10.23, 3.12.14, 3.13.7, 3.15.6, 
4.8.3, 4.10.9, 4.10.11, 4.10.12, 5.5.2, 5.9.14, 5.10.6, 5.10.7 (ibid
) (Total recommendations- 15 Not to 
be pursued further.   
 
 The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry in respect of 15 
recommendations and, therefore, does not want to pursue such recommendations further. 
 

2 
 
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 2.6.13, 3.10.6, 3.10.7, 3.10.8, 3.10.21, 3.12.15, 
3.12.16, 3.13.3, 3.13.8, 3.14.5, 4.4.12, 4.4.13 & 6.1.9, 4.5.8, 4.10.10 (ibid) Total recommendations- 
15 Not convincing replies. 
  
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of 15 of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should take further necessary 
action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a time frame of three  
months after presentation of the Report. 
 
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies o f the 
Government have not been received:  Para: 3.10.22, 6.1.5, 6.1.6 (ibid) Total recomme ndations- 03 
To be pursued further. 
  
In respect of the 03 recommendations placed in Chapter IV, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of 
the Committee within three months. 
 
 The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

3 
 
Chapter-I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
1.1 India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic 
 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.1.1 The Committee, however, observes that the sudden imposition of lockdown necessitated by the 
challenging situation and the fear of the rapid spread of the virus did result in unprecedented disruption. 
The lockdown led to the stoppage of Intra-State and Inter-State movement of people, goods, shutdown 
of factories, hotels, eateries, tourism, etc., and other economic activities that led to unprecedented 
disruption and severe social and economic fallouts. The migrant labourers, factory workers, daily wage 
earners were the worst affected. The civil administration in the States and the districts prepared to 
respond to the challenge and establish shelters and quarantine facilities. As there was no timely 
dissemination of the information in the district areas about the arrangements being made for food, 
shelter and other facilities, anxiety and uncertainty gripped the migrant labourers and workers and led 
to their movement in large number to their home States. This stopped only when effective mitigating 
measures were taken by Central and the State Governments. 
(Para 2.6.12 of the 229th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
1.1.3 MHA issued regular advisories to States/UTs to take all necessary measures to provide shelters, 
food, water, health facilities and also proper counselling to migrant workers. 
 
1.1.4 On 28 th March, 2020, Central Government allowed State Governments to use SDRF for making 
provisions of temporary accommodation, food, clothing, medical care, etc., to homeless people 
including migrant labourers. To augment the funds with the States, Central Government released in 
advance Rs.11,092 crores from the SDRF to the States on 3rd April, 2020 itself. 
 
1.1.5 On 19 th April, 2020 movement of migrant workers was allowed within the States/ UTs so that 
they could be engaged in industrial, farming, construction, manufacturing and MNREGA works as 
additional new activities were permitted outside containment zones with effect from 20th April, 2020. 
  
1.1.6 On 29 th April and 1 st May 2020, MHA further allowed the movement of migrant workers to 
their native places by buses and Shramik special trains respectively. MHA facilitated the movement of 
migrant workers to their native places through Shramik special trains in coordination with the Indian 
railways and State/ UT Governments. More than 64 lakh migrant workers were transported by Indian 
Railways in a smooth manner. 
 
 
 

4 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
1.1.7 In the meeting of the Committee held on 28 th June, 2021, to examine the  Socio-Economic 
Fallout of the COVID-19 Pandemic’s Second Wave’,  the Home Secretary informed the Committee that 
the second wave of Pandemic came with cases rising at different times in different places of the 
country.  Therefore, micro containment strategy in consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare was devised and implemented at the district level. Instead of going for  national level changes, 
States were asked to do it at the local level.  The Centre played a key role in providing the overall 
guidance to the States and UTs.  Based on this, States implemented their own measures based on the 
assessment of the local situation, evidence based real time dynamics approach of imposing restrictions, 
etc.  The situation was reviewed in the country at the highest level on regular basis.  The Ministry of 
Home Affairs issued orders, guidelines and advisories from time to time to ensure this containment of 
COVID-19 in the country.  Before the second wave started, on 23 rd March, 2021 MHA had issued the 
guidelines to States to keep a watch, impose restrictions at district, sub-district level and strict 
enforcement of COVID appropriate behavior with a view to contain spread of COVID-19.    Before the 
second wave started, the MHA emphasized on the strategy of test, track, and treat protocol with micro-
containment zones across the States during Virtual Conferences with the Chief Secretaries as well as in 
meetings of Hon’ble Prime Minister with the Chief Ministers.  The MHA subseque ntly issued various 
advisories in the month of March itself, generating awareness on COVID appropriate behavior.  
Thereafter, guidelines were issued on 29 th April, 2021 where States and UTs were asked to consider 
containment measures as per the advisory of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which was issued 
on 25th of April, 2021.  On 19 th June, the States were advised for a five-fold strategy when the numbers 
came down and activities were opened in a calibrated manner.  It was also advised to increase the 
pace of testing and keep a close watch on any signs of surge at the local, district, city and micro-
subdivision level and take measures to check it right. 
 
1.1.8 For disbursement of funds to States, the MHA has allowed State Governments to use 10 percen t 
of their opening balance of State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) for COVID containment measures.  
However, when the surge increased in April, 2021, the percentage was increased to 50 percent of the 
SDRF. More than Rs. 8,800 crores were released to the States as first installment as a Central share. 
The States add their own share and then they could use 50 percent of it for COVID containment 
measures.
  
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.1.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
1.2 Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
 
Testing for COVID-19 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes that the testing capacity has been expanded significantly since the 
imposition of the first lockdown in late March, 2020. The Committee appreciates that in the 
management of the crisis, India demonstrated its capacity to scale up the responses as the situation 
evolved. The number of testing laboratories was only 1 in the month of January, 2020 which was 

5 
 
increased to 151 on 1 st April, 2020 and as of 10 th December, 2020, the total number of labs approved 
for COVID-19 testing has increased to 2229. The number of isolation beds, ICU beds and PPE kits 
have also been increased from approximately 1.74 lakh, 22 thousand and 3.87 lakh in mid-April, 2020 
to more than 15 lakh, 80 thousand and 6 crore respectively, as on 10 th December, 2020. There has also 
been a robust response from the Government in increasing the testing capacity per day from 30 
thousand on 1st April to 10 lakh as of 10th December, 2020. 
(Para 3.2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.4 The Committee notes with appreciation that the public health care system and Government 
hospitals rose to the occasion in bearing the unprecedented burden. The Committee is of the considered 
view that the Government responded to the challenging situation promptly and appreciates its quick 
adaptation to the emerging evidence about this highly contagious disease, though the country during 
the initial phase suffered from a shortage in medical supplies, availability of beds in hospitals, low level 
of testing and serious impact on other non-COVID health services. There has been a response to the 
situation by both Central and State Governments along with district administration in identifying the 
cases and reserving the required number of beds for COVID-19 patients as and where there was a need. 
(Para 3.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.5 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.7 The Committee opines that a precise study on test rate, recovery and fatality rate is important to 
discern the pattern. There is also a need to identify the States where the testing facilities need to be 
expanded as the testing facility is not the same across the States and Union Territories. Even within 
States also, districts should be identified and adequate health infrastructure should be made available 
there. 
(Para 3.10.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.8 Over the next six years, under the proposed PM-ASBY, Integrated Public health laboratories 
will be established at block and district level to facilitate and expand testing capacity. [There is also 

6 
 
provision for strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional branches 
and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units]. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.9 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.10  The Committee, further, recommends that relevant data should be made available for the 
research community duly following data anonymization, security and privacy laws which can provide 
required input for COVID-19 management and access, analyze and provide real time context-specific 
solutions to control the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
(Para 3.10.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.11  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.12  The Committee notes the reply 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.13  The Committee appreciates the commendable work that has been done by the AIIMS in 
helping the other institutions in the States, particularly, about the treatment protocols. 
(Para 3.10.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.2.14  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.15  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.16  The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and health workers who rose to the occasion in tackling this unprecedented health crisis and 
also expresses deep gratitude towards the frontline health workers and the Corona Warriors who have 
lost their lives on duty. 
 
(Para 3.10.20 ibid) 
 
 

7 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.2.17  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been  
noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.18  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.19  The Committee expresses concern over the recent spike in the incidence of the 
COVID19 cases in Delhi due to the combined effect of series of festive events, increase in a ir pollution 
and advent of the winter season. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to review the situation in Delhi and co-ordinate with the Government of NCT of Delhi to adopt a robust 
strategy for containment and mitigation of the recent surge in cases and take necessary measures to 
prevent the subsequent waves of infections in Delhi. 
(Para 3.15.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.2.20  MHA is reviewing the management of COVID-19 situation in NCT of Delhi on regular 
basis. The Central Government assisted GNCT of Delhi in their efforts in managing the COVID-19 
situation which inter-alia included augmenting ICU bed capacity of Central Government hospitals and 
re-activating the DRDO hospital in Delhi Cantt.,COVID Care Center at Chattarpur and also 
coordinated smooth supply of Liquid Medical Oxygen in Delhi.  
 
1.2.21  Delhi has increased both the testing centres as well as the number of testing being 
carried out daily. Daily testing levels in Delhi have been maintained at around 65,000- 70,000 tests on 
an average.  
 
1.2.22  The identification of the COVID positive patients is being followed up with aggressive 
contact tracing. These contacts being traced are also immediately tested and quarantined to prevent 
spread of infection.  
 
1.2.23  Strict implementation of MoHFW protocol for identification of Eligible Home Isolatio n 
Cases and their management is being ensured by assessment of health status through personal visits by 
district teams of health workers. Patients under Home Isolation are contacted daily through dedicated 
Tele-caller Company and/or Call centers set up at District level.  
 
1.2.24  DDMA has issued various orders/ directions on regular basis throughout the period 
instructing all DMs, District DCPs, DCs of Municipal Corporations, Vice-Chairman (DAMB) & Other 
Authorities for ensuring strict enforcement of COVID Appropriate Behavior in all public places and 
Market etc. 
  

8 
 
1.2.25  A total of 156 dedicated multi-organization teams with 129 enforcement vehicles are in 
place in 11 districts for concerted enforcement action. Fines are being levied for various violations of 
National Directives for management. 
  
1.2.26  Hospital Beds for COVID were augmented from 14,091 on 13 th August, 2020 to 25106 
numbers of beds in May 2021. The number of ICU beds were increased from 2172 on 10 th August, 
2020 to 6867 in May 2021 and Ventilator's beds increased from 1217 on 10 th August, 2020 to 4061 in 
May 2021. 
 
1.2.27  The focus of GNCT of Delhi is on the five-fold strategy for effective management of 
COVID-19 i.e. Test-Track-Treat-Vaccination and adherence to COVID appropriate behavior.  
 
1.2.28  Further NGOs and voluntary organization are also being involved for IEC and 
community outreach activity. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.29  The Committee notes the reply 
 
1.3 Social Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic 
 
Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee observes that the migrant workers are the backbone of the industrial sector but 
the COVID-19 Pandemic has exposed certain problems in the existing public policy framework. Due to 
the lockdown, the migrant workers lost their jobs. The uncertainty involved with the Pandemic and 
inadequate social security, access to affordable housing, health benefits and other basic amenities led to 
their migration to their home States. The lack of these benefits points to the in-effective implementation 
of the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1979. The task of identifying the location and disbursing relief measures to the migrant workers 
became very difficult as the Central Government did not have any data of the migrant workers and had 
to seek it from the States. 
(Para 4.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.3.2 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.3 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government to extend various relief 
measures to the vulnerable sections of the society. However, in the absence of a comprehensive 

9 
 
National Database, it is difficult to extend the relief measures by the Government to the intended 
beneficiaries. 
(Para 4.4.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
  
1.3.5 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.6 The Committee notes the reply 
 
Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.7 The Committee appreciates the various digital initiatives taken by the Government for 
conducting online classes. However, social inequalities exist in the society relating to the availability of 
resources to access these online classes and other digital initiatives taken by the Government. 
(Para 4.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.8 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Reopening of schools/ colleges 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.10  The Committee notes that the schools and other educational institutions have remained 
closed since March, 2020 due to the Pandemic. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been 
issued by the Ministry of Education along with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  in 
consultation with respective State Governments. The Committee recommends that special emphasis 
should be given on physical distancing, masks, hand washing, classroom spaces and sanitization of the 
classrooms. Moreover, mix mode of learning i.e. both online and offline classes should be encouraged 
and classroom studies may begin in a phased manner with staggered timings for different classes/ 
sections. The Committee further observes that the primary and pre-primary students should not be 
called to the classrooms, and may continue to be taught via online modes till vaccines are made 
available or the situation comes under total control. 
(Para 4.6.7 ibid) 
 
 
 

10 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.11  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
1.3.12  In this regard, it is to inform that in the SoP issued by the Department of School 
education regarding re-opening of Schools, emphasis has been made on physical distancing, ma sks, 
hand washing, classroom spaces and sanitization of the classrooms etc. with staggering timetables. 
However, the decision to open the schools has to be taken by the concerned States/UTs Government 
based on the assessment of prevailing situation. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.13  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Psychological impact of COVID-19 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.14  The current COVID-19 Pandemic has already brought mental health problems to the 
fore as people are facing anxiety and stress due to varied reasons. It is likely that more people will ne ed 
mental health care interventions post COVID-19. The Committee notes the efforts of the Government 
in providing teleconsultations and developing websites to address this issue. The Committee observes 
that in the changing scenario, people require special care arising due to isolation caused by social 
distancing, unemployment, financial hardship leading to rising debt, alcohol abuse and domestic 
violence, etc. There is also a need to educate and sensitize people to remove the stigma of mental health 
problems being a sign of either weakness or embarrassment. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the health care centres across rural and urban areas must have mental healthcare profe ssionals to 
counsel people to fight against the fear, worries and anxieties arising out of the impact of the COVID-
19 Pandemic. 
 
(Para 4.7.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.15  Realizing the impact that COVID-19 may have on the mental health of the people, the 
Government has taken a number of initiatives to provide psychosocial support during COVID-19. 
These initiatives include: 
  
(i)  Setting up of a 24/7 helpline to provide psychosocial support, by mental health 
professionals, to the entire affected population, divided into different target groups viz 
children, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers.  
(ii)  Advocacy through various media platforms in the form of creative and audio-visual 
materials on managing stress and anxiety, and promoting an environment of support 
and care for all.  
(iii)  Online capacity building of health workers by NIMHANS in providing psychosocial 
support and training through (iGOT)-Diksha platform  

11 
 
(iv)  Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru- "Mental Health in the times of COVID-19 
Pandemic - Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care 
Settings".  
(v)  Issuance of guidelines/ advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to 
different segments of the society.  
 
1.3.16  All the guidelines, advisories and advocacy material can be accessed on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare website under “Behavioural Health –  Psychosocial helpline” 
(https://www.mohfw.gov.in/
). 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.17  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.18  The Committee opines that the children are also facing physical and mental health 
related issues including strain on eyes and ears, obesity, sleeplessness, anxiety, etc., due to online 
classes and their associated lifestyle. The Committee also observes that children have faced mental a nd 
emotional imbalances leading to suicide in some cases. The Committee appreciates the Central 
Government to come up with an initiative called "Manodarpan" for parents, teachers, and students to 
mitigate the psychological impact of the lockdown and the Pandemic. The Committee, therefore , 
recommends that instead of recreating school with six to seven hours of content, the focus should be on 
making shorter, high-quality engagements including breaks/exercises and revised guidelines may be 
issued for the same. Further, webinars may be organized by educational institutions from time to time  
to discuss mental health problems faced by the students. The Committee firmly believes that a 
concerted effort from parents, teachers and Government is necessary to help children cope up with the 
crisis and thrive in the post-COVID-19 world. 
(Para 4.7.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.19  Realizing the impact that COVID-19 may have on the mental health of the people, the 
Government has taken a number of initiatives to provide psychosocial support during COVID-19. 
These initiatives include:  
 
(i) Setting up of a 24/7 helpline to provide psychosocial support, by mental health 
professionals, to the entire affected population, divided into different target groups viz 
children, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers.  
(ii) Advocacy through various media platforms in the form of creative and audio-visual 
materials on managing stress and anxiety, and promoting an environment of support and 
care for all.  
(iii) Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru- "Mental Health in the times of COVID-19 
Pandemic - Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care Settings".  
(iv) Issuance of guidelines/ advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to 
different segments of the society.  

12 
 
1.3.20  All the guidelines, advisories and advocacy material can be accessed on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare website under “Behavioural Health –  Psychosocial helpline” 
(https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). 
 
1.3.21  'MANODARPAN‟ an initiative of the Ministry of Education has been launched to 
monitor and promote the mental health issues and concerns of students and teachers and to facilitate 
providing of support to address the mental health and psychosocial aspects during conditions like 
COVID 19 and beyond.  
 
1.3.22  UGC has also issued letter dated 05 th April, 2020 regarding Mental, Psychosocial health 
& Well-being of Students during and after COVID-19, requesting the Universities/Colleges to take 
suggested measures to ensure the mental health and psychological wellbeing of students.  
 
1.3.23  Also, UGC vide its guidelines dated 29 th April, 2020 emphasized that the universities 
should strengthen the mechanism of mentor-mentee counselling through a dedicated portal on 
university website to impart timely guidance and counselling to the students.  
1.3.24  An initiative named „Manodarpan‟ has been undertaken b y DoSEL covering a wide 
range of activities to provide psychosocial support to students, teachers and families for Mental Health 
& Emotional wellbeing during COVID outbreak and beyond. The web page containing advisories, 
practical tips, poster, do‟s and don‟ts , FAQ etc is available at: 
http://manodarpan.mhrd.gov.in/ 
and https://cbse.nic.in/newsite/index.html 
 
(i) National Toll-free Helpline  by the Ministry of Education for a country wide outreach to 
students from school, universities and colleges. This unique helpline is manned by a pool 
of experienced counselors/ Psychologists and other mental health professionals and will 
continue beyond the COVID-19 situation. 
(ii) Psychological support is being provided by engaging counsellors to all the students of 
JNV and their parents for mental health and well being through NVS toll free number 
1800-180-7992. 
(iii) In JNVs, 200 teachers trained by NCERT on Guidance and Counselling are also engaged 
in providing counselling to students. In addition, every House Master and Principal are 
also talking to students regularly for their psychological support.   
(iv) CBSE vide Circular No. Acad-51/2020 dated July 22, 2020 has requested the heads of all 
its affiliated schools to disseminate information about this facility to students, parents and 
teachers of their respective schools to help students if they feel like getting expert advice 
on mental health issues. 
 
 Mental health and well being Manual  
(i) This manual prepared by CBSE emphasises on the importance of Mental Health and Well 
Being and encapsulates the role of school, family and community while covering other 
significant aspects related to Health conditions, risk factors and challenges in adolescent 
period. 
(ii) There is a dedicated chapter on psychological support amidst COVID-19 covering Self 
Care, positivity, dealing with fear and anxiety, dealing with stigma, importance of social 
support and staying connected. 
(iii) This Manual is available at: 
https://cbse.nic.in/newsite/attach/CBSE%20MH%20Manual.pdf 

13 
 
 NCERT Counseling Services for School Children  
(i) NCERT has taken various steps to reach out to school students and their primary 
stakeholders (parents and teachers) for helping them to maintain their mental and 
emotional well-being during the present times of COVID-19 Pandemic. 
(ii) To help school students across the country share their concerns and seek help to deal with 
stress, anxiety and related mental health concerns during and after COVID- 19, „NCERT 
Counselling Services for School Children‟ was started in April, 2020 on phone/email 
through its trained counsellors. This service was provided free of charge by about 270 
counsellors across different regions of the country. 
(iii) Live interactive sessions „SAHYOG: Guidance for Mental Well -Being of Children‟ are 
telecast to deal with providing guidance on handling stress and related concerns of 
students. These sessions are being held by school counsellors and Experts on SWAYAM 
PRABHA channel daily from 5.00pm to 5.30pm. 
(iv) To augment Alternative Academic Calendar (AAC), sessions at primary, upper primary 
and secondary stages are held on SWAYAM PRABHA Channel include topics related to 
mental health concerns of children. 
(v) Guidelines to address the mental health concerns such as dealing with stress and anxiety 
have been developed for Students, teachers and parents. These are for elementary and 
secondary stages and have been included in the Alternative Academic Calendar (AAC). 
 
Tele-counselling by CBSE related to pre-board exam, post-result period  and  
Students of residential Schools 
(i) CBSE arranged pre-exam and during Pandemic it also arranged post-result toll-free tele -
counselling for its students in its 22nd edition. 
(ii) 75 counsellors and principals in India and 22 in other countries such as Japan, Oman, 
Saudi Arabia, Nepal, Kuwait provided voluntary service and continued to do so during the 
Pandemic as well. 
(iii) CBSE also provided assistance and psychological counselling to 14000 students of 
boarding schools affiliated with the Board till 15 th  April 2020, by establishing contact 
with the residential schools and their school management. Tele-counselling numbers were 
informed to all schools and given to each child who had stayed back in hostel. 
(iv) Due to the corona Pandemic, CBSE started an additional Toll-Free Tele Helpline on 
CORONA VIRUS safeguards for students as well as general public and provided 
guidance on preventive care and counselled them about their fears and concerns. 
(v) The Board started IVRS facility on Toll free number to enable public to access 
information anytime, anywhere and even multiple times. The 
students/parents/stakeholders could listen to pre-recorded useful information on COVID -
19. 
(vi) With a view to promote coping skills, Audio-visual presentations on issues affecting 
mental health during this crisis were available for masses on Aggression, Internet 
Addiction Disorder, Depression, Exam Anxiety, Substance Use Disorder, Life Skills on 
official YouTube and Facebook handles of CBSE. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.25  The Committee notes the reply 

14 
 
Government interventions 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.26  The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in un-interrupted movement and distribution of food grains up to the remotest part of our 
country during the Pandemic period, particularly during lockdowns. The Committee understands that 
the Department has worked day and night without taking a break while doing service to the nation at 
the time of the unprecedented crisis. 
 
(Para 4.10.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.3.27  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.28  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
1.4 Economic Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic 
 
Banking Operations during Pandemic 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.1  The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts and pain taken by the banking sector 
for providing uninterrupted and seamless banking facilities during the COVID-19 outbreak and 
consequent lockdown. In their sincere efforts to provide continuous service, many of the bank officials 
also lost their valuable life. The Committee, therefore, places on record the good work done by the 
banking sector right from the beginning of the COVID-19 Pandemic and observes that they are also 
recognized as COVID-19 warriors. 
(Para 5.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.4.2  There is no such categorization made by the Central Governm ent namely „COVID 
Warrior‟ or any class of persons. However, the nomenclature generally used across the world for 
medical professional who are directly involved in treatment of COVID – 19 persons in hospitals/ 
healthcare facilities. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.3  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recovery of Economy 
 
Observation/Recommendation 

15 
 
1.4.4  The Committee observes that shock to consumption is severe due to COVID-19 induced 
lockdowns which resulted in huge loss of jobs, daily wages and daily income in both organized and 
unorganized sectors. The impact, however, has been more severe in the unorganized sector. Therefore, 
it will take quite some time to mend and regain the pre COVID-19 momentum. The GDP after having a 
contraction of 23.9% in Q1 (2020-21) has shown signs of recovery in Q2 (2020-21). This is due to 
growth in private consumption during the festive season, rise in investment demand and Government 
intervention through MNREGA, etc. But, more interventions and schemes are required by the 
Government to support the recovery and to sustain this economic revival in the following quarters. 
(Para 5.7.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.4.5  The Central Government‟s fiscal interventions are increasingly shifting from income 
support to a demand boost, with a firm eye on the fiscal bulge. The policy push to boost consumption 
and investment provided under Atmanirbhar 2 and 3 packages are as under: 
 
Atmanirbhar 2.0 : Boost for consumer spending  
 
1.4.6  A cash payment in lieu of the Leave Travel Concessions (LTC) scheme: For 2018-21 
LTC block period, full payment of leave encashment and cash payment towards entitled LTC with the 
condition that goods/services (with GST > 12%) have to be bought worth 3 times of the fare and one 
time leave encashment before 31 st March 2021. Only digital transactions are allowed, GST Invoice to 
be produced. 
 
(i) One-time special Festival advance of Rs 10,000 (interest-free) for central Government 
employees in the form of prepaid RuPay card - recoverable in a maximum of 10 
installments. It needs to be spent by March 31, 2021. As on 4 th   December 2020, 96697 
employees have opted under the special festival advance scheme so far. 
 
A push towards capital spending
 
 
(ii) Interest-free 50-year loan to states worth a total of Rs. 12,000 crore to be used for capital  
expenditure (including repayment of pending bills to contractors and suppliers) by 31 st 
March, 2021 over and above all other borrowings ceilings given to states. 
 
(a) Part 1: 2,500 crore - NE states (1,600 crore), Uttarakhand (Rs. 450 crore) and HP (Rs. 
450 crore) 
(b) Part 2: Rs, 7,500 crore for other states in proportion to FC devolutions. 
(c) Part 3: Rs. 2,000 crore for states which meet at least 3 out of 4 reforms announced 
during Aatma nirbhar Bharat fiscal deficit package –(One Nation One Ration Cared, 
EODB, Power Distribution and Urban Local Body revenues) 
            (50% will be given initially, remaining upon utilization of first 50%). 
(iii) Additional capex budget for the central Government - Over and above Rs. 4.13 lakh crore 
budgeted capital expenditure in FY21, additional budget provision of Rs. 25,000 crore will 
be made in RE for expenditure on Roads, Defence, Infrastructure, Water supply, Urban 
development, Defence infrastructure and Domestically produced capital equipment - To be 
used for new or ongoing capital projects by 31st March, 2021. 
 

16 
 
Atma Nirbhar 3.0 package announced on 12th November, 2020 included the following: 
 
(i) Launch of ECLGS 2.0: Guaranteed credit for supporting stressed sector. To be utilized for 
100% guaranteed collateral free additional credit at capped interest rates to - Entities in 26 
stressed sectors identified by Kamath Committee plus health care sector with credit 
outstanding of above Rs. 50 crore and up to ₹500 Crore as on 29 th February, 2020 with no 
upper ceiling on annual turnover. Entities to be up to 30 days past due (SMA 0) as on 29 th 
February, 2020. Additional credit up to 20% of outstanding as on 29 th February, 2020. 
Tenor of additional credit under ECLGS 2.0 to be 5 years, including one year moratorium 
on principal repayment. Scheme available till 31 st March, 2021. The 26 stressed sectors 
Auto Components, Auto Dealership, Automobile Manufacturing, Aviation, Building 
Materials – Tiles, Cement, Chemicals, Construction, Consumer Durables/FMCG, Corporate 
Retails Outlets, Gems & Jewellery, Hotel, Restaurants, Tourism, Iron & Steel 
Manufacturing, Logistics, Mining, Non Ferrous Metals, Pharmaceuticals Manufacturing, 
Plastic Products Manufacturing, Port & Port Services, Power – Generation, Transmission 
and Distribution, Real Estate – Residential and Commercial, Roads, Shipping, Sugar, 
Textiles and Trading – Wholesale. The Government has extended Emergency Credit Line 
Guarantee Scheme ( ECLGS) through ECLGS 2.0 for the 26 sectors identified by the 
Kamath Committee and the healthcare sector. The Government also extended the duration 
of Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 1.0. Under an Emergency Credit 
Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) as on 04 th December, 2020, Additional credit amounting 
to Rs. 205563 crore sanctioned to 8093491 borrowers. Rs. 1,58,626 crore loan has been 
disbursed to 4049489 borrowers.  
 
(ii) Rs 1.46 lakh crore boost for Atmanirbhar Manufacturing Production-linked incentives for 
10 Champion Sectors. Advance chemistry cell (ACC) battery (Rs 18,100 crore); electronics 
and technology products (Rs 5,000 crore); automobiles and auto components (Rs 57,042 
crore); pharmaceuticals and drugs (Rs 15,000 crore); telecom and networking products (Rs 
12,195 crore); textiles products (Rs 10,683 crore); food products (Rs 10,900 crore); high 
efficiency solar PV modules (Rs 4,500 crore); white goods (Rs 6,238 crore) and speciality 
steel (Rs 6,322 crore). These are in addition to the existing scheme in electronics 
manufacturing (Rs.40,955 crore), medical devices (Rs.3,420 crore) and Key Starting 
materials KSMs/ Drug Intermediates and APIs (Rs. 6,940 crore). The scheme proposes 
production linked incentive to boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments. 
The Scheme shall extend an incentive of 4% to 6% on incremental sales (over base year) of 
goods manufactured in India and covered under target segments, to eligible companies, for a 
period of five (5) years subsequent to the base year as defined. The PLI scheme will make 
Indian manufacturers globally competitive, attract investment in the areas of core 
competency and cutting-edge technology; ensure efficiencies; create economies of scale; 
enhance exports and make India an integral part of the global supply chain. The 
Government approved 16 companies under the initial launch of the PLI scheme in April for 
mobile phone and specified electronic components manufacturers. The Government expects 
that the companies currently approved under the scheme will generate total production of 
more than INR10.5 trillion (5.5% of GDP) over the next five years, of which 60% would be 
exports. 
 

17 
 
(iii) Central Government introduced the Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme in 10 new 
key sectors for enhancing India‟s manufacturing capabilities and exports with outlay of Rs. 
1.46 lakh crore. DPIIT is regularly holding meetings with all these departments to review 
the timelines for implementation of their respective PLI schemes.  
 
(iv) Rs 18,000 crores additional outlay for PM Awaas Yojana (PMAY) –Urban: Support for 
Construction & Infrastructure – Relaxation of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) & 
Performance Security on Government Tenders. Disbursement Plan for additional allocation 
of Rs. 18,000 crore in FY 2020-21 under PMAY(U) has been prepared. Department of 
Economic Affairs has sanctioned Rs.5,000 crore of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) on 
07th December, 2020 from National Small Savings. 
 
(v) Demand booster for Residential Real Estate Income Tax relief for Developers & Home 
Buyers: Increase the differential between circle rate & agreement value from 10% to 20% 
(under section 43CA) for the period from the date of the announcement to 30 th June 2021 
for only primary sale of residential units of value up to Rs 2 crores. Consequential Relief up 
to 20% shall also be allowed to buyers of  these units under section 56(2)(x) of IT Act for 
the said period. 
 
(vi) The Central Government has approved an equity infusion of Rs 6000 crores in NIIF Debt 
Platform, comprising of Assem Infrastructure Finance Limited and NIIF Infrastructure 
Finance Limited. 
 
(vii) Support for Agriculture Rs 65,000 crores for subsidised Fertilisers. 
 
(viii) Enhanced outlay of Rs 10,000 crore under PM Garib Kalyan Rozgar Yojana. 
 
(ix) Provision of Rs. 10,200 crore additional budget outlay towards Capital and industrial 
expenditure, Domestic defence equipment, Industrial incentives, Industrial infrastructure 
and Green energy. 
 
(x) Rs. 900 crore provided for COVID Suraksha Mission for Research and Development of 
Indian COVID Vaccine to Department of Biotechnology. 
 
1.4.7 To examine the  Socio-Economic Fallout of the COVID- 19 Pandemic‟s Second Wave, a 
meeting of the Committee was held on 28 th June, 2021. The representative of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment apprised the Committee that  around five lakh eighteen thousand workers have gone back  
to their home States/villages during second wave which may rise up to seven to eight lakhs.  He further 
informed about the localised lockdowns and continuation of manufacturing and construction activities; 
coordination meeting with labour Secretaries of State along with Ministry of Railways to track and 
manage the migrant situation in different areas, relief measures under Atmanirbhar Bharat Rozgar 
Yojana (ABRY) for workers; Atal Beemit Vyakti Kalyan Yojana  to benefit the family of workers who 
have lost their lives due to COVID-19 and raising of upper ceiling of Employees Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme (EDLI Scheme) to Rs.7,00,000 and the lower ceiling to Rs.2.5 lakh.  
  
1.4.8 He added that during the first wave, the number of complaints was 16,623 with regard to the 
wages, lost wages, back wages and some other distress calls from the migrant labourers.  But during 

18 
 
second wave, there have been only 1,311 complaints which is less than one-tenth number of 
complaints. Regarding data of job losses, it was informed that according to provisional payroll data 
from the EPFO for 2020-21, despite COVID-19 Pandemic, cumulative net payroll addition of jobs was 
77.08 lakh as compared to 78.58 lakh net payroll addition during the previous year which is a marginal 
fall. Besides, Labour Bureau has launched two surveys from 1 st April, 2021 to collect data on job 
losses.  
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
1.4.9  Regarding the projection made by the experts for the recovery of the Indian econo my 
and time to bring back the economy to the recovery track given the third wave predicted for coming 
months, in its reply dated 21 st October, 2021, the Committee was informed by MHA that according to 
RBI’s latest estimates, India’s real GDP growth is projected to grow at 9.5 per cent in FY 2021- 22, 
consisting of 18.5 per cent in Ql; 7.9 per cent in Q2; 7.2 per cent in Q3; and 6.6 per cent in Q4: 2021-
22. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in May, 2021, 
projected India’s real GDP to grow at 9.9 per cent in FY 2021-22, the fastest-growing G20 economy 
in 2021. According to World Bank Global Economic Prospects, June 2021, India’s real  GDP is 
expected to expand by 8.3 per cent in FY 2021-22. 
 
1.4.10  The onset of the second wave of COVID-19 in India has posed a downside risk to 
India’s economic recovery momentum. However, the Indian economy is showing signs of revival 
from the impact of the second wave on the back of targeted fiscal relief, monetary policy 
measures, and a rapid vaccination drive as reflected in movement of several high frequency 
indicators like E-way bills, power consumption, rail freight, UPI transactions, vehicle registrations, 
etc. since the peaking of second wave in first half of May, 2021. Rural demand remains resilient and 
normal monsoon bodes well for sustaining a robust agricultural sector. Adoption of new COVID- 
compatible occupational models by businesses for an appropriate working environment may cushion 
the hit to economic activity, especially in manufacturing and services sectors that are not contact 
intensive. Government has also announced a broad based economic relief package aimed at providing  
relief to people and businesses affected by the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic with specia l 
focus on health and reviving travel, tourism sector. On the external front, strengthening global 
recovery augurs well for boosting exports. RBI continues to ensure that domestic monetary and 
financial conditions remain highly accommodative and supportive of economic revival. 
 
1.4.11 At this juncture, India is well equipped with adequate testing and health infrastructure to 
combat any subsequent waves of COVID-19. Economic activity has adapted to the pandemic and 
will benefit from policy support, including higher spending on infrastructure, rural development, and 
health, and a stronger-than expected recovery in services and manufacturing. This prospect is, 
further, bolstered by the rapid progress in India’s vaccination drive. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.12 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.13  The Committee observes that the 633.88 lakh MSMEs that contributes approximately 30 
percent of India's GDP has been one of the sectors most adversely affected by the Pandemic a nd 
consequent lockdowns. Despite easing of the nationwide lockdown, intermittent lockdown by the 
States has also impacted the restarting of many manufacturing units. These units do not have access to 
low-cost institutional finance and thus there is a lack of cash flows, demand, manpower, technology-
based production activities, experience to use bank finance or engage in product promotion to ensure 
adequate returns and stuck working capital has further lead to stress on employment. The Committee 
therefore, observes that there is a need to support the stressed sectors like MSMEs which are in dire 
need of working capital to sustain the impact of COVID-19. 
(Para 5.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.4.14  Ministry of MSME is implementing various schemes and programmes to provide access 
to Credit & technology upgradation. These Schemes include Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP) for creation of non-farm employment, Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGTMSE) for 
collateral free loans to Micro and Small Enterprises, Credit linked Capital Subsidy-Technology 
Upgradation Scheme (CLCS-TUS) for technology upgradation for MSEs, Micro and Small Enterprise 
– Cluster Development Programme (MSE-CDP) and Interest Subvention Scheme for incremental 
Credit to MSME. The eligible units can take benefit under any of these schemes. 
 
1.4.15  In addition to the above and in order to revive the MSMEs with stressed accounts, 
Government has also announced Rs. 3 lakh crore Collateral free Automatic Loans under Emergency 
Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS)  for business, including MSMEs, for those accounts which are 
classified as Special Mention Account -0 and Special Mention Account-1.  
 
1.4.16  Moreover, the Government has announced Rs 20,000 crore Subordinate Debt for 
MSMEs under Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt (CGSSD). Under this scheme, 
promoters of stressed MSMEs viz. SMA-2 and NPA accounts which are eligible for restructuring as 
per RBI guidelines on the books of the Lending institutions, will be provided with credit facilities to be 
covered under guarantee by the CGTMSE. The promoters will infuse the funds for revival of such 
Units. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.17  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
  

20 
 
1.5 Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt  
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee observes that it is difficult to predict the characteristic of the new agents that 
may cause future Pandemics of this size or even worse than before. The Committee notes that the 
review of the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 is in the process as submitted by the 
Home Ministry. The Committee notes that while the guidelines issued by the Central Government 
allowed the States/UTs to make their regulations more stringent but without diluting the Government of 
India guidelines, it is important to ensure that the conditions imposed by a State/UT do not prohibit 
movement of essential commodities and of person who is engaged in the manufacture, transport and 
related activity. 
(Para 6.1.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.5.2 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
However, it is mentioned that in the Guidelines issued by MHA from time to time for containment of 
COVID-19, there is no restriction on inter-State/ intra-State movement of persons/ goods and no 
separate permission/ approval/e-permit required for such movement. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.4 The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1979 which is key legislation to regulate the condition of service of inter-state labourers should also be 
revised since some deficiencies and lapses came to notice during the lockdown when migrant workers 
had faced immense problems. 
(Para 6.1.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
1.5.5 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Key Lessons Learnt 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.7 COVID-19 Pandemic is an unprecedented crisis that has challenged all the countries and 
societies. This Pandemic has all of a sudden created a situation for which no one was prepared, neither 
the Government nor the civil society. Many persons were infected and valuable lives were lost. 

21 
 
(Number of total deaths due to COVID-19 was 141, 772 as of 10 th December, 2020, Source-MoH&FW 
website). It has been a learning process for everyone inter-alia including the political leadership, 
bureaucracy and the frontline essential service providers - our Corona Warriors. All of them have made 
an enormous contribution to tackle this crisis. Some migrant workers lost their lives while walking 
back to their native places. The country also mourned the demise of many brave-hearted skilled 
essential service providers who helped others to live by making supreme sacrifice of their lives. 
(Para 6.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.5.8 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
  

22 
 
Chapter-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the matter in 
view of the Government’s reply 
 
 
2.1 India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic  
 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.1 The Committee observes that several steps were taken much ahead of what many other 
countries took subsequently for the screening of travellers and passengers coming from abroad into 
India. All international flights were also prohibited in a graded manner. While doing so, the Central 
Government was conscious of the need to bring back stranded Indian citizens abroad to the safety of 
their homes. The Committee, however, observes that incoming international passengers including those 
who entered throughout March, 2020 were screened only for high temperature and there was no testing 
facility established at the airports. Thus, asymptomatic patients as also those who travelled after taking 
medicines for controlling temperature could not be diagnosed at a time when they could practically be 
the only source of infections of COVID-19 in the country. 
 
(Para 2.6.9 of the 229th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 After Government of India decided on universal screening of all international travelers on 6 th 
March 2020, around 50 to 60 thousand passengers were being screened daily until cessation of all 
flights on 22 nd March 2020. At that time, there were just over 100 laboratories all across the country, 
with a daily capacity to test 15000 samples a day was available with the country. Given the limited 
resources available at that point of time, testing of every international traveler was not a fea sible 
strategy. However, Government of India ensured that travelers, after reaching their destination are kept 
under surveillance and followed up for 28 days. 
 
2.1.3 Also, the persons brought under Government of India‟s initiative for medical evacuation of 
Indians from COVID affected countries (such as China, Iran, Italy, Japan etc.) were ke pt under 
institutional quarantine for 14 days and were all tested negative for COVID-19 before relea se from 
quarantine. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government for the management of 
COVID-19 Pandemic and understands that the primary effect of nationwide lockdown was to have a 
uniform set of regulations, to delay peak infections and provide time to the health system to mop up 

23 
 
adequate health care infrastructure, personnel and equipment. The lockdown gave the country time to 
ramp up its public health infrastructure, build the capacity of hospitals and health care workers. The 
Committee also understands that one of the key elements of the Pandemic control strategies across the 
globe has been to shut down economic and social activities, and to impose social distancing with 
varying degrees of stringency. 
(Para 2.6.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.6 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.7 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.8 The Committee notes that necessary measures were taken by the Government to minimize the 
severe impact of the lockdown. The Government ensured the availability of all essential commodities. 
The Government announced Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY), wherein targeted relief 
was for the most vulnerable sections of the society. The Ministry of Home Affairs also allowed 
flexibility in the State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) guidelines to cater to the requirement of setting up 
relief camps for migrant workers and other needy persons. Since the crisis was unprecedented, the 
overall plan for its management was coordinated through meetings of the Prime Minister with Chief 
Ministers/ Administrators and other high-level meetings involving Senior Officers of Centre and States. 
These meetings contributed towards effective coordination between the Central Government and all the 
States/ Union Territories to ensure efficacious implementation of the decision taken for mitigation of 
distress and distribution of relief by the civil administration at district and sub-divisional level. The 
steps were taken to ensure that the poor people in both urban and rural areas are not deprived of any  
benefit of social security, food and shelter as announced by the Government. 
(Para 2.6.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.9 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.10  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.2 Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee observes that there is a need for sustained and focused efforts for managing the 
crisis as also creating awareness in the communities, ensuring testing infrastructure and upgrading 
health infrastructure particularly in remote and rural areas. The availability of pulse oxime ter in the 

24 
 
villages, remote and inaccessible areas as a cheap and effective way to detect silent h ypoxia is 
important. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the remote rural areas should be specifically 
monitored by the States under the overall technical guidance from the Centre. 
(Para 3.10.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.2.2 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, taking due note of increased reporting of C OVID-19 
cases from peri-urban and rural areas has issued a comprehensive „SOP on COVID -19 Containment & 
Management in Peri- urban, Rural & Tribal areas‟ which includes provisioning of logistic and 
consumables with surveillance teams working in these areas to promote early recognition of symptoms 
and prompt referral of patients requiring admission to health facilities. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.4 The Committee observes that there is a global recognition of the Indian scientists who are 
engaged in producing vaccines and respect for India's institutional potential and capacity develope d 
over the decade that has made India the largest drug manufacturer in the world. 
(Para 3.12.14 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.2.5 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and other stakeholders 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.7 The Committee observes that there is a need to establish more inclusive governance for building 
up a strong community resilience system and the ability to co-exist with COVID-19. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that there should be an open and transparent data sharing mechanism 
between scientists, public health professionals and the public at large as this will strengthen Pandemic 
control measures build consensus and evolve an ecosystem of engagement, faith, and trust. 
 
(Para 3.13.7 ibid) 
 
 
 

25 
 
Action Taken 
 
 2.2.8 The Ministry of Health and Family has already established a transparent an d secure data sharing 
mechanism in adherence to the data sharing policy and data security policy/guidelines i ssued by Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY). The Ministry is already sharin g the data related to COVID 19 
with all States/UTs, Departments, and Ministries, etc. to ensure effective Pandemic control measures. 
2.2.9 NDMA has also developed Geographic Information System (GIS) portal which is being utilized 
and has played an important role in the current Pandemic situation, in context to mapping of cases, 
health infrastructures availability in the district level to pin point geo-information, testing facilities 
mapping. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.10  The Committee notes the reply 
 
 
COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.11  The Committee appreciates the effort made by the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Government of NCT of Delhi in building India's biggest COVID-19 care centre consisting of 10,000 
beds and also the timely interventions made to control the spread of the virus in the national capital. 
The Committee observes that the district-specific or the area-wise total number of cases are not being 
maintained and reported by the Delhi Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Delhi Government should maintain and release district-wise data of the positive cases, recovered cases 
and the testing status. This will bring more transparency and will make people aware of the situation in 
their localities. The Committee further recommends that the balance should be maintained between RT-
PCR and RAT and issuing of Medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD) should be made 
compulsory for all hospitals to get the exact number of COVID-19 deaths in Delhi. 
(Para 3.15.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.2.12  Delhi is maintaining the data related to COVID cases including details of positive cases, 
deaths and testing status both centrally as well as District wise. However, in view of the dense 
population, no distinct district boundary and highly mobile population, the data is being released 
Centrally only. As regards maintaining the balance between the RT-PCR and RAT test, it is submitted  
that the Government has already ramped up both the total testing as well as the ratio of RTPCR to RAT 
testing. The Government is carrying out an average of around 70,000 tests on daily basis wherein 
RTPCR tests comprise over 70% of the tests. Further all hospitals are following the protocol and 
issuing medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD) showing the reasons of death and all the 
COVID deaths are also being informed to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP), thereby  
enabling the GNCT of Delhi to declare the accurate number of COVID deaths. 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.13  The Committee notes the reply 
 

26 
 
2.3 Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Stigma relating to COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has made available a guide 
to address the stigma associated with COVID-19, on their website. The Committee observes that due to 
the Pandemic there is a conflict between science and stigma, facts and fears. The Committee, therefore , 
strongly recommends that adequate steps should be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs and other 
concerned Ministries to fight the social stigma through robust media campaigning for generating 
adequate public awareness. Further, the Government should also utilize the services of Media and other 
platforms and NGOs registered with the Government to educate and sensitize society and bring the 
truth before the people in case of any rumour-mongering and misleading news/information on the 
issue. 
(Para 4.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.2 Realizing the impact that COVID-19 may have on the mental health of the people, the 
Government has taken a number of initiatives to provide psychosocial support during COVID-19. 
These initiatives include:  
 
2.3.3 Communication Strategy  
 
(i) The Ministry regularly communicated Guidelines in a credible and transparent  manner to 
the media and the public.   
(ii) The primary message was : Staying safe, maintaining physical distance (Do GazDoori) 
while reviving economic activity.  
(iii) The most important aspect of Communication is to spread only factually correct 
information and positive stories, and counter Fake News. 
(iv) Dissemination of Daily Updates: 
(a) Regular Press Releases on COVID-19 statistics as well as infographics on social 
media were posted by PIB. 
(b) Regional units of DD News and AIR highlighted good news stories of 100% mask 
usage, conduct discussions on the usage of AarogyaSetu and encourage testing 
through messages from doctors in regional languages. 
(v) Tackling Disinformation: The dedicated Fact Check Unit (FCU) in PIB regularly 
disseminated the fact-checks. 
(vi) Social Media Dissemination: Dedicated COVID-19 Twitter Handle 
(@COVIDNewsByMIB) launched  
(vii) Dedicated Programmes for Awareness Generation: 
(a) DD News launched a live phone-in programme Doctor‟s Speak with medical experts- 
now also telecasted through several regional DD Kendras. Interviews and discussions 
with experts were conducted under the shows “In Conversation With”, “DD 
Dialogue”, “Communicating on COVID”, “Total Health” as well as the daily prime -
time show “News Night”. 

27 
 
(b) News Services Division (NSD), All India Radio (AIR) conducted several expert 
based interviews and discussions in the shows “Spotlight”, “Samvad” and also 
disseminated bytes from experts under the series “Experts Speak”. 
(viii) Publicity of Government decisions by using simple language and infographics for better 
understanding of the people.  
(a) Articles were regularly commissioned in newspapers and Webinars were conducted. 
Testimonials from beneficiaries were also obtained and disseminated. 
 
2.3.4 Coordinated Communication Strategy for COVID-19 Vaccine  
 
(i) Countering misinformation & misleading narratives about aspects such as adverse events, 
efficacy of vaccines, etc. 
(a) Myth-busters were aired on DD News and AIR (NSD) 
(c) Daily print media analysis by PIB and NMW 
(d) Rebuttals to media including International media 
(ii) Advocacy and public sensitization about safety (EUA and Immunogenicity) of vaccines 
(iii) Communication upto the last mile was a key focus of the campaign. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.5 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Government interventions 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.6 The Committee recommends that Aadhaar linked National Database of the vulnerable sections 
of the society that includes migrant labourers, urban poor, workers engaged in unorganized Sector, be 
prepared on priority so that in case of such a crisis in future, the Government can reach out to them and 
provide rations and other facilities. The Committee also hopes that effective and timely implementation 
of the program will be ensured and progress will be monitored from time to time as the success of the 
program depends upon benefits reaching the beneficiaries in time. 
(Para 4.10.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.7 All 23.5 Cr. ration cards covering more than 80 Cr. beneficiaries under National Food Security 
Act, 2013 (NFSA) have been completely digitized in all States/UTs. Aadhaar seeding has been 
completed in about 91% of total ration cards and 89% of total NFSA beneficiaries. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.8 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.9 The Committee notes the efforts of the Government of India for providing an additional 
allocation of food grains for distribution under PDS to meet the challenge. But in the absence of 

28 
 
tracking and monitoring mechanisms, it is challenging for both Central and States/UTs Governments to 
track the intra-State and inter-State movement of the migrant workers and distribute adequate quantities 
of food grains from PDS shops on time. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should coordinate with the concerned Central Ministries and the Governments of 
States/UTs and create a tracking and monitoring mechanism linking all the States/ UTs so that the 
movement of migrant workers can be tracked on a real-time basis and States can off take the req uired 
rations/ supplies from the Central Board, FCI godowns accordingly, without any delay. 
 
(Para 4.10.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.3.10  Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is operated under the joint responsibility of 
the Central and State/UT Governments. Central Govt. is responsible for procurement, allocation and 
transportation of food grains upto the designated depots of the FCI. The operational responsibilities for 
allocation, transportation of foodgrains from FCI godown to State Godown, further State godowns to 
FPSs, and distribution of food grains to beneficiaries, rest with the concerned State/UT Government. 
Central Govt. issued instruction to all concerned States/UTs may lift on e month‟s quantity of regular 
central allocation under NFSA in advance (one quarter before), over and above regular lifting of 
monthly NFSA foodgrains from FCI/central pool to meet any shortfall of foodgrains for the distribution 
to national portability beneficiaries. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.11  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.12  The Committee is of the view that Mid-Day Meal Scheme is an essential scheme that 
motivates the poorest children to go to school and pursue studies. But due to the Pandemic and closure 
of schools, they are deprived of Mid-Day Meals. The Committee notes that only some of the States 
have continued the Mid-Day Meal scheme during the Pandemic by delivering the dry rations at 
doorstep/ giving allowances or both. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs along with the Department of Food and Public Distribution may take up the matter 
with the State Governments to ensure that the local administrations are delivering the rations/ 
allowances in time and this should be continued until the schools reopen. 
(Para 4.10.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.3.13  Mid-Day Meal is the entitlement of a child, guaranteed under the National Food 
Security Act, 2013. In order to enable children to meet their nutritional requirement and safe guard 
their immunity during closure of schools due to COVID Pandemic, Ministry of education issued an 
advisory to all States & UTs to provide Food Security Allowance to all eligible children in li eu of hot 
cooked mid-day meal, duly following extant social distancing norms, until the schools are reopened. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
2.3.14  In its reply dated 21 st October, 2021, the Committee was informed by MHA that the 

29 
 
schools remain closed for the major part of 2020-21 in most of the States as a precautionary measure 
to contain the spread of Corona virus among the children. The elementary class children studying in 
the Govt. and Govt. aided schools would have otherwise got the Mid-Day Meal on school days, had 
the schools not been closed by the State Governments. This was affecting their nutritional status 
because most of these children are from poor background and belong to disadvantaged sections. 
Keeping in view the legal entitlements of children under NFSA, and directions of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India, the Department of School Education & Literacy, issued the following advisories to 
States and UTs to provide Food Security Allowance, comprising of food grains and pulses, oil etc 
(equivalent to cooking cost) to enable children to meet their nutritional requirement in order to safe 
guard their immunity:- 
 
(i) 20th March, 2020: Provision of Food Security Allowance (FSA) comprising of food 
grains and cooking cost during closure of schools. 
(ii) 29th April, 2020: Advisory along with guidelines for providing FSA even during summer 
vacations as a one time special measure considering the extraordinary circumstances. 
(iii) 31st July, 2020: Continued provision of FSA comprising of food grains and pulses, oil 
etc (equivalent to cooking cost) till the time schools are open. 
 
2.3.15  Due to the COVID pandemic, since schools were closed, all enrolled children are 
eligible for Food Security Allowance comprising of food grains and cooking cost. Some States/UTs 
have provided food grains along with payment of cooking cost into the beneficiary’s bank 
accounts/through cash while other States/UTs provided food grains and dry ration like pulses, etc., 
equivalent to cooking cost during 2020-21 and the same is being continued even in 2021-22. 
Government of India fully supported the States and UTs and released Rs 12874.01 crore as Cent ral 
assistance as well as allocated 34.45 lakh MT food grains to States and UTs during 2020-21 and 
Rs.2678.80 crore has been released as ad-hoc grant to States and UTs during 2021-22 so far. The 
States and UTs were also advised to provide monetary assistance through Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) of cooking cost component of MDM to all eligible children as per MDM norms for summer 
vacation period of 2021, only as a onetime special welfare measure. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.16  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.4 Economic Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Monetary and Liquidity Measures taken by RBI 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee takes note of the number of Schemes/ interventions extended by the 
Government of India to bring the economy back on track. However, the Committee observes that few 
of these schemes need effective implementation at the ground level. The problems being faced by 
farmers, non-corporate and non-farm small/micro enterprises in getting loans need to be addressed. 
(Para 5.5.2 ibid) 
 
 

30 
 
Action Taken  
 
2.4.2 Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) initiated 'Kisan Credit  
Card Saturation Drive' in mid February, 2020 in collaboration with Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) with the goal to provide universal access to institutional concessional credit to all farmers 
including Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries farmers with special focus on coverage of PM-
KISAN beneficiaries. Under the „Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan (ABA)‟ campaign, Government has 
set a target of issuing additional 2.5 crore KCCs by the end of year as an important step in a chieving 
this goal. This will ensure availability of cheap credit to farmers in the time of crisis and injection of  
nearly 2 lakh crore in rural economy.  
 
2.4.3 As on 5 th March, 2021, about 225.30 lakh of application have been received, out of which about 
198.52 lakh KCCs issued to the farmers with sanctioned limit of Rs.1.89 crore against these KCCs.  
 
Measures taken to counter the COVID-19, Situation  
  
2.4.4 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) vide its circular dated 27 th March 2020 had issued guidelines to 
the effect that all commercial banks (including Regional Rural Banks, Small Finance Banks and Local 
Area Banks), Co-operative Banks, All-India Financial Institutions, and Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (Including Housing Finance Companies) (“lending institutions”) were permitted to grant a 
moratorium of three months on payment of all installments falling due between 1 st March, 2020 and 
31st May, 2020 in respect of all term loans (including agricultural term loans, retail and crop loans). 
The repayment schedule for such loans was shifted across the board by three months after the 
moratorium period. 
            
2.4.5 In respect of working capital facilities sanctioned in the form of cash credit/overdraft 
(“CC/OD”), lending institutions were permitted to defer the recovery of interest applied in respect of all 
such facilities during the period from 1 st March, 2020 up to 31 st May, 2020 (“deferment”). This 
moratorium was further extended up to 31st August 2020 vide RBI circular dated 23rd May 2020. 
  
2.4.6 In addition, the Government had also provided benefit of 2% Interest Subvention (IS) to Banks 
and 3% Prompt Repayment Incentive (PRI) to farmers for the extended period of repayment of loans 
up to 31 st August, 2020 or date of actual repayment whichever is earlier, for short term crop loan upto 
Rs.3 lakh per farmer given by Banks @ 7% p.a., which had become due or would have become due 
between 1st March, 2020 and 31st August, 2020. 
 
(i) In order to address the liquidity issue of MSMEs, Government has taken various 
measures. Ministry of MSME has launched an online Creation and Harmonious 
Application of Modern Processes  for Increasing the Output and National Strength  
(CHAMPIONS) Portal which covers many aspects of e-governance including grievance 
redressal and hand- holding of MSMEs. Ministry of MSME has also launched „MSME 
SAMBANDH‟ portal for monitoring implementation of public procurement policy for the 
MSEs and „MSME SAMADHAAN‟ p ortal for enabling MSMEs to directly register their 
cases relating to delayed payments. Under the online Portal “CHAMPIONS” till 03 rd 
March, 2021 Total 28,848 grievances were received and 98.80 % i.e. 28,503 have been 
replied. 
 

31 
 
(ii) Following measures have been taken by the Government to simplify the flow of 
applications and disbursement of the funds under Prime Minister‟s Employment 
Generation Programme (PMEGP): 
 
(a) Ministry of MSME has modified/simplified the existing PMEGP scheme 
guidelines by discontinuing the role of District Level Task Force Committee 
(DLTFC) for selection of applications. This has resulted in reduction in selection 
time from average 9 months to average 3 months. Further there is 56% increase in 
number of applications sanctioned by Banks during 2020-21. 
(b) Score-card model has been introduced in selection process resulting in speeding up 
of selection process and flow of application from implementing agency to Banks.  
(c) Online Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) has been introduced 
from October 2019 and the scope of offline EDP training has been widened 
through the departmental training centres of KVIC, KVIB, DIC, MSME-DI, 
NSIC, Tool rooms of MSME, IDEMI, RSETI/RUDSETI, Non-departmental 
training centres of KVIC (selected) and other training centres of Central/State 
Govt. This has speed up release of loan and disbursement of subsidy under 
PMEGP. 
(d) Technical Experts and Retired/Ex Bank Officials appointed in KVIC State Offices 
to provide handholding support to the new and old PMEGP beneficiaries, guide 
prospective entrepreneurs to establish viable projects as well as guide modern 
technology process and management practices and regular monitoring of progress.  
(e) KVIC has introduced Call Centre for PMEGP applicants linking with the online 
EDP portal. The Call Centre also facilitates the beneficiaries to redress the 
grievances related to PMEGP issues. 
 
(iii) As part of the Aatma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan, Emergency Credit Line   Guarantee 
Scheme (ECLGS) was introduced in May, 2020 as an emergency measure to combat 
the unprecedented crisis caused in the wake of COVID-19 Pandemic. Under the 
scheme, collateral free credit from Scheduled Commercial Banks, Financial 
Institutions, Non-Banking Financial Companies is provided to eligible Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprise (MSME) units, business enterprises and individual loans for 
business purposes up to 20% of their outstanding credit up to Rs. 50 crore as on 29 th 
February, 2020, subject to the account being less than or equal to 60 days past due as 
on 29 th February, 2020. This additional credit is fully covered by a credit guarantee 
provided by National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. (NCGTC). The loans 
provided under ECLGS have a 12-month moratorium on repayment of principal. The 
Scheme has been extended through ECLGS 2.0 for the 26 sectors identified by the 
Kamath Committee and the health care sector. The entities with outstanding credit 
above Rs. 50 crore and not exceeding Rs. 500 crore as on 29 th February, 2020 were 
made eligible under ECLGS 2.0 subject to the account being less than or equal to 30 
days past due as on 29.2.2020. The scheme is valid till 31 st March, 2021 or till 
guarantees for an amount of Rs. 3,00,000 crore is sanctioned, whichever is earlier.  
(iv) The scheme guidelines and FAQs on this are available on the website of NCGTC 
(The implementing agency of the scheme). The progress under the scheme is being 
regularly monitored by this Department through VCs with the Member Lending 

32 
 
Institutions (MLIs). During the review VCs, the issues faced by MLIs at the ground 
level are addressed suitably. 
(v) As informed by National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited (NCGTC), as 
on 15th February, 2021, loans amounting to Rs. 2.42 lakh crore have been sanctioned, 
of which Rs. 1.78 lakh crore have been disbursed under ECLGS. 
 
(a) Government sets an annual target for this sector, keeping in view the trend in 
disbursement of credit over the past years and also the need for capital formation 
in agriculture. Year wise position of target and achievement under agricultural 
credit flow for the last five years given below indicates the sustained trend in 
actual disbursement, surpassing the incremental annual targets year after year.  
 
As on 31.12.2020, agriculture credit disbursement is to the tune of Rs 11.37 lakh crore against 
target of Rs. 15 lakh crore 
2.4.7 Agriculture credit target for year 2021-22 has been set at Rs.16.5 lakh crore. Agency-wise and 
purpose-wise allocation of the agriculture credit target for the year 2021-22 is as under: 
                                                                                                    (Amount in Rs. crore) 
Agency Crop Loan Term Loan Total 
Commercial Banks 6,05,416 6,00,073 12,05,489 
Cooperative Banks 1,95,337 35,206 2,30,543 
RRBs 1,64,247 49,721 2,13,968 
Total 9,65,000 6,85,000 16,50,000 
 
2.4.8 Further, in order to ensure increased credit flow to Animal Husbandry, Dairy & Fisheries, a 
target of Rs. 61,650 crore for Animal Husbandry, dairy and Fisheries has been fixed within the overall 
term loan target of Rs. 6,85,000 crore during 2021-22. 
 
2.4.9 Reserve Bank of India/Government has taken the following major initiatives to support 
agriculture sector in response to the Pandemic COVID-19: 
 


33 
 
(i) RBI have permitted all commercial banks to grant a moratorium of total 6 months on 
payment of all instalments of all term loans (including agricultural term loans, retail and 
crop loans) falling due between 1st March, 2020 and 31st August, 2020. 
(ii) The repayment schedule for above such loans as also the residual tenor will be shifted 
across the board after the moratorium period and in respect of working capital facilities, 
lending institutions are permitted to allow a deferment till 31 st August, 2020 on recovery of 
interest applied in respect of all such facilities. This facility is applicable to all loans to 
agriculture and allied activities. 
 
Special Liquidity Facility 
 
(iii) A Special Liquidity Facility (SLF) of Rs. 30,000 crore as additional refinance to RRBs 
Coop Banks/ NBFCs-MFIs has been provided through NABARD to supplement the lending 
resources of these Rural Financial Institutions. 
(iv) This is over and above the refinance of around Rs.90,000 crore to be provided by NABARD 
through the normal refinance route during this year. 
(v) Rs.25,000 crore has been disbursed out of this special facility to RRBs,  Cooperative Banks 
and MFIs for meeting the credit requirement of farmers 
(vi) Balance amount of Rs. 5000 crore under SLF allocated by RBI to NABARD for smaller 
NBFCs and NBFC-MFIs.  As on 18 th February, 2021, NABARD has sanctioned and 
disbursed Rs. 1312 crore and Rs. 1067 crore respectively out of this facility. 
 
Special KCC Saturation drive 
 
(vii) A special saturation drive to cover farmers under KCC is going on since February 2020.  As 
per the information furnished by Public Sector Banks & NABARD, 1.95 crore KCC with 
credit limit of Rs 1.85 lakh crore have been sanctioned to farmers across the country during 
this drive up to 23rd February, 2021. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
2.4.10  In the meeting of the Committee held on 28 th June, 2021, to examine the  Socio-
Economic Fallout of the COVID- 19 Pandemic’s Second Wave’ t he representative of Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance made a presentation before the Committee about the measures 
taken to mitigate impact of COVID-19 and spur growth which included Atmanirbhar Bharat Rozgar 
Yojana and Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package (PMGKP); provisional GDP estimates and private 
consumption for Q4 of FY 2020-21; economic recovery post second wave;  net direct tax collection 
during FY 2021-22; agricultural production, food procurement and distribution; Budgetary 
announcements for management of COVID-19 Pandemic; etc. He further informed that the total 
number of mandays generated under MGNREGA in April to June till 24 th of 2019 was 89.97 crores; in 
2020, for the same period, it was 120 crore mandays and in 2021, it was 88 crore mandays. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.11  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
The provisions in place before the Pandemic for supporting the MSMEs 

34 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.12  The Committee appreciates the launch of Creation and Harmonious Application of 
Modern Processes for Increasing the Output and National Strength (CHAMPIONS) Portal, a unified, 
empowered, robust and technology-driven platform for helping and promoting the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by providing them and other related stakeholders facilities to voice their 
issues and grievances and seeks resolution. The Committee takes note of the effort of the Ministry of 
MSME in encouraging the MSMEs to get themselves on board on the GeM Portal by sending bulk 
emails to all Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM) holders and by providing GeM access to the UAM 
database for provisional and automatic onboarding of all the MSMEs on the GeM. 
(Para 5.9.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.4.13  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.14  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.15  The Committee further observes that the MSMEs may also seek new avenues and 
possibilities for expansion by customizing products with quality and innovations that will help them in 
meeting the evolving customer needs and by placing them as a part of the solution that is needed in the 
new normal. 
(Para 5.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.4.16  MSME is already implementing Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and Technology 
Upgradation Scheme (CLCS-TUS) for technology upgradation for MSEs. It is aimed at promoting 
competitiveness amongst Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by the way of wastage 
reduction through Lean Manufacturing, support for Design improvement, creating awareness on 
Intellectual Property Rights and to promote untapped creativity of individual and adoption of latest 
technologies in manufacturing as well as knowledge based innovation MSMEs through Incubation 
across the country. 
 
2.4.17  18 Tool Rooms & Technical Institutions under the Ministry of MSME are constantly 
concentrating on an integrated development of the related segments of industries by way of provi ding 
quality tools, trained personnel and consultancy in tooling and related areas and  up-gradation of 
technologies, processes and products in the specific product groups like Foundry & Forging, 
Electronics, Electrical Measuring Instruments, Fragrance & Flavour, Glass, Sport Goods, and footwear 
designing to support these sectors. 
 

35 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.18  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.19  The Committee observes that the hospitality sector and related services employ around 
five crore people. Due to lockdowns and large number of people getting infected, even after the 
opening of this sector during phased-unlocking, fear is lurking in the mind of the people, therefore, 
they are not undertaking any travel, leading to huge loss of employment and income in these sectors. 
Further, many eateries/restaurants have either shut down or are currently not operating. Therefor e, 
necessary fiscal stimulus, interventions and support will help in the revival of the hospitality sector and 
related services. 
(Para 5.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
2.4.20  The Government announced various fiscal and relief majors under the Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Package to benefit the Tourism Industry. The stimulus package announced by the Government 
of India is outlined as under: 
 
(i) Rs 3 lakh crore collateral free automatic loan has been made available for MSMEs. The 
loan will have 4-year tenure and will have 12-month moratorium. 
(ii) The Government waived off PF contribution for three months for organisations less than 
100 pax and 90% employees below 15000. Under Atmanirbhar Bharat package, PF 
contribution of both employer and employee has been reduced to 10% each from existing 
12% each for all establishments covered by EPFO for the three months i.e. up to September 
2020. 
 
2.4.21  The Central Government has also given relief from various regulatory compliances 
under Income Tax Act, Companies Act and GST Act for varying period in the wake of COVID-19 
crisis to ensure business continuity and survival. Similarly, the RBI extended moratorium on term loans 
till 31st December 2020.  
 
2.4.22  The Ministry of Tourism in association with the Quality Council of India launched the 
System for Awareness, Assessment and Training for Hospitality Industry (SAATHI) scheme  to assist 
the hospitality industry in their preparedness in  ensuring safety and health of guests and employees. 
The SAATHI certification includes the restaurants segment in its ambit to give the stakeholders a sense 
of assurance regarding hygiene and safety. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.23  The Committee notes the reply.  
 
 
 
  

36 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
 
3.1 India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic 
 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.1.1 From the benefit of the experience gained while addressing these challenges, the Committee 
recommends that the Government should draw up a national plan and guidelines under NDMA, 2005 
and Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. An effective functional institutional mechanism is needed for co-
ordination between the Centre, States and Union Territories for quick response to such a crisis in 
future. This would ensure efficacious implementation of all decisions to contain Pandemics and 
equitable/timely distribution of relief at district and sub divisional levels to the intended beneficiaries in 
urban and rural areas. 
(Para 2.6.13 of the 229th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 NDMA had prepared National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) in May, 2016 as per the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act (DM Act), 2005. NDMP was revised in November, 2019. 
The Plan inter – alia, mentions, specific measures at the Centre and State level required for mitigation 
and preparedness for Biological Disasters and Public Health Emergencies. The Plan contains a chapter 
on Biological Disasters and Pubic Health Emergencies, from which specific plan for any specific 
Biological Disaster has to be formulated by the concerned Ministry. It contains responsibility 
framework on Biological and Public Health Emergencies at Section 7.15 with six different components 
for disaster risk reduction. The Plan, inter – alia, mentions that Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is 
the nodal Ministry for dealing with biological emergencies. Work done by NDMA with regard to 
guidelines is given below: 
 
(i) In October, 2007, National Disaster Management Authority released National 
Guidelines on Medical Preparedness and Mass Casualty Management. 
(ii) In July, 2008, NDMA issued guidelines on Biological Disasters. 
(iii) In December, 2009, NDMA issued guidelines on Psycho-social support and mental 
health services in disasters. 
(iv) In August, 2010, NDMA issued guidelines on Management of the Dead in the aftermath 
of Disasters. 
(v) In February, 2016 NDMA issued guidelines on Hospital Safety. 
(vi) NDMA released „Guidelines on Influenza A (H1N1) Pandemic Preparedness for 
Business Continuity in Non- Health Sectors‟. Further, an „Action Plan on Pandemic 
Preparedness and Response‟ was also released by Ministry of Health an d Family 
Welfare in consultation with NDMA in May 2009. 
 

37 
 
3.1.3 The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 was enacted to provide for better prevention of the spread of 
dangerous epidemic diseases. In the present Epidemic Diseases Act the Central Government has been 
given a concurrent role with the State Governments to take any measures that may be needed to prevent 
the outbreak of an epidemic like current COVID-19 or the spread thereof. Further, Public Health be ing 
state subject, the Section 2 of Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 empowers the State Government to 
prescribe regulations to be observed by the public to prevent the outbreak of any dangerous epide mic 
disease or the spread thereof if, it thinks that ordinary provisions of the law in force are insufficient for 
the purpose. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.1.4 In the meeting of the Committee held on 28 th June, 2021, to examine the  Socio-Economic 
Fallout of the COVID- 19 Pandemic’s Second Wave’ t he representative of National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA) highlighted its efforts in management of second wave which included 
several meetings with States and Ministries of Labour & Employment, Panchayati Raj, Housing & 
Urban Affairs, Departments of Skill Development, Pharmaceuticals, Economic Affairs, Land Resources 
and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), etc., for the management of Pandemic; tracing and 
tracking of COVID-19 positive persons through IT Enabled Integrated Hotspot Analysis System 
(Itihas) portal; counseling of people through psycho-social care portal; addition of equipments in India 
Disaster Resource Network (IDRN), etc. The NDMA has also interacted with more than 1000 NGOs to 
discuss various issues regarding management of the Pandemic.   
 
3.1.5 The attention of the Committee was drawn to the practical difficulties faced by the health 
workers of the PHCs, hospitals, etc. It was pointed out that at the time of such emergencies, extensive 
paperwork have acted as an hindrance for providing emergency healthcare to the affected patients to 
the extent that at some places, it led to piling up of dead bodies awaiting clearance of the doctors. 
Hence, the Committee has opined that the need for paperwork for providing healthcare facilities to the 
patients should be looked in to and addressed properly so that the patients are extended healthcare 
facilities quickly during the Pandemics like COVID-19. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its reply, 
acknowledged and clarified the matter and assured to take appropriate steps in this regard. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.1.6 The Committee notes that NDMA had prepared the National Disaster Management Plan 
(NDMP) in May, 2016 which was revised in November, 2019, i.e. before the onset of COVID-19 
Pandemic in India. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the NDM A may revise 
NDMP to include the lessons learned and experience gained in the management of COVID-19 
including SOPs, lockdowns, public health management, etc. Accordingly, NDMA along with the 
Ministry of Health & family Welfare may issue fresh/additional guidelines/Standard Oper ating 
Procedures (SOPs) for curbing and managing Pandemics in future.  
  
3.1.7 The Committee also recommends that the National Disaster Management Act (NDMA), 
2005 may be suitably amended to include a clause ‘subject to correction’ during digital data 
collection and reduction in paperwork for extending benefits, etc., to the intended beneficiaries. 
 
 
 

38 
 
3.2 Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee observes that the Pandemic has pushed both Central and State Governments to 
incur heavy expenditure on COVID-19 treatment and related services. The Committee is of the  view 
that the public sector healthcare delivery system needs to be further strengthened in all the States/ UTs 
and a uniform healthcare system should be established across the country to deal with the Pandemic on 
a sustained basis in future. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in the long term, there should 
be more investments in health infrastructure for the rapid scaling up of public health services. A strong 
and effective public health infrastructure is necessary to respond to such a Pandemic due to which 
thousands of COVID-19 patients are getting admitted to hospitals in addition to the non-COVID-19  
patients. 
(Para 3.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 In a bid to further improve public health funding, a new centrally sponsored scheme, PM Atma 
Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana, has been announced with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 crores over 6 
years. This will develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary Health Care Systems, streng then 
existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection and cure of new and 
emerging diseases. The main interventions under the scheme are: 
 
(i)   Support for 17,788 rural and 11,024 urban Health and Wellness Centers 
(ii) Setting up integrated public health labs in all districts and 3382 block public health units 
in 11 states; 
(iii) Establishing critical care hospital blocks in 602 districts and 12 central institutions; 
(iv) Strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional branches 
and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units; 
(v) Expansion of the Integrated Health Information Portal to all States/UTs to connect all 
public health labs; 
(vi) Operationalisation of 17 new Public Health Units and strengthening of 33 existing Public 
Health Units at Points of Entry, at 32 Airports, 11 Seaports and 7 land crossings; 
(vii) Setting up of 15 Health Emergency Operation Centers and 2 mobile hospitals; and 
(viii) Setting up of a national institution for Health, a Regional Research Platform for WHO 
South East Asia Region, 9 Bio-Safety Level III laboratories and 4 regional National 
Institutes for Virology. 
 
3.2.3 In addition, „India COVID -19 Emergency Response & Health System Preparedness Package: 
Phase-II‟ has also been approved by the Cabinet with Rs 23,123 crores (with Rs. 15,000 Cr as Cent ral 
Component &Rs 8,123 as State component) for the period July, 21 to March, 2022. It includes support 
to State/UT level for ramping up Health Infrastructure including those in rural, tribal and peri-urban 
areas closer to the community, providing support for procurement of Drugs and Diagnostics to enhance  
service delivery at district and sub district levels for management of COVID-19 cases (including 
pediatric care) and for maintaining a buffer of drugs, support for IT Interventions such as 
implementation of Hospital Management Information System and expanding Access to Tele-

39 
 
Consultations in all districts, and support for Capacity Building and Training for all aspects of 
management of COVID-19. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.2.4 The Home Secretary apprised the Committee that since the outbreak of Pandemic, the 
Government has been continuously strengthening the health infrastructure which includes laboratories, 
dedicated COVID health centers and dedicated hospitals. Supply of logistics such as PPE kits, 
essential medicines, ventilators, oxygen cylinders have been significantly enhanced Pradhan Mantri 
Garib Kalyan Package, an insurance scheme, which was launched in March 2020 to provide a 
comprehensive cover of Rs. 50 lakhs to the health care workers. The scheme has been extended furthe r 
for another period of 180 days with effect from 24th April, 2021.  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.5 The Committee opines that the threat of COVID-19 has highlighted the huge disparity of 
infrastructure and services in public and private hospitals. There has to be sufficient capacity of beds 
available both in public/Government and private hospitals. The Committee also observes the 
disproportionate availability of ICU beds in private and public sector hospitals. After the onset of the 
Pandemic, the largest share of the burden of extending comprehensive healthcare has been borne by the 
Government hospitals as private hospitals are either inaccessible or not affordable for everyone. 
Therefore, more allocation should be made for public hospitals to strengthen the Public Health 
Infrastructure so that they can equip themselves appropriately to handle such Pandemics in the future. 
(Para 3.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.6 In addition to the reply given at Para no. 3.10.6 above, also, under NHM, the States are 
encouraged to improve their healthcare infrastructure by sending adequate proposals through their 
Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) to the centre. 
 
3.2.7 In view of the Pandemic, additional resources have also been provided under Emergency 
COVID Response Plan (ECRP) to the States based on their proposals and gap analysis. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.8 The Committee notes various interventions to be made under PM Atma Nirbh ar Swasth 
Bharat Yojana with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 crores over 6 years and ‘India COVID -19 
Emergency Response & Health System Preparedness Package: Phase- II’ for the period July, 21 
to March, 2022 with approved amount  of Rs 23,123 crores. The Committee recomme nds to 
assess the requirement of health professionals including nursing staff and allied workf orce and 
take steps on priority to recruit them for catering to the establishment of Health and Welln ess 
Centers, integrated public health labs,  critical care hospital blocks, etc. The Committee further 
recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW) to coordinate regularly with States/UTs for timely completion of the components of 
the above-mentioned Yojana/Package to ramp up health infrastructure. 
 

40 
 
3.2.9 The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of Progra mme 
Implementation Plans (PIPs) received by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  from  States 
for improvement of their health infrastructure and the components of ‘additional r esources’ 
provided to the States under  Emergency COVID Response Plan (ECRP).  
 
3.2.10  The Committee recommends to increase the percentage of GDP spent in h ealth 
sector to strengthen existing infrastructure and build new, strong and effective p ublic health 
infrastructure in long term. 
 
3.2.11  The Committee also recommends to further strengthen Tele-consultations f or 
capacity building and training of health professionals and Tele-Medicine for treat ment of 
patients especially in peri-urban, rural and remote areas as also patients during  the COVID-19 
Pandemic. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.12  The Committee notes that in the initial phase of spread of the virus, Central and State 
Government along with the civil administration and health care workers co-ordinated the relief work 
and responded by creating bed facilities, opening laboratories, opening of railway coach es and health 
care centre for COVID-19 patients with a large number of beds to handle the Pandemic. However, it is 
vital to build up massive health care infrastructure, special protocols, etc., for the care of patients in 
these dedicated hospitals to manage the Pandemic like COVID-19 in the future. 
(Para 3.10.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.13  The objective of the proposed PM-ASBY, supplemented by funds from  the 15 th  FC is 
to strengthen primary health facilities (Health and Wellness Centres in rural and urban areas)  to deliver 
universal Comprehensive Primary Health Care, including for surveillance, active community 
engagement and improved risk communication, health education and prevention; and to strengthen 
public health institutions and public health governance capacities, to mount an effective response to 
current and future Pandemics\epidemics with capacities for comprehensive diagnostic and treatment 
including critical care service. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.2.14  When asked about the shortage of liquid medical oxygen during second wave in the 
meeting of the Committee held on 28 th June, 2021, to examine the  Socio-Economic Fallout of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic’s Second Wave’, the representative of Department for Promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce & Industry apprised the Committee that during second 
wave, there was rapid surge in the active cases which resulted in sudden and enormous spike in the 
requirement of medical oxygen. The daily average on a monthly basis, liquid medical oxygen supply 
was 1,292 metric tons in February 2021, 1,459 metric tons in March, 2021. It rose to almost 5000 
metric tons in April, 2021 which further increased to 8,520 metric tons on daily basis in the month of 
May, 2021. Therefore, the production of liquid medical oxygen was increased to match the sudden 
increase of demand. The measures taken to increase oxygen supply inter-alia included enhancing their 
production and supply including capacity in the public sector units, import of oxygen, reduction in 
safety stocks requirement of the steel plants from three-and-a-half days to half a day, thereby making 

41 
 
available thousands of tons of liquid oxygen for medical purposes.   The use of liquid oxygen for 
industry was also restricted.  The liquid medical oxygen was transported to various parts of the country 
through railways, air force, navy, etc. 
   
3.2.15  The Home Secretary, further informed the Committee that during second wave of 
COVID-19, huge quantum of oxygen was mobilised from Eastern part of the country to the Northern 
and Western parts of the country where it was in short supply as the production is mostly in steel plants 
located on the Eastern side.  The MHA banned use of liquid medical oxygen by any other industry 
temporarily and diverted all oxygen that was produced in the country for use of medical purposes.    
 
3.2.16  The Home Secretary further informed the Committee that to augment the funds to the 
States, MHA had allowed State Governments to use 10 percent of their opening balance of State 
Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) for COVID containment measures.   However, when the surge increased 
in April, 2021, the percentage was increased to 50 percent of the SDRF. More than Rs. 8,800 crores 
were released to the States as first installment as a Central share. The States may add their own share 
and then they could use 50 percent of it for COVID containment measures.  
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.17  The Committee observes that the nature and virulence of the COVID-19 Pandemic 
is unpredictable. Hence, alertness and preparedness cannot be compromised at any stage. The  
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise the States that the COVID-19 
infrastructure facilities including testing facility, ICU beds and medical oxygen created for  
patients may not be scaled down completely as given the deceptive nature and emergence  of 
multiple variants, the virus may give rise to a third wave without giving sufficient time to react. 
They should be kept in a dormant state so that they can be reactivated to deal with the 
subsequent wave of the Pandemic that might come up. 
  
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.18  The Committee strongly recommends that there is a need for a comprehensive Public 
Health Act, preferably at the national level with suitable legal provisions to support the Government in 
keeping checks and controls over the private hospitals as there have been reports about the selling of 
hospital beds by them. Learning from the experience of this Pandemic, the Government should 
seriously examine it. The Act should also keep a check on the black marketing of medicines and 
product standardization. The Committee further recommends that the people should be made aware 
through awareness campaigns regarding cheaper and effective repurposed medicines to prev ent them 
from panicking and spending a huge amount of money on expensive drugs. The Committee 
recommends that good quality and affordable medicines should be provided to everyone, especially at a 
cheaper/subsidized rate to the marginalized sections of the society specially at the time of Pandemic 
like COVID-19. 
 
(Para 3.10.21 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.2.19  The observations of Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
It is informed that the Government earlier drafted a Public Health (prevention, control and management 

42 
 
of epidemics, bio-terrorism and disasters) Bill, 2017 addressing specific issues related to epidemics, 
Pandemics and disasters. Based on the review, it was decided to subsume it into a larger Public Healt h 
Act, which has been drafted and shared with the States for their comments. Thereafter, Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare will follow the due process of bringing in a legislation before Pa rliament to 
empower the Centre and States to manage Pandemics and epidemics effectively. 
 
3.2.20  Government of India has enacted Clinical Establishments Act 2010, for registration and 
regulation of Clinical Establishments including Private Hospitals. Every Clinical Establishment located 
in the States/UTs where the act is applicable, are required to charge the rates of each type of proce dure 
and services within the range of rates determined and issued by the Central Government from time to 
time in consultation with the State Government. The National Council under the act has an approved 
list of procedures and template for costing of the procedures which have been shared with the 
State/UTs where the act is applicable for them to work out the aforesaid range of rates.  The 
implementation of the provisions Clinical Establishments Act and Rules there under, is within the remit 
of the respec tive State/UT‟s Governments which have adopted the Act. In addition, rates have also 
been prescribed under CGHS and PM-JAY to bring transparency in rates being charged by private 
hospitals empanelled under these schemes. 
 
3.2.21  As regards to quality of drugs it may be mentioned that the manufacture, sale and 
distribution of drugs are primarily regulated in the country under the provisions of Drugs & Cosmet ics 
Act &Rules 1945 made there under through a system of licensing and inspection by State Licensing 
Authorities appointed by respective State Governments. 
 
3.2.22  Licensee is required to comply with all the condition of license as prescribed under 
Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945 and State Licensing Authorities are empowered to take action on 
violation of any conditions of such licenses including prosecution in appropriate Court of law. 
 
3.2.23  In case of receipt of report of black marketing of the drugs, Central Dru gs Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO) takes up the matter in coordination with the State Drugs Controller for 
taking the appropriate action as per the Drugs & Cosmetics Act and Rules there under. 
 
3.2.24  CDSCO and MoHFW have taken various measures from time to time to ensure the 
robust Drug Regulatory System in India. 
 
3.2.25  It is also mentioned that the Epidemic Diseases Act has recently been amended by the 
Governmentof India by Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Bill, 2020 to ensure that during any situation 
akin to the current Pandemic, there is zero tolerance to any form of violence against healthca re service 
personnel and damage to property. The Act provides more stringent provisions for emergent times to 
act as effective deterrents to incidents of violence against the healthcare service personnel.  
 
3.2.26  Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadh Kendras (PMBJK) are   providing quality 
medicines at affordable rates for the common man especially the poor. Approx 7500 PMBJ Kendras are 
functional across the country and all the districts of the country have also been covered by the scheme. 
During the difficult time of COVID-19 Pandemic, PMBJKs have rendered essential services to the 
nation. All Kendras maintained their operations regularly and ensured availability of medicines to the 
citizens. 
 

43 
 
 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.2.27  The Committee while examining the Socio-Economic Fallout of the COVID-19 
Pandemic’s Second Wave’ in its meeting held on 28 th June, 2021, felt that a 10 litre oxygen 
concentrator would be more beneficial as compared to a 5 litre oxygen concentrator. 
 
3.2.28  When asked through a questionnaire about the number of cases that have been 
registered for black marketing of medicines, medical oxygen, etc., during the second wave. The M HA 
in its reply dated 21 st October, 2021, informed that amidst reports of black-marketing/hoarding/ 
overcharging of Covid-19 management drugs, CDSCO  (Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation) has requested all States/ UTs Licensing authorities through several advisories to 
instruct their enforcement staff to keep strict vigil especially at sensitive places and to take stringent 
action against the offenders by conducting special drive of monitoring and investigation. As per 
information available from various State Licensing Authorities, in cases of black 
marketing/hoarding/overcharging of COVID-19 management drugs, various enforcement actions like 
Drug seizure, Arrests of accused persons / registration of FIR etc. have been taken out by the State 
Licensing Authorities. As on date 12 th July, 2021, 146 cases out of 317 cases of hoarding/black 
marketing/over-pricing of Remdesivir have been reported and actions (Drug seizure, persons arrested/ 
notices issued) have been taken in by the respective State Licensing Authorities. 
 
3.2.29  Besides, the following steps have been taken to ensure the availability of these 
medicines in case of third wave: 
 All States/UT and State Drugs Controllers have been requested to verify stock of drugs and 
check other malpractices and take effective steps to curb hoarding and black marketing. 
 A COVID Drugs Management Cell (CDMC) has been set up in the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) to oversee the management of smooth supply of drugs used in 
COVID-19 management. 
 Action is initiated at the National level to augment production of critical drugs including import 
besides support in terms of equitable distribution of the critical supplies. 
 A Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) has been constituted as an institutional mechanism 
under Department of Pharmaceuticals for efficient decision making on all the issues with 
respect to COVID-19 related drugs including availability through inter-departmental 
consultations. 
 Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) have 
actively coordinated with the industry to enhance availability of Amphotericin B through 
identification of manufacturers, alternate drugs and expeditious approvals of new 
manufacturing facilities. 
 Besides, the existing five manufacturers, DCGI had issued permissions to manufacturing/ 
marketing of Amphotericin B Liposomal Injection to six additional firms. 
 
3.2.30  MoHFW has issued "Guidelines for Management of Buffer Stock for COVID- 19 
drugs" on 13 th July, 2021 to all the States/ UTs for them to ensure availability of these drugs for any 
future surge in cases. The Guidelines for Buffer Stock Management of COVID-19 have been prepared 
and shared with States/UTs for them to initiate procurement on priority for building up buffer stocks.   
 

44 
 
 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.31  The Committee recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare to issue guidelines on fixation of ceiling on price of hospital beds 
during the Pandemic like COVID-19 and other public health emergencies. Due publicity may be 
given to these rates so that people are aware of the price of hospital beds and a monitorin g  
mechanism may be created to put a check on black marketing of essential life saving drugs and 
selling of hospital beds above ceiling price.  
 
3.2.32  The Committee notes that the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras 
(PMBJK) are   providing quality medicines at an affordable rates. The Committee r ecommends 
to digitize and integrate all PMBJK to check real-time availability of medicines. This will help in 
checking the stock in real time and ensure availability of medicines at PMBJK. 
 
3.2.33  The Committee recommends that the MHA may coordinate with the MoH&FW to 
advise States to arrange for 10 litre oxygen concentrators at the PHCs/CHCs. The States may 
also be advised to address the shortage of technicians and medical staff to operate the oxygen 
concentrators and ventilators at district/block hospitals, etc. 
 
3.2.34  The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of 
Health & family Welfare to assess the requirement and preparedness for possible third wave 
particularly in terms of availability of liquid medical oxygen, oxygen concentrators, life- saving 
medicines, beds, ventilators, etc. 
 
Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.35  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by ICMR in handling the COVID19 
Pandemic. The Committee recommends that while undertaking vaccine trials all necessary and 
mandatory requirements must be duly fulfilled and all phases must be completed. Trials on small 
animals, human trials should be mandatorily undertaken on a sufficient sample size population. The 
Committee notes that no emergency use authorization has been given in the past by the Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). Therefore, the Committee recommends that if at all 
emergency authorization would be given, it should be given by Government with proper consideration 
and caution and this provision should be used in rarest of the rare cases. 
 
(Para 3.12.15 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.2.36  The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliament Standing Committee (PSC) have been 
noted. 
 
3.2.37  In this regard, it is to mention that, under normal situation for final approval of any 
vaccine, non-clinical data as well as complete data of Phase I, II, and III clinical trials demonstrating 

45 
 
safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of the vaccine are required. However, in case of Pandemi c 
situation like COVID-19, when there is a strong and urgent need for vaccine to protect population 
from the Pandemic, the Accelerated Approval Process was followed to consider its approval for use in 
emergency situation based on acceptable data of safety, immunogenicity and efficacy without wait ing 
for completion of all phases of clinical trials which takes long period of time. 
3.2.38  Sub clause (2) (ii) (A) of clause 1 of the Second Schedule of the New Drugs & Clinical 
Trials Rules, 2019, prescribes Accelerated Approval Process for drugs including vaccines intended to 
be used in life threatening or serious disease conditions or rare diseases and for drugs intended to be 
used in the diseases of special relevance to Indian scenario or un met medical need in India, disaster or 
special defense use e.g. homeostatic and quick wound healing, enhancing oxygen carrying capacity, 
radiation safety, drugs for combating chemical, nuclear, biological infliction etc. 
 
3.2.39  All such applications for approval of the new drug/ vaccines for restricted use under 
emergency situation are evaluated in consultation with the Subject Expert Committee. 
 
3.2.40  Accordingly, as recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, CDSCO considers approval 
of any new drug/vaccine for restricted use under emergency situation considering the above mentioned 
regulatory aspects under the New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.2.41  To increase the daily vaccination dose so that the entire adult population can be 
covered at the earliest, the MHA informed that the average daily vaccination doses in India have 
shown a steady increase from 2.35 lakh dose in January, 2021, to 23.38 Crore doses in 
September, 2021. The Government of India is providing advance visibility of vaccine availability to 
States and UTs with an advice to prepare District-wise and COVID Vaccination Centre (CVC) wise 
plan for accelerating the coverage of COVID-19 vaccination with respect to the available doses. 
Further, communication strategy is in place which is being implemented across all States/UTs with a 
focus to sustain vaccine confidence and address vaccine eagerness and vaccine hesitancy. Efforts are 
also being made to increase the accessibility of vaccination services through engagement of private 
hospitals, Workplace CVCs and "Near to Home’ CVCs. 
 
3.2.42  The 'Revised Guidelines for implementation of National COVID Vaccination Program' 
have come in effect from 21 st June 2021 which mentions that "In order to incentivize production by 
vaccine manufacturers and encourage new vaccines, domestic vaccine manufacturers are given the 
option to also provide vaccines directly to private hospitals. This would be restricted to 25 percent of 
their monthly production." Further, as per these revised guidelines, all citizens irrespective of their 
income status are entitled to free vaccination. Those who have the ability to pay are encouraged to use 
private hospital's vaccination centres. 
 
3.2.43  When asked about the basis of giving 25 per cent share of total vaccines to private 
sector, the MHA in its reply dated 21 st October, 2021 informed that private hospitals play a significant 
role in the overall delivery of healthcare services in the country. Involvement of private hospitals has 
been done in the COVID-19 vaccination drive since its beginning so as to increase the number of 
COVID-19 Vaccination Centres (CVCs) as well as improve the geographical spread of vaccination 
services. 
 

46 
 
3.2.44  This availability of 25 percent share of vaccines to private hospitals will not only 
increase the geographical reach of COVID-19 vaccination services but will also act as a cross-
subsidizing mechanism for lower price of procurement by Government of India thereby incentivizing 
vaccine manufacturer for boosting up the vaccine production. 
 
3.2.45  The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India has advised 
States/UTs to promote private hospitals for participation in the vaccination drive. The demand of these 
private hospitals is aggregated on CoWIN platform to enable all hospitals, irrespective of their size 
and purchasing capacity, to participate in the vaccination drive. MoHFW regularly monitors the 
vaccine supplied to private hospitals and the doses administered by private hospitals in each State/UT 
so as to ensure efficient utilization of available vaccine stocks with the private hospitals thereby 
accelerating the vaccination coverage. 
 
3.2.46  Moreover, continued efforts are also being made to ramp up domestic production of 
vaccines. It is estimated that a total of 186.6 crore doses will be available from January, 2021, to 
December, 2021, which will be sufficient to achieve desirable level of vaccination coverage in the 
adult population.As on 11 th October, 2021, 95.19 Cr. vaccine doses have been administered so far 
under the Nationwide Vaccination Drive. 
 
3.2.47  The Committee sought to know through Questionnaire as how Government is ensuring 
the equitable distribution of vaccines among States and monitoring the progress of vaccination and 
how vaccine wastage is being addressed. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) replied 
that as per the 'Revised Guidelines for implementation of National COVID Vaccination Program', 
Government of India procures 75% of the vaccines being produced by the manufacturers in the 
country which are provided free of cost to States/UTs as has been the case from the commencement of 
the National Vaccination Programme. These doses are administered by the States/UTs free of cost to 
all citizens as per priority through Government Vaccination Centres. Distribution of vaccines to 
States/UTs is done in an equitable manner using parameters like pro-rata population, consumption 
pattern, active case load and vaccine wastage. For the month of July'21, the entire allocation of 
vaccines to the States & UTs have been made on the basis of pro-rata population only. Monitoring of 
the progress of vaccination drive is done on a regular basis through desk review of coverage reports 
available on CoWIN portal and review meetings with State/UT officials at various levels. 
 
3.2.48  The Committee was further informed that vaccine wastage is one of the thematic areas 
which is regularly being reviewed across all levels. The Vaccine Utilization Reports (VUR) for each 
session are generated on CoWIN portal from which vaccine wastage at both Government & Private 
CVCs can be accessed for review and corrective actions. 
 
3.2.49  When asked about the current stock of vaccines, number of  vaccines approved in India 
and number of new vaccines that are under development in India, the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare (MoHFW) informed that till 10 th July, 21, a total of 38.55 crore doses of COVID-19 vaccine 
have been supplied to States/UTs since the beginning of the vaccination drive. It is expected that from 
January 2021 to December 2021, a total of 186.6 crore doses will be available for COVID-19 
vaccination drive. 
 
3.2.50  Presently, four vaccines viz Covishield, Covaxin, Sputnik V and Moderna have been 
approved for restricted use in emergency setting in India. Covishield and Covaxin are being used in 

47 
 
both Govt. and Private COVID-19 Vaccination Centres (CVCs) while Sputnik V is available only in 
Private CVCs.In addition to above vaccines, about 04 vaccine candidates are in clinical stage of 
development and 01 candidate is in advanced pre-clinical stage of development. Besides, NEGVAC is 
in discussions with offshore vaccine manufacturers including M/s Pfizer Inc. to explore availability of 
their COVID-19 vaccines in India. 
 
3.2.51   To ramp up the production of vaccines, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoHFW) replied that the research, development and clinical trials of vaccines is being supported by 
DBT under 'Mission COVID Suraksha'. Support is also being provided to vaccine manufacturing 
facilities to augment vaccine production over the next 6-8 months. Financial support as Grant has 
been provided to Bharat Biotech International Ltd. (BBIL) and 3 other public Sector undertakings, 
viz., Indian Immunologicals Ltd. (IlL), Haffidne Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., and Bharat Immunologicals 
and Biologicals Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahar, to ramp up the production of Covaxin. Through 
this effort, it is expected that the current manufacturing of COVAXIN of 10 million doses/ month will 
be enhanced to nearly 100 million doses/ month in the next 8-10 months. 
 
3.2.52  Further, advance payments are being made to the domestic manufacturers for procurement of 
vaccines for the ongoing vaccination drive. In addition to above measures, 25% of the monthly vaccine 
production is also available for procurement by private hospitals so as to incentivize the 
manufacturers and cross-subsidize the lower price for Government procurement. 
 
3.2.53  Regarding the confusion over the time gap between the first and second dose of Covishield 
vaccine, The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) replied that the dosage interval for the 
currently used COVID-19 vaccines in India have been based upon scientific evidence based on the 
clinical trials and similar research studies. With respect to Covishield vaccine, the dosage interval was 
revised to 12-16 weeks from earlier recommended interval of 6-8 weeks in view of emerging scientific 
evidences after detailed deliberations by Covid-19 Working Group of the National Technical Advisory 
Group on Immunization (NTAGI)  and  subsequently  by  National  Expert  Group  on  Vaccine 
Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC). 
 
3.2.54 When asked whether Delta variant require an early second dose to give full protection. The 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW), informed that presently, there is no established 
evidence of an early second dose required to confer protection against Delta variant. 
 
3.2.55 When asked about the trials of child vaccination in India through a Questionnaire, the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW),  informed the Committee that two domestic manufacturers of 
COVID-19 vaccine have been involved in trials of COVID-19 vaccine in the age group of less than 18 
years. The details are as follows: 
 
a)  M/s Bharat Biotech International Limited has been permitted by The Drugs Controller 
General of India on 12th May 2021 to conduct clinical trials on the healthy volunteers between 2 
years to 18 years of age, for its vaccine i.e. Covaxin and the enrolment process for this trial has 
also begun. 
b) M/s Zydus Cadila which is developing DNA vaccines has concluded its clinical trial for 
between the age group of 12 to 18 years of age and subject to the statutory permissions, the same 
may be available in near future for children of the age group of 12 to 18 years of age. 
 

48 
 
3.2.56 When asked through a questionnaire about the study conducted to assess the probable 
impact and severity of symptoms in children during the third wave. The MHA in its reply dated 21 st 
October informed that there is no specific scientific evidence either from India or globally indicating 
that children get disproportionately infected with COVID-19. Children, if infected, generally remain 
asymptomatic or exhibit mild symptoms and do not get severe disease. However, since children still 
remain susceptible to infection, Union Health Ministry has advised States on the following ongoing 
measures: 
• Union Health Ministry has advised States to undertake gap assessment of paediatric 
COVID Care facilities and upgrade health infrastructure with respect to pediatric case 
management. This includes requirement of drugs, oxygen, equipment, consumables, trained 
human resources, infection prevention, referrals, etc., if required, in collaboration with the 
private sector. 
• States/UTs have also been advised to identify and earmark designated specific areas 
for Paediatric Covid Care in all three levels of Covid facilities (COVID Care Centres; 
Dedicated COVID Health Centres and Dedicated COVID Hospitals) and including 
accompanying parents/ family members. 
• Guidelines on ‘Operationalization of COVID Care services for children and 
adolescents’ was issued and disseminated to all States/UTs on 14th June, 2021. 
• Further, with the intent to protect paediatric age group in the current and any future 
surges of cases, Guidelines for management of COVID-19 in children were also issued on 
18th June, 2021. The guideline provides guidance on the management of acute presentation 
of COVID-19 as well as Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C) in children and 
adolescents found temporally related to COVID-19. 
• Training modules for Paediatric essential COVID care services and communication 
strategy with messaging and information for Paediatric COVID care have been developed 
and widely circulated. 
 
3.2.57 As most paediatric cases are likely to be mild, States/UTs have been advised to undertake 
capacity building initiatives on management of COVID in the community settings using Integrated 
Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illness (IMNCI) plus approach. 
 
 
3.2.58 Regarding the cases of delta plus variant reported so far in India, the MHA informed the 
Committee that the total cases of delta plus variant reported so far in India is 83 from March till 5th 
August, 2021. However, it is a variant of concern as it is a sub-lineage of Delta variant. Hence, all 
sub- lineages of Delta variant are also classified as Variant of concern. On the basis of the data from 
the INSACOG (Indian SARS-CoV-2 Genomics Consortium), the trend of proportion of Delta plus 
variant vis-a-vis Delta remains < 1 percent from March to June, 2021. Data under INSACOG does not 
indicate that delta plus could escape vaccination cover. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.59 The Committee further recommends that the MHA may request the Ministry of Health  & 
Family Welfare (MoH&FW) to vaccinate people at the earliest. If need be, door to door COVID-
19 vaccination on a mission mode like polio vaccination programme, may be carried out, with the  
involvement of local level health workers, etc., to cover the entire population at the earliest. 

49 
 
3.2.60 The Committee takes note of the threat posed by a new variant of COVID-19 (Omicron) 
and also recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) in coor dination 
with the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) and National Expert  
Group  on  Vaccine Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) should assess  the requirement of 
booster doses in India to address the different variants of the virus. The Committee would  like to 
know whether any research has been conducted by ICMR and other conce rned institutions 
regarding the efficacy of the vaccines that are being given or administered in the country against 
various variants. 
 
3.2.61 The Committee further recommends to ramp up the infrastructure for COVID- 19 
patients, in view of the observations of experts/epidemologists that a possible third wave may 
target the non-vaccinated population especially the children, to avoid any disastrous 
consequences. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.62 The Committee opines that periodic press conferences should be held to keep people informed 
about the progress made in vaccine development and the expected time of availability of a vaccine. The 
Committee also recommends, establishing a network for collecting samples of different patients from 
different places at different points of time for future study. The Committee is of the considered view 
that once vaccination begins, it will restore the confidence among people and help in sustained revival 
of economic activities and creation of jobs. 
(Para 3.12.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.2.63 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
3.2.64 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is holding regular press briefing wherein informa tion on 
COVID-19 management and vaccination is given to the public.  
 
3.2.65 Besides, information regarding vaccine development and progress thereof is also being made 
available on ICMR‟s vaccine portal (https://vaccine.icmr.org.in/). 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.66 The Committee is disappointed to note that no reply has been furnished regard ing 
establishment of a network for collecting samples of different patients from diffe rent places at 
different points of time for future study. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its ear lier 
observation and notes that creating such a databank would help the medical experts and  
epidemiologists to understand the nature of the present Pandemic and develop appr opriate 
strategies for tackling such outbreaks of unprecedented scale in future. 
 
3.2.67 The Committee observes that various medical experts and epidemiologists have given 
different prediction regarding a possible third wave which has created confusion  and fear among 
the masses. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA/ Ministry of Health & Fam ily 
Welfare should release authorized/ official bulletins on COVID-19 matters through the various 
news/media in order to avoid panic among people. 
 

50 
 
 
 
 
Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and other stakeholders 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.68  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) in combating the Corona Virus Pandemic as they have swiftly responded by building synergy  
between the Centre and States over handling the Pandemic through Standard Operating Procedures  
(SOPs), guidelines, awareness generation and most importantly, acting as a nodal centre for funding 
manpower deployment to meet exigencies. The Committee understands that this Pandemic is 
unprecedented even for the NDMA which is a dedicated body for Disaster Management. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that a separate wing may be formed in NDMA that will specialize in handling 
/managing the Pandemics like COVID-19 in the future. This wing may take a leading role in building a 
partnership of Government with the public sector, corporates, NGOs and other stakeholders. 
 
(Para 3.13.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.69 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
However, it is mentioned that health being the State subject, the role of Central Government is to 
provide required technical and financial assistance to States/ Union Territories (UTs) for strengthening 
of their healthcare system including management of the COVID-19 Public Health Challenge fr om time 
to time. Under the extant provisions of Disaster Management Act, 2005 the role of different institutions 
has been broadly categorized. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.70 The Committee understands that Health is a State Subject. However, COVID- 19 
Pandemic has brought the entire nation to a state of medical emergency. During such a sit uation, 
a special and well-trained dedicated workforce is required to address the mu ltifarious issues 
associated with the Pandemic. A dedicated wing of the NDMA can serve such a purpose. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation to explore the possibility of c reation of a 
separate wing in NDMA that will specialize in handling /managing the COVID-19 Pandemics like 
situation in the future. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.71 The Committee further recommends that the measures should continuously be taken to avoid 
social stigma and fear of isolation and quarantine, by making people aware and treating them with  
respect and empathy. An interdisciplinary team of public health specialists, grassroots political and 
social leaderships and volunteers can also raise awareness about modes of transmission and methods of 
prevention of COVID-19 in the community which can be done by adopting emergency risk 
communication methods and broad-based community engagement strategies. 
(Para 3.13.8 ibid) 
 

51 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
3.2.72 Realizing the impact that COVID-19 may have on the mental health of the people, the 
Government has taken several initiatives to provide psychosocial support during COVID-19. These 
initiatives include: 
(i) Setting up of a 24/7 helpline to provide psychosocial support, by mental health 
professionals, to the entire affected population, divided into different target groups viz 
children, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers.  
(ii) Issuance of guidelines/ advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to 
different segments of the society. 
(iii) Advocacy through various media platforms in the form of creative and audio-visual 
materials on managing stress, anxiety and promoting an environment of support and 
care for all. 
(iv) Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru- "Mental Health in the times of COVID-19 
Pandemic - Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care 
Settings".  
(v) All the guidelines, advisories and advocacy material can be accessed on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare website under “Behavioural Health–Psychosocial helpline” 
(
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). This includes communication material being hosted on 
MoHFW website and through social media.  
(vi) SMSs and caller-tune messages are being used through telecom subscribers in 13 
Languages to reach 117 crore tele-com subscribers. 
(vii) Online capacity building of health workers by NIMHANS in providing psychosocial 
support and training through (iGOT)-Diksha platform. 
 
3.2.73 In absence of a definitive drug or vaccine, it was crucial to encourage people‟s participati on to 
ensure adherence to COVID-19 appropriate behavior.  To enhance community engagement and 
community awareness, Government of India constituted high-level Empowered Groups for COVID-19, 
for the specific purpose of dealing with (i) information, communications and public awareness as well 
as (ii) engagement with Civil Society Organizations. To further intensify public awareness on COVID-
19 in view of approaching winter months and festive season, Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 8 th October, 
2020 launched the “Jan Andolan” for COVID -19 Appropriate Behavior” campaign with the key 
message of 'Wear Mask, Follow Physical Distancing, Maintain Hand Hygiene'. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.74 The Committee notes the various initiatives taken to provide psychosocial support during 
COVID-19. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  
should carry continuous awareness campaigns for erasing the stigma attached to mental he alth 
on COVID-19 affected people through yoga, exercise and counseling. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may set up a multidisciplinary car e 
service system as a part of post COVID Management protocol based on research on post-COVID 

52 
 
complications, so that the people suffering from various post-COVID-19 medical issues can 
benefit from it. 
 
 
 
Health Insurance Coverage 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.75 The Committee observes that in the initial phase of Pandemic, insurance coverage was not 
given to many people who suffered from COVID-19. The private hospitals were charging exorbitantly 
high rates for the treatment of COVID patients who had to suffer a lot due to lack of any insuranc e 
coverage. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the IRDAI to create standard healt h 
insurance products and recommends that the healthcare systems need to be well prepared with well-
defined medical protocols to handle any health contingencies in future. Expanding the healthcare 
infrastructure to tier 2, 3 and 4 cities and rural areas needs focus. The Committee further recommends 
that transparency and accountability need to be increased to provide quality healthcare and to promote  
fair practices. There is a need to have regulatory oversight on all hospitals working in the c ountry to 
prevent refusal to accept insurance claims. The Committee strongly recommends that the target should 
be to make COVID-19 treatment cashless for all people that are having insurance coverage. 
(Para 3.14.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.2.76 The IRDAI has taken a number of proactive steps since the onset of Pandemic. On 4 th March, 
2020 IRDAI issued norms to all insurers for putting in place expeditious claims settlement process in 
respect of all COVID claims reported. Many insurers clarified to their policy holders about the 
availability of coverage of COVID-19 diseases. On 1 st April, 2020, public were clarified that 
indemnity-based health insurance products that cover the treatment costs of hospitalization offered by 
all general and health insurance companies cover the costs of hospitalization treatment on account of 
COVID -19. All insurers have been advised to publish FAQs on COVID-19 claims in their respective 
websites. 
 
3.2.77 In the initial stages of Pandemic, the COVID-19 treatment facility was limited to 
identified/specified Government Hospitals. However, when the permission for treatment of COVID-19 
diseases was extended to the hospitals in private sector, the policy holders availed insurance coverage 
and the actual claims started reporting to the insurers. In order to expedite   settlement of claims, the 
IRDAI vide circular dated 18 th April, 2020 fixed a turnaround time (TAT) of two hours for granting 
both cashless pre-authorization and for final discharge of the insured patient. Further in order to ensure 
that claims are settled seamlessly, all Insurers were advised to put in special efforts for electronic 
submission of documents for settlement of claims during lockdown. 
 
3.2.78 Standard COVID-19 specific health insurance products, Corona Kavach and Corona Rakshak, 
have increased awareness on health insurance and its importance besides making COVID specific 
insurance products available in the country. These initiatives were well received by public at large. 
 
3.2.79 When certain instances of private hospitals charging exorbitant rates and denying cashless 
facility to policy holders came to the notice of IRDAI, insurance companies were advised to ensure that 

53 
 
cashless facility is made available at all empanelled network providers (hospitals) and a press release is 
also issued advising the general public in the event of denial of cashless by any hospital, the concerne d 
insurance company shall be contacted for redressal of grievances.  
 
3.2.80 IRDAI also requested various State Governments, MCI and to industry bodies such as Indian 
Medical Association (IMA) and Association of Health Care Providers – India (AHPI) requesting them 
to issue appropriate instructions to facilitate cashless treatment to policyholders at private hospitals. It 
was also informed to the Dept of Financial Services that if the State Govt. / UT Admin fixes a ceiling 
on any procedure that is mandatory for all health establishments, such ceiling also needs to be adhered 
to, in case of insurance claims as well.  
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.2.81 The Committee notes that when private hospitals charged exorbitant rates and denied 
cashless facility to policyholders, insurance companies were advised by IRDAI to ensure that  
cashless facility is made available at all empanelled network providers (hospitals). Further, 
IRDAI also requested various State Governments, etc., to facilitate cashless treatment to 
policyholders at private hospitals. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA  may 
take up with IRDAI to establish a system of cashless treatment for the policyholders during 
Pandemic like COVID-19 and other public health emergencies along with a regulatory ove rsight 
mechanism to put a check on the hospitals who refuse to accept insurance claims. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
3.3 Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.3.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should ensure a decent minimum 
wage, food security and safe living conditions to all the workers employed in both the formal and  
informal sector by including them in health services, cash transfer and other social programmes. 
Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the National Database on migrant workers should be 
launched at the earliest as it will help in the identification of migrant workers and also in delivering 
ration and other benefits to them. The database may also include the records of returning migrant 
labourers including details about their source and destination, earlier employment details and the nature 
of their skills which will help in skill development and planning for the transit of migrant workers in 
emergency situations such as the outbreak of Pandemic, etc. 
(Para 4.4.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
3.3.2 Ministry of Labour and Employment in technical collaboration with National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) is developing a module/portal for comprehensive National Database for Unorganized 
Workers (NDUW) seeded with Aadhaar for all unorganised workers including construction workers, 
Gig and Platform workers, Street Vendors, Domestic Workers, Agriculture Workers, Migrant workers 

54 
 
and similar other workers to address various challenges and issues related to the delivery of benefits of 
welfare schemes. 
 
3.3.3 This database will help the State Governments, migrant labourers, other workers and other 
stakeholders including Government authorities to know the movement of workers from their native 
states to the destination states and back. Moreover it will help the authorities to plan welfare schemes 
and measures for them. Definition of Inter State Migrant Worker has been expanded in the 
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 ( OSH) Code, 2020 and Social 
Security (SS) Code, 2020 to cover all workers, including organized, unorganised and self-employe d 
workers. This will facilitate them to receive more benefits of the Government Schemes in future. 
 
3.3.4 For reverse migrants, Government of India is implementing  Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan 
(GKRA) with a mission to address the issues of returnee migrant workers through a multi- pronged 
strategy of providing immediate employment & livelihood opportunities to the distressed, to saturate 
the villages with public infrastructure and creation of livelihood assets to boost the income generation 
activities and enhance long term livelihood opportunities. 
 
3.3.5 In order to support Garib Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan (GKRA), the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has allocated target of 3 lakh candidates (1.5 lakh each for Short Term 
Training and Recognition of Prior Learning) for skill development training under Centrally Sponsore d 
Centrally Managed (CSCM) component of PMKVY 2016-20 to migrants returned due to Pandemic. 
GKRA under PMKVY CSCM-STT has been extended to 117 districts of 7 States. 
 
3.3.6 On 8 th June 2021, Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) was extended and 
till November 2021, 80 crore people will continue to get free food grain every month. Government of 
India is bearing the entire cost under PMGKAY. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
3.3.7 In its reply dated 21 st October, 2021, the MHA informed the Committee that  the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, has developed e-Shram portal for  registration and creation of a 
comprehensive National Database of Unorganized Workers (NDUW) for all types of Unorganised 
workers such as Construction Workers, Migrant Workers, Domestic Workers, Agricultural 
labourers, Self-employed workers, street vendors, small shopkeepers, Asha workers, Anganwadi 
workers, Fishermen, unorganised plantation workers, milkmen and similar other sub-group of 
Unorganised workers. The e-Shram Portal has been launched on 26 th August, 2021 and handed over 
to the States/UTs. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.3.8 The Committee observes that a comprehensive data base would have helped the 
Government to identify and provide rations and other essentials to the migrant workers f rom the 
first wave of the Pandemic onwards. The Committee opines that for extending any be nefit under 
Welfare Schemes of the Governments, a national database of the unorganised workers is highly 
essential and urgent, especially during Pandemics like COVID-19. Therefore, the Committ ee 
recommends that the Ministry of Labour and Employment should regularly take up with 
States/UTs to register the workers on the e-Shram Portal so that a comprehensive National 

55 
 
Database of Unorganized Workers (NDUW) is created at the earliest to extend the ben efits of 
various schemes to these workers. 
  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.3.9 The Committee further recommends that the Government should revisit the Inter-State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 and other Labour Laws 
to strengthen and implement them in letter and spirit. The Committee also recommends that the 
Government should use different platforms to provide information about the various Government 
schemes and other avenues of employment. 
(Para 4.4.13 ibid) 
 
3.4 Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt 
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation mentioned at Para 4.4.10 of the Report 
and strongly recommends to revisit the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 and other relevant Labour Laws. 
(Para 6.1.9 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.4.2 The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 
1979 has been subsumed in the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions (OSH) Code, 
2020 and notified on 29 th September, 2020.  In the OSH Code definition of Inter State Migrant Worker 
has been expanded in the Code on Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions to cover all 
workers, including organized, unorganized and self-employed workers. This will facilitate them to 
receive more benefits of the Government Scheme in future. 
 
3.4.3 The migrant workers are a subset of contract workers, building and other construction workers, 
self-employed workers and any other category of workers etc. They may be working in the orga nized 
and un-organized sectors or may be self-employed.  
 
3.4.4 In the OSH Code duty has been cast on every contractor or the employer, of an establi shment 
employing inter-state migrant workers in connection with the work of that establishment to ensure 
suitable conditions of work to such worker having regard to the fact that he is required to work in a 
State different from his own State. In case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury it has to be re ported 
to the specified authorities of both the States and also the next of kin of the worker. Employer has to 
extend all benefits to inter-state migrant workers which are available to a worker of that establishment 
including benefits under the Employees‟ State Insurance Act, 1948 or the Employees‟ Provident Funds 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 or any other law for the time being in force and the facilit y of 
medical check-up. The employer will also pay journey allowance to the migrant worker in a ye ar a 

56 
 
lump sum amount of fair for to and fro journey to his native place from the place of employment. There 
is also provision for availing benefits of Public Distribution System either in his native State or the 
destination State where he is employed. There is also provision for portability of benefits of the migrant 
workers working for the Building and Other Construction Work out of the Building and Other 
Construction Cess fund in the destination State where such migrant worker is employed. There is also a 
provision for Toll free helpline number to the inter-state migrant workers in the OSH Code. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.4.5 The Committee is of the view that given the level of education and awareness of the 
migrant workers, the benefits/facilities available to them under Occupational Safety, Health and 
Working Conditions (OSH) Code, 2020 should be widely publicized so that the intended 
beneficiaries are aware and can avail the benefits. 
 
3.5 Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.5.1 The Committee strongly recommends that a scheme may be worked out to provide financial 
assistance as well as low-cost subsidized devices like tablets, smartphones and computers to students 
with sufficient data to access these facilities, especially for the students belonging to weaker sections of 
the society. The Committee further recommends that to enable the students to get the benefit of online 
classes and also to bridge the digital divide, the Government should prioritize the strengthening of the 
IT infrastructure to provide uninterrupted internet connection throughout the country especially, in the 
rural areas. Meanwhile, big screens may be placed in the community centres particularly in rural area s 
so that the poor children who do not have smartphones/ internet connection can continue their studies 
from these community centres. The lockdown imposed has brought a paradigm shift from classroom 
teaching to online teaching. Schools, Colleges and other higher educational institutions are quickly 
adapting themselves to this shift and conducting online classes so that studies do not suffer. The 
Committee, therefore, also recommends that training may be imparted to teachers to conduct online 
classes as it is different from teaching in a classroom and would be regular phenomenon in times of 
COVID-19. 
(Para 4.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.5.2 As Corona Pandemic has affected all the sectors very badly including schools, colleges, a nd 
universities etc., the Government of India has timely come forward for the provisions like online 
classes through various application platforms. Special attention has also been made for the students 
belonging to weaker section of the society so that they don‟t miss the online classes. Some initiatives 
are listed below which have been taken by the various educational institutions under Department of 
Higher Education. 
 
3.5.3 UGC has launched the SWAYAM PRABHA initiative for remote areas, with low bandwidth 
connectivity. It provides access to best teaching learning resources which can be viewed by any learner 
free of cost without any registration. A onetime Installation of DD Free Dish reception system costs 

57 
 
Rs.1500 to 2000/- to watch subject based SWAYAM PRABHA DTH Channels is required. Under 
SWAYAM, the Transcription of Videos and subtitles are available in different languages also.  
 
3.5.4 SWAYAM PRABHA teaching materials have been made available through 32 
SWAYAMPRABHA channels. Many renowned DTH operators adopt these channels, MHRD has tied 
up with private DTH operators like Tata Sky and Airtel to air three of these channels. 
 
3.5.5 In the field of technical education, IIT Bombay has launched virtual course content for 21 
engineering streams. To facilitate practical in technical subjects, IIT Bombay initiated www.vlab.co.in, 
a website which enabled the students to conduct virtual lab experiments associated with the practical 
courses of engineering. Both are available free of cost.  
 
3.5.6 In non technical courses, 86 e-courses were made available by UGC at post-graduate level and 
204 e-courses at the undergraduate level, made free of cost. States/UTs and Ministry of Education have  
been making efforts for providing education to children at their homes through alternate means of 
delivery such as, distribution of textbooks at homes of learners, telephonic guidance by teachers, online 
and digital content through TV and radio, activity-based learning through the Alternate Academic 
Calendar released by NCERT, etc. 
 
3.5.7 With a view to address the issues related to gaps and/or loss of learning among students, during 
and after the lockdown, the Ministry of Education entrusted NCERT with the task of constituting a 
Committee, comprising of academic and curricular experts. The Committee conducted a survey in 
KVS, NVS and CBSE schools regarding various digital modes being used by students to receive online  
education and their concerns regarding children not having digital devices. Further, discussions were 
held with SCERTs (on 22 nd June, 2020) to gather information about the initiatives taken up by them in 
their state/UT.  Meanwhile, Department of School Education & Literacy also advised the states/UTs on 
preparation of their own Continuous Learning Plans, particularly with regard to learners who have no 
access to any mode of digital devices.  
 
3.5.8 The ensuing guidelines for Learning Enhancement (LE) during the challenging times of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic were prepared based on the recommendations of the aforementioned committee 
and on the reports of States/UTs, and include guidelines for the following: 
(i) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students without digital devices 
(ii) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students with limited accessibility to 
digital devices 
(iii) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students with digital devices 
(iv) The guidelines can be accessed 
at: 
https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/announcement/Learning_%20Enhancement_Guidelines.pdf 
 
3.5.9 In respect of Javahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) students not having digital devices, resource 
materials like printed content, question & answers, Alternative Academic Calendar (AAC), 
Assignments, etc., were personally handed over to the parents/ students. In addition, daily contact 
system is in place by JNVs to maintain connect with each student about mental well being, health and 
academics. 
 

58 
 
3.5.10  As far as CBSE schools are concerned, the Board, vide Circular No. Acad-63/2020 
dated September 2, 2020 has advised all its affiliated schools to adopt these guidelines for addressing 
the learning gaps in their students and optimise their learning achievement. 
 
3.5.11  Under the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  component of centrally 
sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha, an outlay of  Rs. 677.61  Crore has been approved for 
implementation of ICT related interventions in 4090 schools in States and UTs. 
  
National Initiative for School Heads and Teachers for their Holistic Advancement 
(NISHTHA) online: 
(ii) As the name suggests this is an online capacity building programme for covering all 
42,00,000 elementary school teachers and school heads of the country. 
(iii) This programme was conducted face to face before the Pandemic. However, in its wake, 
this programme was contextualised to the needs of teaching and learning during the 
Pandemic and made 100% online. 
(iv) In order to facilitate teachers to undertake online NISHTHA training, financial support up 
to Rs 1000 per teacher for procuring pen-drives, printing of modules and high-speed data-
pack has been provided at elementary level on reimbursement basis and subject to 
successful completion of the training course. 
(v) There are 18 modules in this programme: 12 for teachers, 5 for school heads and 1 
specialised module on teaching and learning during COVID-19 times. 
(vi) Each module consists of guidelines, primers, training package with QR coded e-content, 
videos on each module, and other e-resources. 
(vii) NISHTHA Online for elementary teachers was launched on 6 th October, 2020 and at 
present 3 Modules are live on DIKSHA. 
Special capacity building of teachers on how to conduct online classes where feasible 
(i) CBSE, KVS and JNV undertook a massive exercise to build online teaching capacities of 
their teachers as soon as the lockdown started, to ensure continuity of learning through 
online means, wherever possible. 
(ii) In the process, CBSE has trained 4,80,000 teachers (during April-September 2020), KVS 
trained 15855 and JNV trained 9085 teachers all India.  Training was also imparted by 
NVS to teachers regarding online assessment and GeoGebra. 
(iii) Several bite-sized modules were also prepared and disseminated post training to augment 
the capacities of teachers. 
(iv) In KVS, online training programmes organised by the Zonal Institutes of Education and 
Training focused on use of different learning platforms, developing & usage of various e-
resources and online assessment of students. 
 
3.5.12  Special orientation for primary teachers and HMs in KVS was organised for sensitizing 
them on handling Class I students and conducting their classes online since they were admitted during 
COVID-19 times and schools are not functioning. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
   
3.5.13  The Committee notes that the Government has embarked upon providin g online 
classes/ education to the students across the country through digital mode.
 The Committee 

59 
 
observes that since digital/online mode of education has now become a major mod e of learning 
therefore, it is important to technologically empower every school and student across the  
country. The Committee notes that Rs. 677.61 crore has been allocated under the Information 
and Communication Technology component of centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra  
Shiksha,  for the implementation of ICT related interventions in 4090 schools in States and UTs. 
The Committee recommends to ensure availability of  high-speed internet con nectivity, TV 
sets/large screens, computers, with other digital equipments along with regular and 
uninterrupted power supply especially during working hours in all sc hools across the country in 
order to bridge the digital divide and to meet any such emergent situations in future.  
 
3.5.14  The Committee recommends for aggressive and continuous publicity for the 
educational programmes being aired on Doordarshan and on satellite TV to create awareness 
amongst general public. The Committee also recommends to revise the curren t one-time 
installation cost of Rs.1500 to 2000 for DD Free Dish reception system to watch subject-based 
SWAYAM PRABHA DTH Channels in order to make it affordable for the economically weake r 
and marginalised students. Doordarshan Free Dish and adequate number of TV screens may also 
be placed in the schools, community halls, etc., in all villages, small towns etc., by including this  
in their curriculum during normal/regular studies as well. 
 
3.5.15  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Education may assess the 
loss of learning due to closure of schools during COVID-19 particularly of students belonging to 
rural and remote areas and take necessary steps for bridging their learning gap. The  teachers 
and students may be given training to use digital devices and Information and Communicat ion 
Technology  in collaboration with the technical educational institutions, NGOs etc., under PPP 
mode for better and faster outreach of the facilities across the country. The Commi ttee also 
recommends to assess the efficacy of online classes including learning outcomes, shortcomings, 
etc. The Committee would like to know about the steps taken to ensure internet  connectivity and 
provide digital devices particularly to the economically weaker students of rural and remote 
areas. 
  
 
Government interventions 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.5.16  The Committee is aware that the country has the largest PDS network in the world, 
which is instrumental in meeting the objective of the National Food Security Act, 2013 in normal 
circumstances. However, the COVID-19 Pandemic has affected in a very harsh way, the li ves of the 
poor and the vulnerable sections of the society, both in the rural areas and in the urban areas. The 
Committee observes that during the lockdown period, due to lack of inter-operability of PDS across 
states, migrant workers were not able to take food grains from PDS shops inspite of having ration 
cards. The Committee, therefore, recommends that until One-Nation One ration card (ONOR) is 
implemented in all the States/UTs, interstate operability of ration cards should be allowed so that the 
migrant workers can take food grains from PDS shops in any State/UT. 
(Para 4.10.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  

60 
 
3.5.17 The One Nation One Ration Card system aims to empower all migrant beneficiaries to be self -
reliant for their food-security by enabling their access to the PDS foodgrains entitled under National 
Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013 from any Fair Price Shop in the country using their same/existing 
ration card or Aadhaar number. 
  
3.5.18 Up to December 2020, the facility for portability of ration card under One Nation One Ration 
Card plan has been seamlessly enabled in 32 States/UTs covering about 69 Crore beneficiaries (86% 
NFSA population) to access their NFSA Foodgrains / benefit anywhere in these States/UTs, namely – 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. This Department is regularly pursuing with remaining 4 States i.e. 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Delhi and West Bengal to implement „One Nation One Ration card‟ at the 
earliest. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
 The Committee notes that up to December 2020, the facility for portability of rat ion card 
under One Nation One Ration Card plan has been seamlessly enabled in 32 States/UTs and four 
States namely Delhi, Chhattisgarh, Assam and West Bengal are yet to integrate with the ONORC 
plan. In view of the crucial role played by the ONORC system during the Pandemic, the 
Committee further recommends that the MHA may take up with the concerned Ministry as we ll 
as the above- mentioned four State Governments to get their beneficiaries integrated with the 
ONORC Plan at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that  performance assessmen t of 
the 32 States/UTs who have already been enrolled under the ONORC may be carried out, in  
order to check whether beneficiaries are availing the benefit of the scheme or not . The 
Committee recommends to widely publicize ONORC Scheme so that poor and illiterate  
beneficiaries in remote rural areas may be made aware of the Scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

61 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the Government have not been 
received 
 
 
4.1 Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee recommends that a holistic approach should be adopted to treat the patients who 
are already admitted to hospitals due to COVID-19. The Committee is of considered view that in the 
absence of certified vaccine/ medicines, the Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) has huge potential in preventive and providing curative healthc are 
in this Pandemic. For immunity- boosting of both the patients and common people, kadha/ herbs/ 
spices as part of diet and Yoga may be suggested and promoted by the Ministry of Health and Famil y 
Welfare in coordination with the Ministry of AYUSH and AIIMS. As an alternate source of medicine 
to treat COVID-19, Ayurveda/traditional systems should be researched and awareness should be raised 
regarding their efficacy in the treatment of COVID-19. 
(Para 3.10.22 of the 229th Report) 
Action Taken 
  
4.1.2 On 6 th March, 2020 a letter to all Chief Secretaries of States/ Union Territories was sent from 
the Ministry of AYUSH with more specific suggestions on augmentation of general immunity of 
people and about possible AYUSH interventions. The Ministry of AYUSH commenced scientific 
studies at various Research Councils and National Institution as per the recommendations of Inter-
disciplinary AYUSH Research and Development (R&D) Task Force. Accordingly, 109 studies are 
being conducted at 140 centers. 
 
4.1.3 Guidelines for registered practitioners of respective system of AYUSH including Homoeopathy 
have been prepared by Director Generals of Research Councils and Directors of National Institutes 
with their team of experts and after vetting by the Inter-disciplinary AYUSH Research and 
Development Task Force of Ministry of AYUSH these guidelines are made available in public domain 
for the benefit of registered AYUSH practitioners to help in the management of COVID 19 Pandemic 
uniformly. 
 
4.1.4 Ministry has also released „Nat ional Clinical Management Protocol on Ayurveda and Yoga for 
COVID-19‟ on 06 th October, 2020 wherein Yoga protocol for post-COVID-19 care Yogasana, 
Pranayama and Meditation has been mentioned. 
 
4.1.5 Further, Ministry of AYUSH has constituted core group of experts under the Chairmanship of 
Prof. Bhushan Patwardhan, Vice-Chairman, UGC, to identify and propose formulations on COVID-19 
which are in line with Classical Ayurveda principles and have substantial leads on COVID-19 viz one 
for prophylaxis as immunomodulatory, another for management of COVID-19 with antiviral properties 
and one product for post COVID-19 care. 

62 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.1.6 The Committee observes that traditional medicines have helped in boosting immunity and 
maintaining sound health during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may take necessary steps for  
integrating traditional medicines to the existing public healthcare system which will help in 
boosting general immunity and overall health of the people. 
 
4.1.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry of AYUSH commenced scientific studies at various 
Research Councils and National Institution as per the recommendations of Inter-disciplinary 
AYUSH Research and Development (R&D) Task Force. Accordingly, 109 studies are being 
conducted at 140 centers. The Committee would like to be apprised about the ke y findings of 
these studies. 
 
4.2 Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt  
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee observes that the COVID-19 Pandemic may stay with us for a longer period. 
The response to this Pandemic has been conceived and is being guided by the provisions of the Disaster 
Management Act (NDMA), 2005 and also the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. The Committee opines 
that the Pandemic/ epidemic fundamentally differs from disaster. Disasters happen periodically every 
year which includes floods, cyclones, train accidents, etc. whereas Pandemic/ epidemic occurs in 
decades and even once a century. The last declared Pandemic of this magnitude with huge social and 
economic fallouts was the Spanish flu of 1918. Although the provision of NDMA helped in timely 
interventions and response during the COVID-19 Pandemic, it is not meant for handling the Pandemic/  
epidemic, if it happens in future. 
(Para 6.1.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
4.2.2 The observations of the Hon‟ble Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) have been noted. 
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
4.2.3 In a reply to a Questionnaire, the Committee was informed by MHA that a Committee has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Kamal Kishore, Member, NDMA for thorough review of 
the National Disaster Management Act, 2005. The meeting of the Committee was held on 17 th June, 
2021 and the review is under progress. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.2.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 

63 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.2.5 The Committee observes that the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, have helped in 
managing the COVID-19, but this Act is outdated as it was framed in the colonial era which was even 
well before the Spanish flu of 1918. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Epidemic Diseases 
Act, 1897 should be revisited, updated and amended so that it is fully equipped to respond to the 
challenges posed by the unanticipated onset of the Pandemic/ epidemic in the future. 
(Para 6.1.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
  
4.2.6 In light of the evolving canvas of public health globally and domestically, the need to 
strengthen public health governance, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare intends to br ing a new 
Public Health Act.  
 
Further Deliberations of the Committee 
 
4.2.7 In its reply dated 21 st October, 2021, the Committee was informed by MHA that in order to 
effectively deal with and prevent violence against doctor’s/health  care professionals, an ordinance 
duly amending the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 was initially promulgated on April 22, 2020. 
Further it was passed by Parliament and further notified as the Epidemic Disease (Amended) Act, 
2020 on September 29, 2020. 
 
4.2.8 The amended Act provides that any act of violence against Health Care Personnel would be 
cognizable and non 
– bailable offence. Commission or abetment of such acts of violence shall be 
punishable with imprisonment of a term ranging from three months to five years and with a fine of Rs 
50,00/- to Rs. 2,00,000/-. In case of causing grievous hurt, imprisonment shall be for a term of six 
months to seven years and with a fine of Rs. 1,00,000/- to Rs. 5,00,000. Government has already 
constituted a Committee for review of the Disaster Management Act (DM Act) -2005. The exercise is 
at are advanced stage for finalization of the recommendations of the committee. 
 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.2.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
 
India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.1.9) 
Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
Testing for COVID-19 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.3) 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.6) 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.2.9) 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.2.12) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.15 ) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.18) 
COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.2.29) 
Social Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic 
Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.3.3)
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.3.6) 
Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.3.9) 
 
Reopening of schools/ colleges 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.3.13) 
 

65 
 
Psychological impact of COVID-19 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.3.17)
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 1.3.25) 
Government interventions 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.3.28) 
Economic Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic 
Banking Operations during Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.4.3) 
Recovery of Economy 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.4.12) 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.4.17) 
Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt  
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.5.3) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.5.6) 
Key Lessons Learnt 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.5.9) 
India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic  
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.1.4) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.1.7) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.1.10) 
 

66 
 
Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.2.3) 
Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.2.6) 
 
Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and other stakeholders 
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 2.2.10) 
COVID-19 situation in Delhi 
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 2.2.13 )  
Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
Stigma relating to COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.3.5) 
Government interventions 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.3.8) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.3.11) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.3.16) 
Economic Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
Monetary and Liquidity Measures taken by RBI 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.11) 
 
The provisions in place before the Pandemic for supporting the MSMEs 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.14) 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) Survey of MSMEs-Post COVID-19 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.18) 
  

67 
 
The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.4.23) 
 
India's Preparedness to Tackle the Pandemic 
Outcomes/Gains/Effectiveness of strategies adopted to manage the Pandemic 
 
 The Committee notes that NDMA had prepared the National Disaster Management Plan 
(NDMP) in May, 2016 which was revised in November, 2019, i.e. before the onset of COVID-19 
Pandemic in India. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the NDM A may revise 
NDMP to include the lessons learned and experience gained in the management of COVID-19 
including SOPs, lockdowns, public health management, etc. Accordingly, NDMA along with the 
Ministry of Health & family Welfare may issue fresh/additional guidelines/Standard Oper ating 
Procedures (SOPs) for curbing and managing Pandemics in future.  
 (Para 3.1.6)  
 
 The Committee also recommends that the National Disaster Management Act (NDMA), 
2005 may be suitably amended to include a clause ‘subject to correction’ d uring digital data 
collection and reduction in paperwork for extending benefits, etc., to the intended beneficiaries. 
 
(Para 3.1.7) 
Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
 The Committee notes various interventions to be made under PM Atma Nirbhar  Swasth 
Bharat Yojana with an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 crores over 6 years and ‘India COVID -19 
Emergency Response & Health System Preparedness Package: Phase- II’ for the period Jul y, 21 
to March, 2022 with approved amount  of Rs 23,123 crores. The Committee recomme nds to 
assess the requirement of health professionals including nursing staff and allied workforc e and 
take steps on priority to recruit them for catering to the establishment of Health and Welln ess 
Centers, integrated public health labs,  critical care hospital blocks, etc. The Committee further 
recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW) to coordinate regularly with States/UTs for timely completion of the components of 
the above-mentioned Yojana/Package to ramp up health infrastructure. 
 (Para 3.2.8) 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of Program me 
Implementation Plans (PIPs) received by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  from  States 
for improvement of their health infrastructure and the components of ‘additional re sources’ 
provided to the States under  Emergency COVID Response Plan (ECRP).  
(Para 3.2.9) 
 
 The Committee recommends to increase the percentage of GDP spent in health sector to 
strengthen existing infrastructure and build new, strong and effective public health 
infrastructure in long term. 
(Para 3.2.10) 

68 
 
 The Committee also recommends to further strengthen Tele-consultations for cap acity 
building and training of health professionals and Tele-Medicine for treatment of patients 
especially in peri-urban, rural and remote areas as also patients during the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
(Para 3.2.11) 
 
 The Committee observes that the nature and virulence of the COVID-19 Pandemic is 
unpredictable. Hence, alertness and preparedness cannot be compromised at any stage. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise the States that the COVID-19 
infrastructure facilities including testing facility, ICU beds and medical oxygen created f or 
patients may not be scaled down completely as given the deceptive nature and emergence  of 
multiple variants, the virus may give rise to a third wave without giving sufficient time to react. 
They should be kept in a dormant state so that they can be reactivated to deal w ith the 
subsequent wave of the Pandemic that might come up. 
 (Para 3.2.17) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare to issue guidelines on fixation of ceiling on price of hospital b eds during the 
Pandemic like COVID-19 and other public health emergencies. Due publicity may b e given to 
these rates so that people are aware of the price of hospital beds and a monitoring  mech anism 
may be created to put a check on black marketing of essential life saving drugs and  selling of 
hospital beds above ceiling price.  
(Para 3.2.31) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras (PM BJK) 
are   providing quality medicines at an affordable rates. The Committee reco mmends to digitize 
and integrate all PMBJK to check real-time availability of medicines. This wi ll help in checking 
the stock in real time and ensure availability of medicines at PMBJK. 
(Para 3.2.32) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the MHA may coordinate with the MoH&FW to advise 
States to arrange for 10-litre oxygen concentrators at the PHCs/CHCs. The States may also b e 
advised to address the shortage of technicians and medical staff to operate the oxygen 
concentrators and ventilators at district/block hospitals, etc. 
(Para 3.2.33) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Health 
& family Welfare to assess the requirement and preparedness for possible third wave 
particularly in terms of availability of liquid medical oxygen, oxygen concentrators, life- saving 
medicines, beds, ventilators, etc. 
(Para 3.2.34) 
Status of development of Indigenous vaccines 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the MHA may request the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare (MoH&FW) to vaccinate people at the earliest. If need be, door to door COVID-
19 vaccination on a mission mode like polio vaccination programme, may be carried out, with the 
involvement of local level health workers, etc., to cover the entire population at the earliest. 

69 
 
(Para 3.2.59) 
 The Committee takes note of the threat posed by a new variant of COVID-19 (Omicron) 
and also recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) in 
coordination with the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) and 
National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) should assess  the 
requirement of booster doses in India to address the different variants of the virus. The 
Committee would like to know whether any research has been conducted by ICM R and other 
concerned institutions regarding the efficacy of the vaccines that are being given or administered 
in the country against various variants. 
(Para 3.2.60) 
 
 The Committee further recommends to ramp up the infrastructure for COVID-19  
patients, in view of the observations of experts/epidemologists that a possible third wave may 
target the non-vaccinated population especially the children, to avoid any disastrous 
consequences. 
 
(Para 3.2.61) 
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that no reply has been furnished regardin g 
establishment of a network for collecting samples of different patients from differen t places at 
different points of time for future study. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its e arlier 
observation and notes that creating such a databank would help the medical experts and  
epidemiologists to understand the nature of the present Pandemic and develop appr opriate 
strategies for tackling such outbreaks of unprecedented scale in future. 
(Para 3.2.66 ) 
 
 The Committee observes that various medical experts and epidemiologists have given 
different prediction regarding a possible third wave which has created confusion  and fear among 
the masses. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA/ Ministry of Health & Fam ily 
Welfare should release authorized/ official bulletins on COVID-19 matters through the various 
news/media in order to avoid panic among people. 
(Para 3.2.67 ) 
 
Partnership building- involvement of the private sector, corporate, NGOs and other stakeholders 
 
 The Committee understands that Health is a State Subject. However, COVID- 19 
Pandemic has brought the entire nation to a state of medical emergency. During such a situ ation, 
a special and well-trained dedicated workforce is required to address the m ultifarious issues 
associated with the Pandemic. A dedicated wing of the NDMA can serve such a purpose. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation to explore the possibility of cre ation of a 
separate wing in NDMA that will specialize in handling /managing the COVID-19 Pandemics like 
situation in the future. 
(Para 3.2.70) 
 
 The Committee notes the various initiatives taken to provide psychosocial support during 
COVID-19. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  
should carry continuous awareness campaigns for erasing the stigma attached to mental he alth 

70 
 
on COVID-19 affected people through yoga, exercise and counseling. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may set up a multidisciplinary car e 
service system as a part of post COVID Management protocol based on research on post-COVID 
complications, so that the people suffering from various post-COVID-19 medical issues can 
benefit from it. 
(Para 3.2.74) 
Health Insurance Coverage 
 
 The Committee notes that when private hospitals charged exorbitant rates and d enied 
cashless facility to policyholders, insurance companies were advised by IRDAI to ensure that  
cashless facility is made available at all empanelled network providers (hospitals). Further, 
IRDAI also requested various State Governments, etc., to facilitate cashless treatment to 
policyholders at private hospitals. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA  may 
take up with IRDAI to establish a system of cashless treatment for the policyholders during 
Pandemic like COVID-19 and other public health emergencies along with a regulatory ove rsight 
mechanism to put a check on the hospitals who refuse to accept insurance claims. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 3.2.81) 
Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
Measures taken for the return of migrant workers to their places of domicile 
 
 The Committee observes that a comprehensive data base would have helped the  
Government to identify and provide rations and other essentials to the migrant workers f rom the 
first wave of the Pandemic onwards. The Committee opines that for extending any be nefit under 
Welfare Schemes of the Governments, a national database of the unorganised worker s is highly 
essential and urgent, especially during Pandemics like COVID-19. Therefore, the Committ ee 
recommends that the Ministry of Labour and Employment should regularly take up with 
States/UTs to register the workers on the e-Shram Portal so that a comprehensive National 
Database of Unorganized Workers (NDUW) is created at the earliest to extend the ben efits of 
various schemes to these workers. 
(Para 3.3.8) 
Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt 
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
 The Committee is of the view that given the level of education and awareness of the 
migrant workers, the benefits/facilities available to them under Occupational Safety, Health and  
Working Conditions (OSH) Code, 2020 should be widely publicized so that the intended 
beneficiaries are aware and can avail the benefits. 
(Para 3.4.5) 
Social Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic 
Impact of COVID-19 on Education 
 
 The Committee notes that the Government has embarked upon providing onli ne classes/ 
education to the students across the country through digital mode.
 The Committee observes that 
since digital/online mode of education has now become a major mode of lear ning therefore, it is 

71 
 
important to technologically empower every school and student across the country. The 
Committee notes that Rs. 677.61 crore has been allocated under the Information and 
Communication Technology component of centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra Shik sha,  for 
the implementation of ICT related interventions in 4090 schools in States and UTs. The 
Committee recommends to ensure availability of  high-speed internet connec tivity, TV sets/large 
screens, computers, with other digital equipments along with regular and uninter rupted power 
supply especially during working hours in all schools across the country in order to br idge the 
digital divide and to meet any such emergent situations in future.  
(Para 3.5.13) 
 
 The Committee recommends for aggressive and continuous publicity for the edu cational 
programmes being aired on Doordarshan and on satellite TV to create awareness amongst 
general public. The Committee also recommends to revise the current one-time  installation cost 
of Rs.1500 to 2000 for DD Free Dish reception system to watch subject-based SWAYAM 
PRABHA DTH Channels in order to make it affordable for the economically weaker and 
marginalised students. Doordarshan Free Dish and adequate number of TV screen s may also be 
placed in the schools, community halls, etc., in all villages, small towns etc., by including this in 
their curriculum during normal/regular studies as well. 
(Para 3.5.14) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Education may assess the loss  of 
learning due to closure of schools during COVID-19 particularly of students belonging to rur al 
and remote areas and take necessary steps for bridging their learning gap. The teacher s and 
students may be given training to use digital devices and Information and Communication 
Technology  in collaboration with the technical educational institutions, NGOs etc., under PPP 
mode for better and faster outreach of the facilities across the country. The Commi ttee also 
recommends to assess the efficacy of online classes including learning outcomes,  shortcomings, 
etc. The Committee would like to know about the steps taken to ensure internet c onnectivity and 
provide digital devices particularly to the economically weaker students of rural and remote 
areas. 
 (Para 3.5.15) 
Government interventions 
 
 The Committee notes that up to December 2020, the facility for portability of rat ion card 
under One Nation One Ration Card plan has been seamlessly enabled in 32 States/UTs and four 
States namely Delhi, Chhattisgarh, Assam and West Bengal are yet to integrate with the ONORC 
plan. In view of the crucial role played by the ONORC system during the Pandemic, the 
Committee further recommends that the MHA may take up with the concerned Ministry as we ll 
as the above- mentioned four State Governments to get their beneficiaries integrated with the 
ONORC Plan at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that  performance assessmen t of 
the 32 States/UTs who have already been enrolled under the ONORC may be carried out, in  
order to check whether beneficiaries are availing the benefit of the scheme or n ot. The 
Committee recommends to widely publicize ONORC Scheme so that poor and illiterate  
beneficiaries in remote rural areas may be made aware of the Scheme.  
(Para 3.5.19) 
 
Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 

72 
 
Adequacy of such assistance to States/UTs 
 
 The Committee observes that traditional medicines have helped in boosting immunity and 
maintaining sound health during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may take necessary steps f or 
integrating traditional medicines to the existing public healthcare system which will help in 
boosting general immunity and overall health of the people. 
(Para 4.1.6) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry of AYUSH commenced scientific studies at various 
Research Councils and National Institution as per the recommendations of Inter-disciplinary 
AYUSH Research and Development (R&D) Task Force. Accordingly, 109 studies are being 
conducted at 140 centers. The Committee would like to be apprised about the key findings of 
these studies. 
(Para 4.1.7) 
Revisiting the Legislation and Key Lessons Learnt  
 
Revisiting the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Inter-State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Services) Act, 1979 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 4.2.4) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 4.2.9) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

73 
 
IV 
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:30 AM on Wednesday, the 8 th December, 2021 in Room 
No.63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman    
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri Brijlal 
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
8. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
12. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
13. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
18. Shrimati Sharmishta Sethi 
19. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
20. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the 
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the 
Committee:- 

74 
 
(i) xxx    xxx    xxx  
(ii)  236th Report on “Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Ninth Report 
on the “Management of COVID-19 Pandemic and Related Issues”. 
 
3. The Chairman asked the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on the 
recommendations and observations given in the draft Reports, and mentioned that those 
suggestions would be incorporated suitably, if necessary.  
4. xxx    xxx    xxx  
5. The Committee took up the draft 236 th Report for consideration and adopted it 
without any change.  
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors 
and also to nominate Members for presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok 
Sabha on 10 th December, 2021 so that further necessary action can be initiated on the said 
Reports. 
7. xxx    xxx    xxx  
8. xxx    xxx    xxx  
9. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.  
10. The meeting adjourned at 10.50 am. 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx   Relates to other matter. 