97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
 
 
NINETY-SEVENTH  REPORT
 
ON
THE ELECTION & OTHER RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 18TH  DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 18TH  DECEMBER, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
6. ANNEXURES
(i) The Election and  Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002               
(As introduced)
(ii) Order No.437/GE-LS/TVS/MCS/99 dated 3rd  August, 1999 of  Election Commission of India on Telecast/Broadcast
facility   to political parties during  election       
(iii) Gist of views of the major political parties expressed in   the AllParty Meeting  held on 13.9.2001 on Regularisation of 
Finances  of Political Parties
(iv) The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002 ( As amended  by the  Committee)
 
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 1.        Shri Pranab Mukherjee ― Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
 * 2.     Smt. Basanti Sarma
 3.        Shri Kapil Sibal
4.                Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
5.                Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6.                Shri Kalraj Mishra
7.                Dr. L.M. Singhvi
8.                Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
  *9.     Shri K.M. Saifullah
            10.       Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
11.
         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
12.       Shri Drupad Borgohain
    *13.Shri C.M. Ibrahim
   14.    Shri Swaraj Kaushal
15.       Shri Ram Jethmalani
§16.    Shri Lalu Prasad
§17.        Shri Motilal Vora
J 18.    Smt. Ambika Soni

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
LOK SABHA
19.      Shri Rajen Gohain
20.      Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
21.      Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
22.      Shri Anadi Sahu
23.      Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
24.      Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
25.      Shri Vinay Katiyar
26.      Shri Manabendra Shah
27.      Sardar Buta Singh
28.      Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
29.      Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
30.      Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
31.      Shri K. Karunakaran
32.      Begum Noor Bano
33.      Shri M.O.H. Farooq
34.      Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
35.      Shri Subodh Ray
36.      Shri B.V.N. Reddy
37.      Shri Ramji Lal Suman
38.      Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
Æ 39.      Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
_________________________________________________________________________
* Ceased to be member w.e.f. 9 April, 2002 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya  Sabha.
§Nominated w.e.f. 22 April, 2002.
J Nominated w.e.f. 20 July, 2002.
ÆCeased to be member w.e.f. 18 July, 2002.
 
 
40.
     Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
41.     Shri Adhi Sankar
42.     Shri P.H. Pandian
43.     Dr. Bikram Sarkar
44.     Shri Holkhomang Haokip
45.     Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
46.     Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
a  47.     Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
b  48.     Shri E. Ponnuswamy
#  49.      Shri Suresh Chandel
           
             
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs having been authorized by
the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-Seventh Report on the Election & other Related
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2001·
.
 
2.         In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha  referred ¨
¨ the Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002 as

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 19 March 2002 and pending therein, to the Committee on 27 May 2002 for examination and
report.
 
3.0       The Committee considered   the   Bill   in  six   sittings    held    on 5 July, 11 September, 8 October, 13 and 27 November
and 16 December 2002. 
 
3.1               The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, Legislative Department in its sitting held on 5 July 2002.
 
3.2       The Committee held further deliberations in its sittings held on 11 September, 8 October and 13 and 27 November 2002 in
the presence of representatives of the Legislative Department and the Ministry of Finance.
 
3.3       In its sitting held on 27 November 2002, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
 
3.4       In its sitting held on 16 December 2002, the Committee considered the draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same.
 
3.5       In the said sitting, the Committee also decided that the evidence tendered before the Committee may be laid on the Table
of both the Houses of Parliament.
           
4.0       In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on the Bill received from the
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice), replies of the Legislative Department to the queries raised by the Members
in the sittings of the Committee and other related papers. The Committee has also consulted the following documents:
 
 (i)        Representation of the People Act, 1951;
(ii)        Companies Act, 1956;
(iii)       Income-tax Act, 1961;  
(iv)       Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 ;     
(v)        Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968;
(vi)       Report of the Committee on Electoral Reforms (Dinesh Goswami Committee);
(vii)      Report of the Committee on State Funding of Elections (Indrajit Gupta Committee);
(viii)      One Hundred and Seventieth Report of the Law Commission of India on Reform of Electoral Laws;
(ix)       Minutes of all-party meeting held on 22.5.1998; 
(x)
                Minutes of all-party meeting held on 13.9.2001; and
(xi)       Order No.437/GE-LS/TVS/MCS/99 dated 3 August 1999 of Election Commission
of India on Telecast/Broadcast facility to political parties during election. 
 
4.1       The Committee acknowledges the assistance provided by the Legislative Department in drafting amendments suggested by
it in the Bill.
 
5.         For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold
letters in the body of the Report.
 
    NEW DELHI;
16December, 2002
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
Chairman
Committee on Home Affairs
 
 
REPORT
 
The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002 (See Annexure-I) seeks to introduce State funding in kind
(supply of electoral rolls and identity slip of electors to the candidates).  It also intents to bring in transparency in the funding of
political parties  by corporate sector/any other person and to effectuate harmonisation of certain provisions in Representation of
the People Act, 1951 with Indian Panel Code 1860,  which relates to  authorisation by the candidates for meeting his/her election
expenditure by others.
 
2.0
              The Bill, therefore, proposes amendments to the following Acts: -
(i)   Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Sections 29, 39, 77, 78, 123 and 169);
(ii)  The Companies Act, 1956 (Section 293); and
(iii)The Income-Tax Act, 1961 (Sections 13 and 88)
2.1       The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill mentions that the proposed piece of legislation is an attempt to bring in

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
reforms in electoral laws in piecemeal manner in pursuance of some of the recommendations of the Committee on Electoral
Reforms (Dinesh Goswami Committee, 1990), the Committee on State Funding of Elections (Indrajit Gupta Committee, 1998)
and One Hundred Seventieth Report of Law Commission of India.
 
3.0       The Bill has the following salient features: -
(a)        Limited State Funding of Elections;
(b)        Transparent system of political donations and audit & account thereof for the purpose of Income Tax
benefit to the donors; and
(c)        Harmonisation of Explanation (1) to Section 77 of Representation of the People  Act , 1951 with Section
171H of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
 
A. LIMITED STATE FUNDING OF ELECTION
 
3.1       It is a well known fact that the growing role of money and its dubious means of collection have been eroding purity and
sanctity of the election process thereby has corrupting influence  on the political system.  The central idea of State funding of
Election is to curb the corrupting   influence of money power on the electoral process by stopping the existing practice of raising
money (corporate donation and black money support) by the political parties.
 
3.2       The pattern of State funding can either be in cash or kind; it can also be total or partial.  State Funding in cash is prevalent
in certain other countries[1]
 .The issue of State funding of election in India has a chequered history[2].
 
 
3.3.0    The State funding in cash as suggested in Indrajit Gupta Committee’s Report has not seen the light of the day yet due to
lack of unanimity[3]
 amongst the States and UTs.  However, as a initial measure, the Central Government in principle has agreed
to the concept of partial State funding in kind to the recognised political parties4.
 
3.3.1    The legislation under consideration proposes to provide the following election material free of cost to the candidates set up
by the recognised parties in any General Election held for the purpose of the House of People and the Legislative Assemblies of
States-
 
(a)        Copies of electoral roll as finally published under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and such
other material as may be prescribed under the rules by the Central Government;
(b)        Identity slip of electors in the constituency concerned; and
(c)        Free airtime on electronic media.
 
3.3.2    For that purpose, a new Part VA under the caption "Free supply of certain material to candidates of recognized political
parties" divided into two Sections 78A & 78 B is proposed to be inserted5
 in the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
 
(a)        Supply  of electoral roll of electors to the candidates.
 
3.4.0    Preparation/Revision/Correction of electoral rolls for Parliamentary/Legislative Assembly constituencies is done under the
superintendence, direction and control of Election Commission 6
, which is usually done by the Electoral Registration Officer and
Assistant Electoral Registration Officer(s).  Electoral roll of a constituency is made available to the administrative machinery
(Chief Electoral Officer, District Electoral Officer, Returning Officer, Assistant Returning Officer and Presiding Officer etc.) for
conduct of election.  But it is not made available to the candidates in the fray.  However, only two copies of electoral rolls as
finally published, are made available to those political parties for which a symbol has been exclusively reserved by the Election
Commission {section 22 (c) of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960}.
 
3.4.1    As per the Bill, henceforward, copies of electoral rolls have been proposed to be made available to the candidates of the
recognized parties in the fray.
 
3.4.2    The Committee unanimously welcomed the proposal but at the same time desired that copies of electoral rolls may be
made available to the candidates of recognized parties both in hard as well as soft forms.
 
(b)        Issue of Identity slip of electors to candidates

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
3.5.0    Nowadays Identity slips of electors are being printed and distributed by the candidates themselves at their own expenses to
facilitate the elector to exercise his/her franchise in an effective way.
 
3.5.1    As per the provisions of the Bill, copies of Identity slip of electors would be made available to the candidates of
recognized political parties at Government's expense by the Election Commission for onward transmission to the concerned
electors.
 
3.5.2    While deliberating on the issue a point was raised in the Committee that instead of supplying Identity slip of electors to the
candidates, the same may be directly delivered to the concerned electors by the administrative machinery of the concerned
Government, which would entail saving of printing cost of multiple copies of electoral roll to be given to the candidates in the fray
and would thereby check bogus voting.
 
3.5.3    Overwhelming majority in the Committee was however of the view that supply of Identity slip of the electors to the
concerned electors by the Government would increase responsibility and expenditure, to such an extent that it would be an
horrendous task for the Government.  Further, the candidate develops good rapport with the electors in the process of distributing
such slip to the electors, which is for the benefit of the candidate.  Moreso, the representatives of the candidates remain present at
the time of polling who could identify the bogus voters.  Therefore, they were in favour of the provision for supplying such
Identity slip to the candidates instead of electors.  In that context, the Committee was of the unanimous view that issuance of
Electors photo identity card could be of great help in checking bogus voting and urged upon the Government to complete the
process of photo identity card in a time bound manner. 
 
3.5.4    The Committee in its collective wisdom considered that printing and distribution of identity slips to candidates or voters
would not be practicable and does not justify cost- benefit ratio.
 
(c)        Equitable sharing of time on electronic media
 
3.5.5    In the direction of State funding of elections, an initiative was undertaken by the Election Commission  to allow
recognised political parties to use  Government owned electronic media for propagating their manifestos.  This was done
considering the reach of the vast network of Doordarshan and All India Radio which would considerably cut down expenses of
political parties on election campaigns and general party propaganda thereby amounting to indirect State funding.
 
3.5.6    The allocation of time on State electronic media as it exists today, is available to  political parties on the basis of  the
following:
 
(i)
                  categorisation  of the political parties as National or State parties, under the provisions of the Election
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968; and
 
(ii)
                past performance of  the political parties in the previous general election to the House of the People or State
Legislative Assemblies.
 
3.5.7    The facility is not available to unrecognised political parties or any independent candidates.  The discrimination between
recognised and unrecognised political parties for the above benefit has been treated as reasonable and valid by the Supreme Court
in the case of  Ramakant Pandey  vs. Union of India  (AIR 1993 SC 1766) and  the High Courts of Allahabad in  W.P.No.5790 of
1984 (Hari Shankar Jain vs. Chief Election Commissioner and others),  Madras in W.Ps. Nos. 12378 of 1984 and 14507 of 1989
(P.T. Srinivasan vs. Union of India and others and S. Shanmugam vs. Chief Electoral Officer, Tamil Nadu and others) and
Karnataka in W.P. No.19367 of 1984 (Raghunathmal vs. Election Commission of India and others).
 
3.5.8    National recognised parties get equitable time on both national as well as Regional Kendras of Doordarshan/All India
Radio while recognised State parties get time on Regional Kendras of Doordarshan/All India Radio for telecasting/broadcasting
their policies, programmes manifestos etc.
 
3.5.9    Allocation of time on Doordarshan/All India Radio as arranged by the Election Commission of India through its order
No.437/GE-LS/TVS/MCS/99 dated 3
rd August, 1999 is as follows:
 
(a)        a total of not less than 10 hours of telecasting/broadcasting time  on the National Channel by the National Parties;
 
(b)        a total of not less than 15 hours of telecasting/broadcasting time on the Regional Kendras of Doordarshan/All India
Radio by the National Parties;
 
(c)        a total of not less than 30 hours of telecasting/broadcasting time on the Regional Kendras of Doordarshan/All India
Radio by the State Parties; and

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
(d)        a total of 6 hours of telecasting/broadcasting time through the Regional Satellite Services Channel/national hookup
of AIR available to viewers across the whole country by the State parties.
 
3.5.10  Further, the time allocation to each recognised party out of the above mentioned time is done to some extent equally and
rest on the basis of percentage of votes polled by each such party, at the last general election. (See Order of Election Commission
Annexure-II)  Parties get time vouchers for this purpose with a discretion to choose their representatives and time slot. The
telecast/broadcast facility span between the last date of nominations for the first phase and two days prior to the last of the dates of
poll.  In addition, each nationally recognised party is allowed to nominate one representative each in the national panel
discussions/debates on the national channels organised by the  Prasar Bharti Corporation.
           
3.5.11  Clause 3 of the legislation under the consideration of the Committee proposes to insert Section 39A after Section 39 of
Representation of the People Act, 1951 to allocate equitable time in cable television network and other electronic media (Radio,
Television) by the Election Commission to the political party on the basis of their past performance.
           
3.5.12  During the Committee’s deliberations a point was raised as to whether it was possible to allocate equitable time to all
political parties irrespective of their status and in that context it was desired that it should be extended to recognised political
parties only.  The Committee, however, sought comments of the Legislative Department.
 
3.5.13  The Legislative Department had opined that allocation of equitable time was applicable to all recognised political parties
as it would be practically impossible to allocate time to six hundred odd unrecognised parties in existence.  Therefore, the
Department had proposed to add the words “recognised” before the words “political party” wherever they occurred in clause.
 
3.5.14  A section of Members was of the view that State recognised parties should also be given equal opportunity to propagate
their ideas on national electronic media in view of the fact that State recognised parties were in real terms national parties as they
were contributing in formation of Governments at the Centre, while another section wanted that time sharing on national channel
by the national recognised and State recognised parties may be done on proportionate basis.
 
3.5.15  However, the majority view in the Committee was in favour of continuance of the present practice in respect of time
sharing on Government owned media as per the extant orders of the Election Commission.
 
 
B.         TRANSPARENT SYSTEM OF POLITICAL DONATION
 
3.6.0    Alike any other organisation, political parties too need funds for their sustenance and growth.  The parties garner resources
from different sources such as subscription fee, contribution from members and others, interest from properties of the party and
company donation, etc.  which gets deposited in the consolidated account of the party from which its expenditures are met.
 
3.6.1    Political donations as permissible under the law (Section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956) come from companies other
than Government companies.  According to Section 293A of the Companies Act, a company (other than Government company or
a company which has been in existence for less than three years) may contribute directly/indirectly  (a) to any political party (b)
for any political purpose to any person any amount not exceeding five per cent of its average net profits (taking immediately
preceding three years).  Such contribution can be made by a company only if a resolution is passed by its Board of Directors.  The
existing provision is in continuous operation7
 from 1985.
 
3.6.2    Dinesh Goswami Committee has recommended complete ban on corporate donation to political parties whereas the issue
of ban on corporate donation has been left by the Indrajit Gupta Committee to the wisdom of the Government and Parliament.
           
3.6.3    The legislation under consideration of the Committee allows 8
 political party to receive voluntary donation from the
following:
 
(a)        any company other than Government company within the stipulation of the Companies Act, 1956; and
(b)        any individual.
 
Further, donations from any foreign sources, which inter alia include a foreign company, Multi- National Company are forbidden
for this purpose.
           
3.6.4    Donation to a political party by a company has an upper limit within the stipulation of Companies Act, 1956 i.e. 5% of its
average net profit (preceding three financial years).
           

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
3.6.5    The donors (company or individual) would now be getting tax deduction on donations given to political party while
computing its/his/her total income, which has been proposed under clause 11 of the Bill9.
 
(a)        Declaration of political donation
3.6.6    The Bill intends to bring transparency in political donation for which it prescribes submission 10 of report 11 by the
treasurer of the political party containing the following items in  respect of donation received by it, to the Election Commission
before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year (substitution done by the Legislative Department in
lieu of words before the end of that financial year in the original Bill) :
 
(i)                  details of donations received from any person in that financial year;
(ii)                details of donation received from any company (other than Government company) in that financial year;
(iii)               details of expenditure incurred out of such donation; and
(iv)              a certificate regarding eligibility of donors under the law.
The political party failing to submit the aforesaid report to the Election Commission would be deprived of Income Tax relief.
           
3.6.7    As per the provision of the Bill, for transparency of accounts of donations, the report so submitted to the Election
Commission would be audited bythe Auditor approved by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India once in a financial year
to determine the expenditure on constituency campaign and expenditure on general party campaign incurred by the concerned
political party.
 
(b)        Preparation and submission of Report by Treasurer
3.7.0    As per the provisions of the Bill the treasurer of a political party will prepare and submit a report of donations received
from companies and individuals to the Election Commission, containing four items enumerated in para 3.6.6 supra.
 
3.7.1    The Committee had pointed out to the Legislative Department that there were recognized political parties, which had no
treasurer though it was mandatory for a political party to inter alia mention the name of its treasurer 12
 at the time of its
registration.  In that case any other functionary of the party, did the job of treasurer.  In that situation, the Committee felt, it would
be difficult for those parties to submit a report in the absence of its treasurer.
           
3.7.2    The Legislative Department in consultation with Election Commission has agreed to amend proposed Section 29(B) to the
effect that treasurer of a political party or any other person authorized by the political party in this behalf shall submit report to
Election Commission.
(c)        Accounting of political donation
3.8.0    While preparing the report to declare political donation received by the political parties the treasurer has to give details of
individual donors from whom the donations have been received. The upper limit  of contribution is proposed to be increased to
Rs.20,000/- by the Bill13
 above which records of the same would have to be maintained by political parties. 
 
3.8.1    The Committee observed that maintenance of list of small donors was difficult as maintenance of details of names and
addresses, etc. of individual small donors would be near to impossibility as primary party worker and others contribute in small
amount to the party.  The Committee, therefore, desired that some sort of ceiling may also be fixed for the individual donors. 
           
 
3.8.2    The Legislative Department while pointing out the proposed amendment to Section 13A of Income Tax Act, 1961 has
agreed to categorically mention the upper limit of Rs.20,000/- for maintenance of account of both the donors (companies and
individuals) for the purpose of submission of report to the Election Commission and accordingly agreed to amend clause 2
suitably.
           
3.8.3    The Committee also pointed out the difficulty arising out of issue of certificates towards the eligibility of the donors,
which was required under the Bill.  Therefore, the Committee wanted deletion of the said provision.
           
3.8.4    The Bill requires the declaration report of political donation of each party to be audited by the auditor certified by C&AG
after it is submitted to Election Commission.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
3.8.5    Here it may be mentioned that under the provisions of the Bill each political party would be required to prepare and
maintain two books of accounts containing the following:-
 
(i)         all receipts and expenditure including  political donations14; and
(ii)                receipt of political donation and expenditure out of such donation exclusively.
While item (i) above is being done under the relevant provision of Income Tax Act, 1961 and is submitted to Income Tax
authorities and being audited by Chartered Accountant, as per the provision of the Bill, the report of political donation would be
submitted to Election Commission and audited by Auditors certified by the C&AG, which in turn along with audited report
thereon would be forwarded to Central Government and the latter would cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament. 
 
3.8.6    Many a member objected to the audit of accounts of donations by auditor approved by C&AG and its submission to
Central Government.  They were of the view that since money was not given from the public exchequer, submission of its
accounts of donation to Central Government would erode the autonomy of the political parties.  Further the auditor would have
the right to inspect any documents/premises of political parties at any point of time which was objected to on the ground that it
would tantamount to intrusion into the internal affairs of the party.  The trusts and charitable institutions, which get tax exemption,
get their accounts audited by Chartered Accountant. By subjecting the political party to get its account of donation audited by
auditor certified by C&AG would be discriminatory in the name of transparency.  The Committee unanimouslydesired that the
audit of accounts of donation received by the political party may be done through Chartered Accountants appointed by it as at
present, as per the provisions of the Income Tax Act (Section 13A).  In view thereof the Committee recommended deletion of
entire Section 29(D) in clause 2 of the Bill.
(d)        Segregation of accounts of expenditure of political party
3.9.0    The Committee pointed out that money received by political parties is deposited to a common account out of which
expenditure is incurred.  It would be difficult for the political parties to maintain different accounts for different segment of its
income, which instead of simplifying the work would increase the work of political parties without getting any substantial
benefit.  Owing to practical difficulties, the Committee did not favour the idea of maintaining two accounts in relation to
expenditure therefrom.
           
3.9.1    A section of Members wanted complete ban on corporate donation  to  political parties  as well as income tax benefit
thereon to the companies on the ground  that the companies can influence  policies of political parties.  Prevalence of corporate
donation may lead to denial of level playing  field to certain political parties. They were of the view that political parties are
becoming spokesperson of companies by receiving donations from them.  Other Members were of the view that even during the
time of ban on corporate funding, donations were received in clandestine way, which was harmful to the political system than the
present dispensation where transparency was to be maintained.   
 
C.       HARMONIZATION OF EXPLANATION TO SECTION 77 OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT,
1951 WITH SECTION
171 H OF INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
 
3.10.0  Section 171H of Indian Penal Code, 1860 expressly prohibits political parties and all other bodies/associations/individuals
to make election expenses for a candidate without his authorisation.  Whereas Explanation to Section 77 of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 permits such expenses by others for the candidates without his authorisation.  Thus, whether the election
expenditure made by others for a candidate would be treated as part of election expenses of a candidate for the purpose of
ceiling15
 on election expenses becomes subject of interpretation due to discrepancy between relevant Sections of Indian Penal
Code, 1860 and Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
3.10.1  The problem has arisen out of insertion of Explanation (1) to Section 77 of Representation of the People Act, 1951 in
1974.
 
3.10.2  The Supreme Court as well as Dinesh Goswami Committee had recommended restoration of Section 77 to its pre-1974
position.  The Indrajit Gupta Committee left the issue to the wisdom of the Government/Parliament.
 
3.10.3  The proposed legislation tries to harmonise both the provisions of law by substituting Explanation 1 and 3 to Section 77 of
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by another  Explanation which clarifies that expenditure on general party campaign by
the leaders of political parties would not be treated as election expenditure by the candidate for ceiling purposes.
 
3.10.4  The numbers of leaders of recognised political party would be forty and twenty for unrecognised party for the purpose of
above benefit.
 
Segregation of security expenditure from expenditure of candidate.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
3.10.5  The Committee desires that the security related expenditure, which is done by any person in the service of Government,
should be segregated from the expenditure of candidate for determining ceiling of election expenditure.  Accordingly, the
Committee has proposed amendment of clause 4 to restore Explanation 3 of Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951.
 
4.         The issues involved in the Bill have been discussed in the all-party meeting held on 13 September 2001. Gist of the views
expressed by   various  political parties is placed  at Annexure-III.
 
5.         The Committee urged upon the Government to come out with a comprehensive electoral reform Bills rather than bringing
piecemeal legislations.
 
 
6.0       The Committee undertook clause-by-clause consideration of the  Bill in the presence of Secretary, and representatives of
Legislative Department  and  representatives of Department of Legal Affairs.
Clause 2
 
6.1.0    The clause seeks to insert new sections 29B to 29D after Section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to
provide for acceptance of voluntary donations by the political parties from Companies (other than Government Companies) and
any other person; preparation and submission of report in this regard to the Election Commission for declaration of donation
received by political parties by its Treasurer and audit of the same by the auditor approved by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and its subsequent forwarding to Central Government  for presentation in both the Houses of Parliament.
 
6.1.1    The Committee suggests that in proposed Section 29C instead of the words treasurerof apolitical party preparing a report,
it should be substituted by the words treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this
behalf.
 
6.1.2    The Committee agrees to the suggestion of the Legislative Department to mention the upper limit of  donations i.e. Rs.20,
000/- above which the political parties would be required to maintain accounts as political parties use to receive  donation in small
amount and maintenance of their record would be well nigh impossible.  Accordingly, amendments have been proposed in
sections 29C (1)(a) and  (b).  Besides, the Committee also objects to the proposal of maintaining the details of expenditure out of
such donations as all income coming from different sources including donation goes to one common account of the party out of
which all its expenditure are met and therefore recommends deletion of sub-clause (1) of 29C (c). Further, modification in sub-
clause  (2) of proposed Section 29 C has been recommended by the Committee, as it is difficult to issue certificate of eligibility of
those donors, who are donating to the concerned political party.
 
6.1.3    The Committee also recommends doing away with the provision regarding audit of accounts of political donation by the
Auditor approved by the C and AG and deletion of entire Section 29 D as it was obligatory on the part of political parties to file
their returns to Election Commission under 139 A of Income Tax Act, 1961 which has to be audited by Chartered Accountant
under Section 13A of Income Tax Act, 1961.
 
6.1.4    The clause is adopted as amended.
 
Clause 3
 
6.2.0    This clause seeks to insert new section 39A in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 so as to provide for allocation of
equitable sharing of time to political parties  on the cable television network and other  electronic media.
 
6.2.1    The Committee recommends that equitable sharing of time on electronic media should be for recognisedpolitical parties,
instead of, for all political parties.  Therefore the word “recognised” has been recommended to be prefixed to political party
wherever it occurs in the clause.
 
6.2.2    The clause is adopted as amended.
 
 
Clause 4
 
6.3.0    This clause provides for substitution of Explanations 1 and 3 in sub-section (1) of Section 77 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 with a new Explanation, with a view to segregating the expenditure on general party campaign by leaders of
political parties for propagating programme of political party from the candidate’s expenditure.  It implies that security related
expenditure in respect of arrangements made/facilities  provided to  the candidate by any person in the service of Government will
be counted  as an expenditure  incurred by the candidate for the purpose of election expenditure.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
6.3.1    Accordingly,the Committee amends  the clause to make  a clear mention of the forty persons  in the case of recognised and
twenty in the case of unrecognised parties as the leaders of political party  on whom the expenditure incurred  for general party
campaign would be exempted from candidate’s expenditure.The Committee desires that the security related expenditure, which is
done by any person in the service of Government, should be segregated from the expenditure of candidate for determining ceiling
of election expenditure.  Accordingly, the Committee has proposed amendment of clause 4 to restore Explanation 3 of Section 77
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
 
6.3.2
        The clause is adopted as amended.
 
Clause 5
 
6.4.0    This clause provides for insertion of Part VA divided into Sections 78 A & 78 B in the Representation of the People Act,
1951 relating to free supply of copies of final electoral roll published under the RP Act, 1950, identity slips of elector and other
materials to candidates set up by recognised parties. 
 
6.4.1    In view of discussion at paras 3.5.0 to 3.5.4, the Committee recommends for supply of such items as the Central
Government may, by order, determine in consultation with the Election Commission, to the electors in the constituencies
concerned or to the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.
 
6.4.2    The clause is adopted as amended.
 
 
Clause 6
 
6.5.0    This clause seeks to omit the proviso to clause (7) of Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which was
in consequence of the substitution of Explanation 1 and 3 by a new Explanation.
 
6.5.1    The Committee recommends deletion of the clause as a consequence of the restoration  of Explanation 1 and 3 of Section
77 of Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
Clause 7
(Re-numbered as Clause 6)
 
6.6.0    The clause seeks to add certain necessary items in section 169(2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, which
provides that the Government has powers to make rules on those items along with the items enumerated in the Section, after
consultation with the Election Commission.
 
6.6.1    The Committee does not recommend any amendment in this clause.  However, as a consequence of the amendment of
clause 5, proposed section 169 (2) (iii) (hhh) is proposed for deletion.
 
6.6.2    Subject to above deletion, the clause is adopted.
 
 
Clause 8
(Re-numbered as Clause 7)
 
6.7.0    The Clause provides for insertion of a new explanation in sub-section (5) of Section 293 A of the Companies Act, 1951
clarifying  the definition of  the political party in the Act.
 
6.7.1    The Committee recommends consequential changes in view of the amendments recommended in clause 3.
 
6.7.2    Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
 
 
Clause 9
(Re-numbered as Clause 8)
 
6.8.0    The clause seeks to amend Section 13A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to increase the amount of contribution received by
political parties to Rs.20,000 above which its record has to be maintained. The explanation in the Section is also proposed to be
substituted to clarify the definition of political party.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
6.8.1    The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
 
Clause 10
(Re-numbered as Clause 9)
 
6.9.0    The clause seeks to amend Section 87 of the Income Tax Act, 1961  as a consequence of the amendments proposed in
section 88 of the said Act under clause 11 of the Bill.
 
6.9.1    The clause has been proposed to be amended by the Ministry as a consequence of  amendment to clause 11.
 
6.9.2    The Committee approves the amendment proposed by the Government. 
 
6.9.3    The clause is adopted as amended.
 
 
Clause 11
(Re-numbered as Clause 10)
 
6.10.0  The clause seeks to insert new Section 88D and 88E after Section 88C in the Income Tax Act, 1961, providing for tax
relief in relation to donation given by companies or any person to political parties.
           
6.10.1  The Ministry has proposed an amendment to the clause, by substituting the sections 80 GGB and 80 GGC with Sections 88
D and 88 E thereby providing for deductions in respect of donations given by Companies and persons to political parties,
respectively, instead of the tax relief as provided in the Bill.
 
6.10.2  The Committee approves the amendment proposed by the Government. 
 
6.10.3  The clause is adopted as amended.
 
 
Clause 1, Enacting formula and Title.
 
6.11.0  Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted without any change.
 
7.         The Committee has amended the Bill in the light of the above narration. The Bill, as amended by the Committee, has been
appended to the Report at Annexure –IV.  The Committee recommends that Government should give due consideration to the
amendments proposed by it while piloting the Bill in Parliament.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  AT A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee unanimously welcomed the proposal but at the same time desired that copies of electoral rolls may be made
available to the candidates of recognized parties both in hard as well as soft forms.
 
(Para 3.4.2)
 
The Committee was of the unanimous view that issuance of Electors photo identity card could be of great help in checking
bogus voting and urged upon the Government to complete the process of photo identity card in a time bound manner. 
 
                                                                                                                               (Para 3.5.3)
 
·        The Committee in its collective wisdom considered that printing and distribution of identity slips to candidates or voters
would not be practicable and does not justify cost- benefit ratio.
 
(Para 3.5.4)
 
During the Committee’s deliberations a point was raised as to whether it was possible to allocate equitable time to all
political parties irrespective of their status and in that context it was desired that it should be extended to recognised

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
political parties only.  The Committee, however, sought comments of the Legislative Department.
(Para 3.5.12)
 
A section of Members was of the view that State recognised parties should also be given equal opportunity to propagate
their ideas on National electronic media in view of the fact that State recognised parties were in real terms national parties
as they were contributing in formation of governments at the Centre, while another section wanted that time sharing on
national channel by the national recognised and state recognised parties may be done on proportionate basis.
 
(Para 3.5.14)
 
However, the majority view in the Committee was in favour of continuance of the present practice in respect of time sharing
on Government owned media as per the extant orders of the Election Commission.
(Para 3.5.15)
 
·        The Committee observed that maintenance of list of small donors was difficult as maintenance of details of names and
addresses, etc. of individual small donors would be near to impossibility as primary party worker and others contribute in
small amount to the party.  The Committee therefore, desired that some sort of ceiling may also be fixed for the individual
donors. 
           
            (Para 3.8.1)
 
·        The Committee also pointed out the difficulty arising out of issue of certificates towards the eligibility of the donors,
which was required under the Bill.  Therefore, the Committee wanted deletion of the said provision.
           
(Para 3.8.3)
 
·        Many a member objected to the audit of accounts of donations by auditor approved by C&AG and its submission to
Central Government.  They were of the view that since money was not given from the public exchequer, submission of its
accounts of donation to Central Government would erode the autonomy of the political parties.  Further the auditor would
have the right to inspect any documents/premises of political parties at any point of time which was objected to on the
ground that it would tantamount to intrusion into the internal affairs of the party.  The trusts and charitable institutions,
which get tax exemption, get their accounts audited by Chartered Accountant. By subjecting the political party to get its
account of donation audited by auditor certified by C&AG would be discriminatory in the name of transparency.  The
Committee unanimouslydesired that the audit of accounts of donation received by the political party may be done through
Chartered Accountants appointed by it as at present, as per the provisions of the Income Tax Act (section 13A).  In view
thereof the Committee recommended deletion of entire Section 29(D) in clause 2 of the Bill.
 
(Para 3.8.6)
·
        The Committee pointed out that money received by political parties is deposited to a common account out of which
expenditure is incurred.  It would be difficult for the political parties to maintain different accounts for different segment
of its income, which instead of simplifying the work would increase the work of political parties without getting any
substantial benefit.  Owing to practical difficulties, the Committee did not favour the idea of maintaining two accounts in
relation to expenditure therefrom.
 
 
(Para 3.9.0)
 
·
        The Committee desires that the security related expenditure, which is done by any person in the service of Government,
should be segregated from the expenditure of candidate for determining ceiling of election expenditure.  Accordingly, the
Committee has proposed amendment of clause 4 to restore Explanation 3 of Section 77 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951.
 
(Para 3.10.5)
 
The Committee urged upon the Government to come out with a comprehensive electoral reform Bills rather than bringing
piecemeal legislations.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
(Para 5)
·        The Committee suggests that in proposed Section 29C instead of the words treasurerof apolitical party preparing a report,
it should be substituted by the words treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party in
this behalf.
 
(Para 6.1.1)
 
·        The Committee agrees to the suggestion of the Legislative Department to mention the upper limit of  donations i.e. Rs.20,
000/- above which the political parties would be required to maintain accounts as political parties use to receive  donation
in small amount and maintenance of their record would be well nigh impossible.  Accordingly, amendments have been
proposed in sections 29C (1)(a) & (b).  Besides, the Committee also objects to the proposal of maintaining the details of
expenditure out of such donations as all income coming from different sources including donation goes to one common
account of the party out of which all its expenditure are met and therefore recommends deletion of sub-clause (1) of 29C
(c). Further, modification in sub-clause  (2) of proposed Section 29 C has been recommended by the Committee, as it is
difficult to issue certificate of eligibility of those donors, who are donating to the concerned political party.
 
(Para 6.1.2)
 
·
        The Committee also recommends doing away with the provision regarding audit of accounts of political donation by the
Auditor approved by the C&AG and deletion of entire Section 29 D as it was obligatory on the part of political parties to
file their returns to Election Commission under 139 A of Income Tax Act, 1961 which has to be audited by Chartered
Accountant under Section 13A of Income Tax Act, 1961.
 
(Para 6.1.3)
 
·
        The Committee recommends that equitable sharing of time on electronic media should be for recognisedpolitical parties,
instead of, for all political parties.  Therefore the word “recognised” has been recommended to be prefixed to political
party wherever it occurs in the clause.
 
(Para 6.2.1)
 
·        Accordingly,the Committee amends  the clause to make  a clear mention of the forty persons  in the case of recognised &
twenty in the case of unrecognised parties as the leaders of political party  on whom the expenditure incurred  for general
party campaign would be exempted from candidate’s expenditure.The Committee desires that the security related
expenditure, which is done by any person in the service of Government, should be segregated from the expenditure of
candidate for determining ceiling of election expenditure.  Accordingly, the Committee has proposed amendment of clause
4 to restore Explanation 3 of Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
(Para 6.3.1)
 
In view of discussion at paras 3.5.0 to 3.5.4, the Committee recommends for supply of such items as the Central
Government may, by order, determine in consultation with the Election  Commission, to the electors in the constituencies
concerned or to the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.
 
 (Para 6.4.1)
 
·        The Committee recommends deletion of the clause as a consequence of the restoration  of Explanation 1 and 3 of Section
77 of Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
(Para 6.5.1)
 
·        The Committee does not recommend any amendment in this clause.  However, as a consequence of the amendment of
clause 5, proposed section 169 (2) (iii) (hhh) is proposed for deletion.
 
(Para 6.6.1)
 
The Committee recommends consequential changes in view of the amendments recommended in clause 3.
 
(Para 6.7.1)

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
The Committee has amended the Bill in the light of the above narration. The Bill, as amended by the Committee, has been
appended to the Report at Annexure –IV.  The Committee recommends that Government should give due consideration to
the amendments proposed by it while piloting the Bill in Parliament.
(Para7.0)
ANNEXURE
ANNEXURE I
(See page 1, para 1 of the Report)
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 23 of 2002
 
THE ELECTION AND OTHER RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Companies Act, 1956      
                                     and the Income-tax Act, 1961.
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:―
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 
 
 
 
43 of 1951
 
1. This Act may be called the Election and Other Related laws (Amendment) Act, 2002.
                  CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF  THE PEPOLE ACT, 1951
2. After section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereafter in this
Chapter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, namely:―
Short title.
 
 
 
Insertion of new
sections 29 B to 29
D.
 
Political parties
entitled to accept
donation.
 
‘29B. Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, every political party may
accept any amount of donation voluntarily offered to it by any person or company other
than a Government company:
 
Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any donation from any foreign
source defined under clause (e) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act,
1976.
 
Explanation.― For the purposes of this section and section 29C,―
 
(a) “company” means a company as defined in section 3;
 
   (b) “Government company” means a company within the meaning of section 617; and
 
    (c) “donation” has the same meaning as assigned to it under section 293A, of the
Companies Act, 1956; and
 
    (d) “person” has the meaning assigned to it under clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, but does not include Government company, local authority and every
artificial juridical person wholly or partially funded by the Government.
 
1 of 1956
 
 
 
49 of 1976
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1956.
 
43 of 1961

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
Declaration of
donation received by
the political parties.
29C. (1) The treasurer of a political party shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in
respect of the following, namely:―
 
     (a) the donation received by such political party from any person in that financial year;
 
    (b) the donation received by such political party from companies other than Government
companies in that financial year; and
 
    (c) the details of expenditure incurred by the political party out of such donation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed and
shall specifically certify that each donor from whom donation has been received is eligible
under the law for the time being in force to so donate to the political party.
 
    (3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by the
treasurer of every political party before the end of that financial year, to the Election
Commission.
 
    (4)Where the treasurer of any political party fails to submit a report under sub-section
(3), then, notwithstanding anything contained under the Income-tax Act, 1961, such
political party shall not be entitled to any tax relief under that Act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
1961.
 
 
 
 29D. (1) The accounts of donation under the report submitted to the Election Commission
under sub-section (3) of section 29C shall be audited by the auditor approved by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, once in a financial year, to determine the
expenditure on constituency campaign and expenditure on general party campaign incurred
by the concerned political party.
 
(2) The auditor approved by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, in connection
with the audit of the accounts of donation under the report referred to in sub-section (1),
shall have the rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has, in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books, vouchers and other documents and papers connected with the accounts and to
inspect any of the offices of the concerned political party for the purposes of such audit.
(3) The accounts of donation under the report referred to in sub-section (1) as certified by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by the auditor approved by him under sub-
section (1) togetherwith the audit report thereon specifying the expenditure on constituency
campaign and expenditure on general party campaign shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House
of Parliament.
Audit and accounts of
donation report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation ―For the purposes of this section,―
 
(a) "expenditure on constituency campaign", in relation to a political party,  means the
expenditure incurred for the purposes of promoting or procuring electoral success for the
political party at any election, that is to say, the expenditure at such election of candidates
standing in the name of the political party, but does not include any expenditure which is
incurred or authorised by a candidates at an election or by his election agent between the
date on which he has been nominated and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both
dates inclusive;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) "expenditure on general party campaign", in relation to a political party, means the
expenditure incurred by leaders of the political party on account of travel by air or
otherwise for propagating programme of the political party.’.
 
3. After section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:―
 
'39A.(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law of the time being in force,
the Election Commission shall, on the basis of the past performance of a political party,
during elections, allocate equitable sharing of time on the cable television network and
other electronic media in such manner as may be prescribed to display or propagate any
election matter or to address public in connection with an election.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new
section 39A.
 
Allocation of equitable
sharing of time.
  
(2). The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1), in respect of
an election, shall be made after the publication of list of contesting candidates under
section 38 for the election and shall be valid till forty-eight hours before the hour
fixed for poll for such election.
 
(3) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1) shall be
binding on all political parties concerned.
 
(4) The Election Commission may, for the purposes of this section, make code of
conduct for cable operators and electronic media and the cable operators and every
person managing or responsible for the management of the electronic media shall
abide by such code of conduct.
 
Explanation―For the purposes of this section,―
 
(i) "electronic media" includes radio and any other broadcasting media notified
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette;
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment
of Section 77.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of
new Part VA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Free supply
of copies of
electoral rolls.
(ii) "cable television network" and "cable operator" have the meanings
respectively assigned to them under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation)
Act, 1995.’.
 
      4. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for Explanations 1 and 3,
the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:―
 
"Explanation- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expenditure
on general party campaign as referred to in section 29D, incurred by the leaders of a
political party shall not be deemed to be the expenditure in connection with the
election incurred or authorised by a candidate of that political party or his election
agent for the purposes of this sub-section.".
 
5. After Part V of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted,
namely:―
 
‘PART  VA
 
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL TO CANDIDATES OF
RECOGNISED POLITICAL PARTIES.
 
78A.(1) The Government shall, at any general election held for the purposes of
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, supply,
free of cost, to the candidates of recognised political parties such number of copies
of the electoral roll, as finally published under the Representation of the People Act,
1950 and such other material as may be prescribed.
 
(2) The material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be supplied,―
7 of 1995.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
43 of 1950.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Election Commission with respect to the reduction of the maximum expenditure which may be
incurred by the candidate under section 77; and
 
(ii) through such officers as may be specified by the Election Commission who shall act in
accordance with such general or special directions as may be given by the election Commission.
 
78B.(1)The Election Commission shall, at any time between the date of publication of the
notification calling the election and the date on which the poll is to be taken, supply or cause to be
supplied identity slips of electors in the constituency concerned and other items as may be
prescribed to the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supply of identity
slips of electors to
candidates.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Where the Election Commission supplies the identity slips or other items to the candidates
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may, in consultation with the Election Commission,
impose conditions with respect to the reduction of the maximum expenditure which may be
incurred by the candidate under section 77.
 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this Chapter and clauses (hh) and (hhh) of sub-section (2) of
section 169, the expression "recognised political party", has the meaning assigned to it in the
Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968.’.
 
6. In section 123 of the principal Act, in clause (7), the proviso shall be omitted.
 
7. In section 169 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),―
 
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:―
 
"(aa) the form of donation report;";
 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:―
 
"(bb) the manner of allocation of equitable sharing of time on the cable television network
and other electronic media;";
 
(iii) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:―
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 123.
 
Amendment of
section 169.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"(hh) the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of
recognised political parties at any general election held for the purposes of constituting
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State;
 
(hhh) the items to be supplied by the Election Commission to the candidates set up
by the recognised political parties;".
 
CHAPTER III
 
AMENDMENT OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956
 
8. In section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, after sub-section (5), the following
Explanation  shall be inserted, namely:―
 
'Explanation.― For the purposes of this section, "political  party" means a political party
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
Amendment of
section 293A of
Act.
1 of 1956.
registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.'.  
 
 
 
43 of 1951.
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 13A.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
AMENDMENTS OF THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
 
9. In section 13A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Income-tax Act),―
 
       (i) in the proviso, in clause (b), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
 
        (ii)  after the proviso and before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:―
 
"Provided further that if the treasurer of such political party fails to submit a report under
sub-section (3) of section 29C of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 for a financial
year, no exemption under this section shall be available to that political party for such
financial year.";
 
       (iii) for the Explanation, following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:―
 
‘Explanation.― For the purposes of this section, "political party" means a political party
registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.’.
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1951.
      10. In section 87 of the Income tax Act,―
 
       (i) in sub-section (1), for the figures, letters and word "88B and 88C", the figures, letters
and word "88B, 88C, 88D and 88E" shall be substituted;
 
      (ii) in sub-section (2), after the word, figures and letter "section 88C", the words, figures
and letters "or section 88D or section 88E" shall be inserted.
 
11. After section 88C of the Income-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:-
 
'88D.  In computing the amount of income-tax on the total income of an Indian company
with which it is chargeable for any assessment year, there shall be allowed from the amount
of income (as computed before allowing the deduction under this section) a deduction of an
amount contributed directly or indirectly  to any political party or for any political purpose to
any person.
 
Amendment of
section 87.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new
sections 88D and
88E.
 
Tax relief in
relation to
donation given by
companies to
political parties.
 
1 of 1956.
 
43 of
1951.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation,― For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of
this section, the word "contribute", with its grammatical variation, has the meaning assigned
to it under section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956 and includes the donation accepted by
the political parties in pursuance of section 29B of the Representation of the People Act,
1951.
 
88E.  In computing the amount of income-tax on the total income of the assessee, being
any person, except local authority and every artificial juridical person wholly or partially
funded by the Government, resident or having place of business, in India, or outside India,
with which it is chargeable for any assessment year, there shall be allowed from the amount
of income (as computed before allowing the deduction under this section) a deduction of an
amount donated to a political party.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tax  relief in
relation to
donation given by
any person to
political parties.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
1951.
Explanation.―For the purposes of sections 88D and 88E, a "political party" means the
political party which is registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act,
1951.'.
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government is continuously exploring ways and means of bringing about reforms in electoral laws with a view to
making the electoral process clean, fair and free from corrupt influences.  In this regard, the Government has before its various
recommendations made by different bodies/individuals like the Committee on Electoral Reforms  (Dinesh Goswami Committee),
the Committee on State Funding of Elections (Indrajit Gupta Committee), the Election Commission of India, the Law
Commission of India (170
th Report on Reform of Electoral Laws), etc.  The Indrajit Gupta Committee, which was constituted
pursuant to a decision taken in the all-party meeting held on 22.5.1998, considered, inter alia, the issues of State funding of
elections and other related proposals pertaining to maintenance of accounts by political parties and audit thereof, ban on donations
by companies to political parties, inclusion of expenses of political parties in the election expenses of candidates for the purposes
of ceiling on election expenses, etc., on which recommendations had been made by the Dinesh Goswami Committee in 1990.  The
Committee submitted its report to Government on 14.1.1999.  The object of the Bill is to implement some of the recommendations
of the Indrajit Gupta Committee as further considered in the light of the views expressed by the State Governments, political
parties as expressed in the all-party meeting held on 13.9.2001, Chambers of Commerce and various concerned
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, etc.
 
2.         The Bill seeks to bring transparency in the funding of the political parties by the corporate sector and by other persons by
streamlining and promoting the donations received by the political parties for elections by giving suitable tax-exemptions and
withdrawal thereof in specified circumstances.  In this connection, it may be stated that section 293A inserted in the Companies
Act, 1956 in 1960 provided for contribution by the companies to the political parties.  After severe  criticism of the role of money
power in the politics, the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1969 prohibited  making of political contributions and also made it
punishable.  Section 293A was again amended in 1985 allowing the corporate sector to play its legitimate role in the functioning
of the Indian democracy, within the defined norms.  The Dinesh Goswami Committee was of the considered view that the
donations made by companies to political parties be completely banned.  However, the Indrajit Gupta Committee left the decision
in this regard to the wisdom of Parliament and the Government.  The corrupting influence of money in politics has, however, not
abated despite these legislative remedies.
 
3.         The Bill also seeks to address the problems arising out of insertion of Explanation 1 to section 77(1) of the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 which permits political parties and all other bodies or associations or individuals to make election
expenses for a candidate without his authorisation.  Explanation 3 thereto is also sought to be deleted.
 
4.         The Bill further seeks to make provisions for allocation of equitable sharing of time on the cable television network and
other electronic media for the purposes of election campaign as well as State funding in kind in respect of supply of free copies of
electoral rolls to the candidates by the Government and for supply of identity slips of electors and other prescribed items by the
Election Commission to the candidates.
 
4.
      The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                          ARUN JAITLEY
The 11
thMarch, 2002
 
 
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION
OF INDIA
 
[Copy of letter No. H. 11019/9/99, dated the 11 th March, 2002 from Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of  Law, Justice and
Company Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of
article 117, read with clause (1) of article 274, of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Election and Other Related
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002 to Lok Sabha and also recommends to Lok Sabha the consideration of  the Bill.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 
            Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert section 39A after section 39 in the Representation of the People Act, 1951.  The
proposed section 39A relates to allocation of equitable sharing of time for the purposes of election campaign.  The time shall be
allocated in the prescribed manner on the cable television network and other electronic media.  The electronic media includes
radio and any other broadcasting media notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.  This may involve costs for
the Government owned or controlled media.
 
2.         Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert new Part VA in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 relating to partial State
funding in kind.  The proposed section 78A relates to the free supply of copies of electoral rolls, as finally published under the
Representation of the People Act, 1950, to the candidates by the Government.  The proposed section 78B provides for supply of
identity slips of electors and other prescribed items by the Election Commission to the candidates.
 
3.         The Bill, if enacted, would involve annual recurring expenditure and a non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.  It is, however, not possible to calculate the estimate of the expenditure involved in the purported measures as it is
not possible to anticipate with any accuracy the number of contestants in an election as well as the number of voters in any
constituency in view of the continuous change in their numbers on various accounts.
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 169 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by inserting clauses (aa), (bb),  (hh)
and (hhh) after clauses (a), (b) and (h) respectively in sub-section (2) thereof.  The proposed clauses (aa), (bb),  (hh) and (hhh)
empower the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form of donation report, the manner of allocation of equitable
sharing of time on the cable television network and other electronic media, the material to be supplied by the Government to the
candidates of recognised political parties at any general election held for the purposes of constituting the House of the People or
the Legislative Assembly of a State and the items to be supplied by the Election Commission to the candidates set up by the
recognised  political parties respectively.
 
2.
                  The matters, in respect of which such rules may be made, are matters of detail and may hardly be provided for the Bill. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
 
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
                        *                                              *                                              *
CHAPTER VIII
LECTION EXPENSES
                        *                                              *                                              *
 
 77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent,
keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorized  by him or by his election agent between the date on which he has
been nominated and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.
 
Explanation 1.―Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of any court to the
contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in connection with the election of a
candidate by a political party or by any other association or body of persons or by any
individual (other than the candidate or his election agent) shall not be deemed to be, and
shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with the election incurred
or authorized by the candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this sub-section:
 
Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect―
 
Account of
election expenses
and maximum
thereof.
 
 
 
Ord.
13 of 1974.
     (a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court whereby the election of a
candidate to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State has been
declared void or set aside before the commencement of the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1974;
 
    (b) any judgment, order or decision of a High Court whereby the election of any such
 
 
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
candidate has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the said
Ordinance, if no appeal has been preferred to the Supreme Court against such judgment,
order or decision of the High Court before such commencement and the period of limitation
for filing such appeal has expired before such commencement.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corrupt
practices.
Explanation 3.―For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that any expenditure
incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided or any other act or thing done
by any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the classes mentioned
in clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty as
mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection
with the election incurred or authorized by a candidate or by his election agent for the purposes
of this sub-section.
*                                                      *                                                *
PART  VII
CORRUPT PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES
CHAPTER  I
CORRUPT PRACTICES
 
123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purpose of this Act:-
 
*                                                    *                                                   * 
 
(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure by a candidate
or his agent or, by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent, any
assistance (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's
election, from any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the
following classes, namely:-
 
(a)
    gazetted officers;
(b)   stipendiary judges and magistrates;
(c)    members of the armed forces of the Union;
(d)   members of the police forces;
(e)    excise officers;
 
 
     (f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as lambardars, malguzars,
patels, deshmukhs or by any other name, whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are
remunerated by a share of, or commission on, the amount of land revenue collected by them
but who do not discharge any police functions; and
 
    (g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government as may be prescribed:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the
classes aforesaid, in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty, makes any
arrangements or provides any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any
candidate or his agent or any other person acting with the consent of the candidate or his election
agent (whether by reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reasons), such
arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance for
the prospects of that candidate's election.
 
*                                                         *                                            *                    
 
PART  XI
GENERAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
169.(1)     *                                       *                                              *
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all  or any of the following matters, namely:-
 
*                         *                                     *                                        *
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956
(1 OF 1956)
 
*                              *                                 *                                        *
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make
rules.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
293A. (1) *                                              *                                         *
(5) If a company makes any contribution in contravention of the provisions of this section,―
 
     (a) the company shall be punishable  with fine which may extend to three times the amount so
contributed; and
 
    (b) every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Prohibitions and
restrictions
regarding political
contribution.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special provision
relating to incomes of
political parties.
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
*                                *                                   *                                    *
13A. Any income of a political party which is chargeable under the head "Income from
house property" or "Income from other sources" or any income by way of voluntary
contributions received by a political party from any person shall not be included in the total
income of the previous year of such political party:
Provided that―
      (a) such political party keeps and maintains such books of account and other documents as
would enable the Assessing Officer to properly deduce its income therefrom;
      (b) in respect of each such voluntary contribution in excess of ten thousand rupees, such
political party keeps and maintains a record of such contribution and the name and address of
the person who has made such contribution; and 
     (c) the accounts of such political party are audited by an accountant as defined in the
Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288.
 Explanation. ―For the purposes of this section, "political party" means an association or
body of individual citizens of India registered with the Election Commission of India as a
political party under paragraph 3 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,
1968, and includes a political party deemed to be registered with that Commission under the
proviso to sub-paragraph (2) of that paragraph.
 
*                                *                                   *                                    *
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER  VIII
REBATES AND RELIEFS
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
 
 
Rebate to be allowed in
computing income-tax.
 
 
A.     Rebate of income-tax
 
87.(1) In computing the amount of income-tax on the total income of an assessee with which
he is chargeable for any assessment year, there shall be allowed from the amount of income-
tax (as computed before allowing the deductions under this Chapter), in accordance with an
subject to the provisions of sections 88A, 88B and 88C, the deductions specified in those
sections.
 (2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under section 88 or section 88A or section
88B or section 88C shall not, in any case, exceed the amount of income-tax (as computed
before allowing the deductions under this Chapter) on the total income of the assessee with
which he is chargeable for any assessment year.
*                                *                                   *                                    *
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
 
Further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Companies Act, 1956 and the Income-tax Act, 1961.
 
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)
 
 
 
ANNEXURE II
(See page 5, para  3.5.10 of the Report)
 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Nirvachan Sadan, Ashoka Road, New Delhi – 110001.
______________________________________________________________________________
 
No. 437/GE-LS/TVS/MCS/99                                                            Dated: August 03, 1999
 
Telecast/Broadcast facility to political parties during elections
 
ORDER
 
At the time of General Elections to the Lok Sabha in February, 1998 the Election Commission of India had taken up a new
initiative for State funding of recognized political parties through free use of State owned Television and Radio under directions
of the Commission (Vide Order No. ECI/GE98/437/MCS/98 dated 16th January 1998).
2.         The scheme was discussed in detail with representatives of all National and State recognized political parties on the eve of
the Lok Sabha Elections in 1998.  All the Parties welcomed the proposal of the Election Commission.  The Commission in
comprehensive consultations with the Prasar Bharati Corporation.  Doordarshan and All India Radio gave the operational
parameters of the scheme.
3.         The recognized National and State political parties were allotted 122 hours for telecast/broadcast over DD/AIR in the new
scheme.  The concept of time vouchers for parties was also introduced at that time.  The Scheme proved to be very useful and was
much appreciated particularly because it provided for State funding in a manner which could not be misused.
4.         The Commission, subsequently successfully extended the said scheme to the General Elections to the legislative
assemblies of 4 States, namely, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Rajasthan and NCT of Delhi, held in November, 1998 and State of
Goa in June, 1999.
5.         The Commission is determined to carry forward this scheme and expand its scope.  Accordingly, the Commission has now
decided to extend the said scheme to the ensuing General Elections to Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies of certain States,
1999.
6.         Accordingly, the Commission after consultation with the Prasar Bharati Corporation, and in exercise of its plenary powers
of superintendence, direction and control, inter alia of elections to Parliament and State Legislatures vested in it by Article 324 of
the Constitution of India, nereby directs, as follow:
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
Parties eligible for Telecast/Broadcast facility:
 
(i)         The above facility of use of Doordarshan (DD) and All India Radio (AIR) shall be available in connection with the
forthcoming general elections to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of certain States.  Only to those six (6)
National Parties and forty eight (48) State Parties, which are at present recognized as such National or State Parties under the
provision of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968 and whose names are shown in the list annexed
hereto as Annexure-I.  This facility will not be available to registered-unrecognised political parties or any independent
candidates.
 
Total time allotted for Telecast/Broadcast:
 
(ii)        The Prasar Bharati Corporation shall set apart
 
On Doordarshan
 
(a)
    a total of not less than 10 hours of telecasting time on the National channel of the Doordarshan for telecasts by the
National Parties;
(b)   a total of not less than 15 hours of telecasting time on the Regional Doordarshan Kendras for telecasts by the National
Parties;
(c)    a total of not less than 30 hours of telecasting time on the Regional Doordarshan Kendras for telecasts by the State
Parties; and
(d)   a total of 6 hours of telecasting time through the Regional Satellite Services channel available to viewers across the
whole country.
 
On All India Radio
 
(e)    a total of not less than 10 hours of broadcasting time on the National hookup the All India Radio for broadcasts by the
National Parties;
(f)     a total of not less than 15 hours of broadcasting time on the Regional AIR Stations, for broadcasts by the National
Parties;
(g)    a total of not less than 30 hours of broadcasting time on the National hookup the All India Radio, for broadcasts by the
State Parties;
(h)    a total of 6 hours of broadcasting time on the National hookup for broadcasts by the State Parties.
 
Allocation of Time to each Party:
 
(iii)       Each National and State party shall be allotted time for telecasts over Doordarshan (DD) and broadcasts on All India
Radio (AIR), according to the following parameters:-
 
For National Parties:
 
(a)
                of the total ten hours five minutes telecasting/broadcasting time reserved over the National channel/hookup of
DD/AIR for the National Parties. 45 (forty Five) minutes shall be allotted to each of the 6 National Parties. i.e. a total
of four hours and thirty minutes (4-1/2 hours). Each on the DD  and  AIR separately;
(b)               the remaining five hours and thirty minutes (5-1/2 hours) telecasting/broadcasting time shall be further divided among
the six National Parties, accordingly to the percentage of votes polled by each such party, at the last general election to
the House of People held in 1998;
(c)                in addition, each National Party shall be allotted one and a half times of the total time allotted to it under sub-paras (a)
and (b) above, for telecasts/broadcasts on the Regional Doordarshan Kendras/Regional AIR Stations;
(d)               of the total time so allotted to each National party under sub-para (C), each such party shall have the option to utilise
the time  so allotted on any of the Regional Doordarshan Kendra/State capital AIR Station.
 
For National Parties:
 
(a)
                of the total ten hours five minutes telecasting/broadcasting time reserved over the National channel/hookup of
DD/AIR for the National Parties, 45 (forty five) minutes shall be allotted to each of the 6 National parties, i.e., a total

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
of four hours and thirty minutes (4-1/2 hours).  Each on the DD and  AIR separately;
(b)               the remaining five hours and thirty minutes (5-1/2 hours) telecasting/broadcasting time shall be further divided among
the six National parties, according to the percentage of votes polled by each such party, at the last general election to
the House of the People held in 1998.
(c)                in addition, each National party shall be allotted one and a half times of the total time allotted to it under sub-paras (a)
and (b) above, for telecasts/broadcasts on the Regional Doordarshan Kendras/Regional AIR Stations;
(d)               of the total time so allotted to each National party under sub-para (c), each such party shall have the option to utilize
the time so allotted on any of the Regional Doordarshan Kendra/State capital AIR Station;
provided that not more than one-tenth (1/10 th) of such time shall be utilized by it at any one Regional Doordarshan
Kendras/AIR Stations;
 
For State Parties:
 
(e)
                of the total time of thirty (30) hours reserved for telecasting/broadcasting by the State Parties on the Regional DD
Kendras/Regional AIR Stations, each of 48 State Parties shall be allotted thirty five (35) minutes, i.e. a total of twenty
eight hours (28 hours), each on DD and AIR separately;
(f)
                 the remaining two hours (2 hours) telecasting/broadcasting time for parties shall be further divided among the said 48
State parties, according to the percentage of votes polled by each such party in the State(s) in which it is recognized, at
the last general election to the House of the People held in 1998, and the last general election to the Legislative
Assembly of the State concerned, taken together;
(g)                in addition, each State party shall be allotted 10 minutes telecasting/Broadcasting time on Regional Satellite Services
channel of DD available to viewers across the whole country and the National hookup of AIR.
 
Time Vouchers for Parties
 
(iv)       Each party shall be given time vouchers of denomination of 5 minutes equal to the total time allotted to it for telecasts on
Doordarshan and broadcasts on AIR.  That party shall have the discretion to choose any representatives and allow them to use
those time vouchers, provided that no such individual representative shall be allowed to use more than 20 minutes of the total time
allotted to that party, either on Doordarshan or on AIR.
 
Dates of Telecasts/Broadcasts
 
(v)        The above telecasts/broadcasts shall span between the last date of nominations for the first phase and two days prior to the
last of the dates of poll any where in India in case of Parliamentary elections, and the relevant State or States where elections for
the respective State Assemblies are also being held simultaneously.  The Prasar Bharati Corporation in consultation with the
Commission  will decide and announce the days of the week and the time slots during which these telecasts/broadcasts will be
made.
 
(vi)       The actual date and time during which the above telecasts/broadcasts will be made by the authorised representatives of
any party shall be predetermined, by lot by the Prasar Bharati Corporation in consultation with the Commission. 
 
(vii)      While deciding about such Dates and Times, it shall be ensured that fairness and equity is maintained, as far as possible
and having due regards to the technical constraints in regard to the occasion and time for the telecasts/broadcasts by such parties.
 
Guidelines for observance in Telecasts/Broadcasts
 
(viii)      The telecasts/broadcasts on Doordarshan/AIR will not permit:
 
(a)
    criticism of other countries;
(b)   attack on religions or communities;
(c)    anything obscene or defamatory;
(d)   incitement to violence;
(e)    anything amounting to contempt of court;
(f)     aspersions against the integrity of the President and Judiciary;
(g)    anything affecting the unity, sovereignty and integrity of the Nation; and
(h)    any criticism by name of any person.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
Submission of Transcripts in advance
 
(ix)       The parties or their representatives shall have to submit, in advance within the time frame as indicated by the Prasar
Bharati Corporation on account of technical constraints, the transcripts of their telecasts/broadcasts to the authorities specified in
this behalf by the Prasar Bharati Corporation.  Parties can have their transcripts after approval recorded at their cost in Private
Studios meeting required technical standards of the Prasar Bharati Corporation. Provided that the symbol of the party with a white
background can be shown in any video recording.  In case they require facilities of the Prasar Bharati Corporation, both
Doordarshan and All India Radio they will give sufficient advance notice to the concerned Station Director to make necessary
arrangements.
 
 Panel Discussions and Debate
 
(x)        In addition to the above mentioned Party telecasts/broadcasts the Prasar Bharati Corporation may organize a maximum of
two national panel discussions/debates on the national channels of Doordarshan and All India Radio.  Each nationally recognised
Party can nominate one representative to such programmes.
The Election Commission of India will approve the names of moderators for such panel discussions and debates in consultation
with the Prasar Bharati Corporation.
 
(xi)       In the States, where Assembly elections are also being held simultaneously, similar debates and panel discussions may be
arranged from the Regional Kendras of Doordarshan and All India Radio for elections to the concerned State Assemblies.  In
these programmes, the concerned State recognized parties will be permitted to participate.
 
Powers of the Election Commission to remove Difficulties
 
7.         Notwithstanding anything contained in para 6, the Election Commission may issue such further directions and
instructions:―
           
(a)
    for the clarification of any of the provisions of this Order; or
(b)   for the removal of any doubt which may arise in relation to the implementation of any such provision; or
(c)    in relation to any matter with respect to the allotment of time to, or utilization of time by, any recognized National or
State party, for which this Order makes no provision or makes insufficient provision necessary for the smooth and
orderly implementation of the scheme covered by this Order;
(d)
   The time allocated to the National and States parties, has been worked out and annexed hereto as Annexure II, III &
IV.
 
8.         The above guidelines shall also apply mutatis mutandis at all future elections to Parliament and State Legislatures.
 
 
By Order.
(Subas Pani)
Deputy Election Commissioner
 
 
ANNEXURE III
(See page 10, para 4 of the Report)
 
GIST OF VIEWS EXPRESSED BY THE POLITICAL PARTIES IN MEETING HELD ON 13.9.2001 ON
REGULARIZATION OF FINANCES OF POLITICAL PARTIES
 
 
Sl.No. Party's Name (National) Views
1. BJP (i)
                  Ceiling on election expenditure to be respected.  Something needs to be
done for the anomaly with respect to section 77 pointed out by the Indrajit
Gupta Committee.
(ii)                State Funding in kind.
(iii)               Audit of accounts of parties and donation by corporate houses to be
allowed.
(iv)              Methodology of funding political activities of parties to be worked out.
2. Indian National Congress (i)                  State Funding in cash depending upon past performance of political

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
party in last 3 elections ― for contesting elections and genuine political
activities.  New parties to be reimbursed on the basis of votes polled.
(ii)                Centre may work out a formula for sharing the burden of State Funding
with the States.
(iii)               Corporates may be allowed to contribute with adequate transparency. 
These donations received by political parties should be tax free.
(iv)              5% cap should not be there for individual contribution.
3. CPI (i)                  State Funding in kind only.
(ii)                No cash for political activity-Instead some facilities by the Government
like rent free accommodation in Delhi and State Capital.
(iii)               Deletion of Explanation I to Section 77 of R.P. Act, 1951.
(iv)              Ban on Corporate donation to parties.
4. CPI(M) Limited State Funding in kind only.
5. AGP (i)                  Funding in Cash to parties.  Methodology/criteria may be worked out.
(ii)       Corporate Funds to Government, not to political parties directly.
6. AIADMK (i)        State Funding in kind only by Central Government.
7. Arunachal Congress (i)                  25% States contribution and rest by Central Government.
   
8. Autonomous State Demand
Committee (United)
(i)                  Agree with recommendations of the Indrajit Gupta Committee.
(ii)                Corporates  should donate to Government, instead of political parties.
(iii)               Central Government should bear entire expenditure.
 
Sl.No. Party's Name (State Level) Views
9. CPI(ML) (L) (i)                  Against State Funding of elections.
(ii)                Some concession, facilities like time on radio/T.V. may be allowed.
(iii)               Against Corporate donation.
10. DMK  No comments
11. Forward Bloc Endorses recommendation of the Indrajit Gupta Committee.
12. Indian National Lok Dal (i)                  Expenditure to be borne by Central Government.
(ii)                State Funding to recognized political parties.
(iii)               Limits on expenditure to be fixed.
13. Janata Dal (Secular) State Funding in kind.  Requires ensuring free and fair disbursing of these
facilities.
14. Janata Dal (U) (i)                  Limited State Funding for political activities like rent free
accommodation and telephone.
(ii)                No funding for contesting elections.
15. Kerala Congress (i)                  A cess on the income of corporate houses can be a source for election
fund.
(ii)                Funds may be provided to national and regional parties on the basis of
votes polled in the previous two elections.
16. MDMK (i)                  No restriction over contribution by anybody.
(ii)                Common fund may be raised.
17. Mizo National Front (i)                  Expenditure may be borne by Centre.
(ii)                Corporate/Individual funding to parties may be allowed.
18. Muslim League (i)                  State Funding in cash/kind both may be considered.
19. RJD (i)                  In general against State Funding of elections and in favour of
maintaining status-quo.
20 RSP Agrees with the suggestions of West Bengal Government.
21. SAD (i)                  Transparent system of State Funding.
(ii)                Legitimise contribution from various sources, open to audit.
22. Samajwadi Party (i) State Funding in kind as recommended by Indrajit Gupta Committee.
23. Samta Party (i)                  No State funding to contest elections.
(ii)                State Funding irrespective of the status of the political parties 
(iii)               Free accommodation for the party office, free travelling for Party
President, General Secretary.
24. Sikkim Democratic Front No comments.
25. TDP (i)                  State Funding in kind as recommended by Indrajit Gupta Committee or
in cash depending on the system of ensuring accountability of political
parties for using the funding.
(ii)
                Companies may donate in the Election Fund and not directly to the
political parties.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
Sl.No. Party's Name (State Level) Views
26. Trinmool Congress (i)                  Discuss recommendations of Indrajit Gupta Committee more
extensively with political parties.
(ii)                State Funding in kind.
(iii)               Funding for State level parties also.
 
ANNEXURE IV
(See page 13, para  7.0 of the Report)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE ELECTION AND OTHER RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
 
(AS AMENDED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE)
 
[Words underlined or sidelined indicate the amendments suggested by the Committee, asterisks indicate
omissions.]
 
A
BILL
 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Companies Act, 1956 and the Income-
tax Act, 1961.
 
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 
1. This Act may be called the Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2002.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new
sections 29B and
29C.
 
 
Political parties
entitled to accept
donation.
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
 
2. After section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereafter in this
Chapter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, namely:-
 
‘29B. Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, every political party may
accept any amount of donation voluntarily offered to it by any person or company other
than a Government company:
 
Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any donation from any foreign
source defined under clause (e) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act,
1976.
 
Explanation- For the purposes of this section and section 29C,―
 
(a)
    “company” means a company as defined in section 3;
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1951.
 
 
1 of 1956.
 
 
 
49 of 1976.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
   “Government company” means a company within the meaning of section 617;
 
(c)    “donation” has the same meaning as assigned to it under section 293A, of the
Companies Act, 1956; and
 
(d)   “person” has the  meaning assigned to it under clause (31) of  section 2 the Income-
tax Act, 1961, but does not include Government company, local authority and every
artificial juridical person wholly or partially funded by the Government.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961.
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
Declaration of
donation received
by the political
parties.
 
29C. (1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political
party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect of the following,
namely:-
 
 
(a)
           the donation in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such political party
from any person in that financial year;
 
(b)          the donation in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such political party
from companies other than Government companies in that financial year;***
 
*                                             *                                                 *    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
1961.
 
 
 
 
43 of
1961.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
 
(3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by the treasurer of a
political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this behalf before the due
date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year under section 139 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961 to the Election Commission.
 
(4) Whether the treasurer of any political party or any other person authroised by the political
party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-section (3), then, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, such political party shall not be entitled to any tax relief
under that Act.’.
 
  *                                                    *                                              * 
 
3. After section 39  of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new
section 39A.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘39A. (1) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Election Commission shall, on the basis of the past performance of a recognised
 political party,
during elections, allocate equitable sharing of time on the cable television network and other
electronic media in such manner as may be prescribed to display or propagate any election
matter or to address public in connection with an election.
 
(2) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1), in respect of an election,
shall be made after the publication of list of contesting candidates under section 38 for the
election and shall be valid till forty-eight hours before the hour fixed for poll for such election.
 
(3) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1) shall be binding on all
political parties concerned.
 
(4) The Election Commission may, for the purposes of this section, make code of conduct for
cable operators and electronic media and the cable operators and every person managing or
responsible for the management of the electronic media shall abide by such code of conduct.
 
Explanation- For the purposes of this section,-
 
(a)
         “electronic media” includes radio and any other broadcasting media notified by the
Central Government in the official Gazette;
 
Allocation of
equitable sharing
of time.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 77.
 
(b)         “cable television network” and “cable operator” have the meanings respectively
assigned to them under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.’
 
4. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for Explanations 1 and 3, the following
explanations shall be substituted, namely:-
 
Explanation..― -For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that–
 
       (a)  the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of travel by air or by
any other means of transport for propagating programme of the political party shall not be
deemed to be the expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorized by a
candidate of that political party or his election agent for the purposes of this sub-section;
 
       (b) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided or any
other act or thing done by any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of
the classes mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his
official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in
connection with the election incurred or authorized by a candidate or by his election agent for
the purposes of this sub-section.
 
7 of
1995
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation – 2. For the purposes of clause (a)  of Explanation 1, the expression “leaders of a
political party”, in respect of any election means,-
 
(i)                  where such political party is a recognized political party, such persons not exceeding
forty in number; and
(ii)                where such political party is other than a recognized political party, such persons not
exceeding twenty in number,
whose names have been communicated to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral
Officers of the States by the political party to be leaders for the purposes of such election, within
a period of seven days from the date of the notification for such election published in the
Gazette of India or Official Gazette of the State, as the case may be, under part III:
 
Provided that a political party may, in the case where any of the persons referred to in clause
(i) or, as the case may be, in clause (ii) dies or ceases to be a member of  such political party, by
further communication to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral officers of the
States, substitute new names, during the period ending immediately before forty-eight hours
ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the last poll for such election, for the names of
such person died or ceased to be a member, for the purposes of designating the new leader in his
place.’.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
5. After Part V of the principal Act, the following part shall be inserted, namely:-
 
PART  VA
 
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL TO CANDIDATES OF RECOGNISED
POLITICAL PARTIES.
 
78A. (1) The Government shall, at any general election held for the purposes of
constituting the house of the people or the Legislative Assembly of a State, supply, free of
cost, to the candidates of recognized political parties such number of copies of the electoral
roll, as finally published under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and such other
material as may be prescribed.
 
(2) The material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be supplied,-
Insertion of new part
VA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Free supply of
copies of electoral
rolls.
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
1950.  
(i)                  subject  to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Election Commission with respect to the reduction of the
maximum expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under section 77;
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)                through such officers as may be specified by the Election Commission who shall
act in accordance with such general or special directions as may be given by the
Election Commission.
 
78B. (1) The Election Commission shall, at any time between the date of publication of the
notification calling the election and the date on which the poll is to be taken, supply or cause
to be supplied, such items as the Central Government may, by order, determine in
consultation with the Election Commission, to the electors in the constituencies concerned or
to the candidates set up by the recognized political parties. 
 
(2) where the Election Commission supplies the items to the candidates under sub-section
(1), the Central Government may, in consultation with the Election Commission, impose
conditions with respect to the reduction of the maximum expenditure which may be incurred
by the candidate under section 77.
 
Explanation-For the purposes of *** section 39A, this Chapter and clauses (hh) and (hhh) of
sub-section (2) of section 169, the expression “recognized political party”, has the meaning
assigned to it in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968.’.
 
  *                                               *                                                       * 
 
 
 
 
 
Supply of certain
items to candidates,
etc.
 
 
Amendment of
section 169.
 
 
 
 
6. In section 169 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
 
(i)
                  after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
         “(aa) the form of donation report;”;
 
(ii)
                after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
 
       “(bb) the manner of allocation of equitable sharing otime on the cable television
network and other electronic media;”;
 
(iii)
               after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
 
      “(hh) the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of
recognized political parties at any general election held for the purposes of constituting
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 293A of
Act 1 of 1956.
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
AMENDMENT OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956
 
7. In  Section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, after sub-section (5), the following
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
 
 
     ‘Explanation-For the purposes of this section, “political party” means a political party
registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.’.
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1951
 
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 13A.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMENDMENTS OF THE IN                        
                                                                   COME-TAX ACT, 1961
 
8. In section 13A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Income-tax Act),-
 
(i)
                  in the proviso, in clause (b), for the words “ten thousand rupees”, the words
“twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted;
 
(ii)                after the proviso and before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be
inserted,  namely:-
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
1951
 
 
 
 
 
43 of
1951
 
 
“Provided further that if the treasurer of such political party or any other person authorized
by that political party in this behalffails to submit a report under sub-section (3) of section 29C
of the Representation of People Act, 1951 for a financial year, no exemption under this section
shall be available for that political party for such financial year.”;
 
(iii)               for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:-
 
‘Explanation.―For the purposes of this section, “political party” means a political party
registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.’.
 
    *                                                      *                                                  *
 
9. In section 80A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), for the word, figures and letters
“section 80GGA”, the words, figures and letters “section 80GGA or section 80GGC” shall be
substituted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of
section 80A.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of
1956
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 0f
1951
 
 
 
43 of
1951
10. After section 80GGA of the Income-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:-
 
 
‘80GGB.  In computing the total income of an assessee, being an Indian company, there
shall be deducted any sum contributed by it, in the previous year, directly or indirectly, to
any political party.
 
 
Explanation – For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this
section, the word “contribute”,  with its grammatical variation, has the meaning assigned to
it under section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956 and includes the donation accepted by the
political parties in pursuance of section 29B of the Representation of the people Act, 1951.
 
80GGC. In computing the total income of an assessee, being any person, except local
authority and every artificial juridical person wholly or partly funded by the Government,
resident or having place of business in India, or outside India, there shall be deducted any
amount of donation made by him, in the previous year, to a political party.
 
 
Explanation- For the purposes of sections 80GGB and 80GGC, “political party” means a
political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the people Act, 1951.’.
 
 
       *                                                            *                                               *
Insertion of new
section 80GGB and
80GGC.
 
 
Deduction in
respect of
donations given by
companies to
political parties.
 
Deduction in
respect of
donations given by
any person to
political parties.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
MINUTES
XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday,  5 July  2002 in  Main Committee Room , Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee― Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Kalraj Mishra
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
6.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
 
            LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
8.         Shri Anadi Sahu
9.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10.       Shri Manabendra Shah
11.       Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
12.       Begum Noor Bano
13.       Shri M.O.H. Farooq
14.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
15.       Shri Subodh Ray
16.       Shri Ramji Lal Suman
17.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
18.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
19.       Shri Adhi Sankar
20.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
21.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
 
 
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law and  Justice
 
Legislative Department
 
1.         Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2.         Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.         Shri Arvind Suri, Deputy Secretary
4.         Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
 
2.0       *                                                          *                                                          *
                                                                                                                              

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
2.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
2.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
2.3       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
4.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
5.0       The Chairman invited  the Secretary, Legislative Department  to make a presentation on the Election and other Related
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002.  He informed the Secretary that  Members might like to seek some clarifications to which he may
send written responses to the Secretariat within the next seven-eight days. 
 
5.1       The Committee thereafter, heard the presentation of Secretary, Legislative Department on the Bill.
 
6.0       The Secretary thanked the Committee for the opportunity given to him to make a presentation.  He made some
observations on the position obtaining in some other countries of the world on such matters as public funding, private
contributions and tax deductibility of donations made to the political parties.
 
6.1       Touching upon the issue of funding of parties he stated that there was no uniform practice the world over.  He said that in
Australia and Canada the practice was of post-election funding of political parties, whereas in Israel funds were given to political
parties during the election period.  In New Zealand and South Africa funds were given to the parties at the end of every financial
year.  He further stated that anonymous contributions were prohibited by most of the countries.  While Germany laid down a limit
beyond which donations were prohibited if the donor could not be identified and further the donations exceeding the specified
limit were to be reported, in USA all contributions were to be recorded but donations exceeding the specified limits must be
disclosed.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
6.2       On the issue of tax deductibility of donations he said that while Australia, Canada and Germany gave tax benefits, in
England such recommendation of the Committee on Standards in Public Life was rejected by the Government.
 
6.3       Dwelling upon the Bill, the Secretary  mentioned that it  mainly involved amendments to  the Representation of the People
Act, 1951, the Income Tax Act, 1961 and some incidental or consequential changes in the Companies Act, 1956.
 
6.4       Regarding the proposed amendments to the Representation of the People Act, 1951 he mentioned that the companies other
than the Government companies would be permitted to make donations, subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. 
The political party should not be eligible to accept any donation from a foreign source and the treasurer of a political party shall
prepare a report of donations received from a person or a corporation in the prescribed form every financial year and to provide
details of expenditure incurred by a political party out of such donations and if a party failed to submit report to the Election
Commission, it would not be entitled to the income-tax relief.   An auditor approved by the C&AG would audit the report of the
political parties, and the accounts with an audit report would be forwarded to the Central Government and laid before both Houses
of Parliament.  There would be equitable sharing of time on cable TV network etc., and a statutory code of conduct for cable
operators and electronic media would be formulated.
 
6.5       Referring to the cases of G.Y. Kankarao vs. E.V. alias Balasaheb Vikhe Patil and C. Narayanswamy vs. C.K. Jafer Sharief
, the Secretary  said that Explanation 1 to Section 77 of the R.P. Act, 1951, and Explanation 3 under Section 77 and proviso to
Section 123 of the Act were proposed to be deleted.   He further pointed out the proposed addition in Explanation 3 to provide that
expenditure on general party campaign  incurred by the leaders of the political parties shall not be deemed to be an expenditure in
connection with the election of a candidate.
 
6.6       The Secretary explained that the amendments proposed in the Income Tax Act, 1961 included amendment of Section 13A
to increase the limit of voluntary contribution to a political party from Rs. 10000 to Rs 20000.  A proviso was proposed to be
added to the effect that if the treasurer of the political party failed to submit a report regarding declaration of donations to the
Election Commission as it provided income-tax relief to Indian Company or any other assessee who made contribution to a
political party, the said exemption would not apply.
 
7.0       The Chairman then put a query on Income Tax concessions and wanted to know  as to how the Government was going to
respond to the recommendations of  Indrajit Gupta Committee on donations to political parties.  He also enquired about  the  latest
position with regard to direct funding by Government. 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
7.1       A Member said that the Bill talked about laying of the audit report of political parties on the Tables of the Houses of
Parliament.  He felt that political parties should not be required to furnish accounts to the Central Government but it might do it to
an independent body i.e. Election Commission.  He was of the view that CAG should not come in the way of accounts of political
parties; rather it should be a certified Chartered Accountant who should be competent to audit the accounts of political parties.
 
7.2       A Member viewed that this Bill intruded  into the affairs of political parties.  He drew the attention of the Secretary  to 
sub-sections (1) and (2) of proposed Section 29C of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which would require the treasurer
of a political party to file statements of accounts and felt that  to some extent the section was impracticable.  He also found fault in
proposed Section 29D relating to expenditure on general party campaign and wanted to know the meaning of the
words/expressions ‘otherwise’ and ‘leaders of the political party’ in the said section.
 
7.3       A Member wanted a provision to be included in the Bill  regarding compulsion on the voters to vote so that bogus voting
could be stopped.  He also wanted expeditious supply of  voters identity cards.  Another Member strongly opposed the provision
of rebate in income tax to the donations to political parties.  Another felt that in depth analysis of the Bill must be done by the
Committee. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew.)
 
8.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
9.         The Committee adjourned at 12.25 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 17 July 2002. 
 
____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
XXXVI
THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 11 September  2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,  Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ― Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sang Priya Gautam
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
 
            LOK SABHA
 
9.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
10.       Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
11.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
12.       Shri Manabendra Shah
13.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
14.       Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
15.       Shri K. Karunakaran
16.       Shri M.O.H Farooq
17.       Shri Ramji Lal Suman
18.       Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
19.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
20.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
21.       Shri Holkhomang Haokip

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
22.       Dr. Jayant Rongpi
23.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
24.       Shri Suresh Chandel
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
            Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
 
1.
                  Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2.                  Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.         Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
 
 
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
 
            Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
 
            Representatives of Ministry of Finance
 
            1.         Shri A.J. Majumdar, Joint Secretary
            2.         Shri S.K. Choudhari, Director, CBDT
 
2.0       The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee to hold general discussion on the Election and
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002.  He recapitulated the discussion held on 5 July  2002 on the proposed legislation,
which mainly covered  the background of the Bill as well as the provisions on which comments had already been submitted.
 
2.1       He then highlighted the points made by Members such as the situation when a political party did not have a ‘Treasurer’,
the upper limit of Rs.10, 000 to maintain the records according to proposed section 29 D in the Representation of People Act,
1951; the need for submitting of records by political parties to Government.
 
3.0       At this stage the Chairman welcomed a new Member to the Committee and mentioned to him that he would find the
functioning of the Committee very interesting.  He then invited the Members to express their comments.
 
3.1       A Member referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, i.e. to bring in transparency in the funding of
political parties and to bring in discipline, felt that with this piecemeal reform the objective would not be achieved.  He also
expressed concern over the unanimous opposition of all parties to the Election Commission’s guidelines about declaration of
candidate’s background.  However, he observed that somehow a beginning was being made through this Bill, which should be
welcomed.
 
3.2       Another Member, while expressing concern over the growing role of money power and muscle power in the elections,
believed that the present Bill was a beginning in electoral reforms.  He expressed his concern over the cumbersome process of
reporting to the Government.  Speaking on the time-sharing on electronic media, he opined that all recognised national parties
should be given equal time on the television.  On the proposed provision in the Bill which provides for free copies of electoral
rolls and identity slips to candidates/electors, he felt that it should be welcomed as something was coming in the form of state
funding through this Bill.  About probity in public life he felt that Parliament would have to debate the issue.  However, he felt
that this Bill should be cleared.
 
4.         The Chairman concluded the discussion by emphasizing upon Parliament’s responsibility to cleanse public life and for that
matter to encourage the legislative measure, although a piecemeal one.  He   pointed out the areas where clarifications were
required such as the auditing of income and expenditure and that the process should be made simple.  Regarding the disclosure of
information about the candidates background he felt that practically it would not serve its objective.  On the present Bill he
suggested that the Committee might clear the Bill with the certain amendments.
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
5.         The Secretary, thanking the Chairman and the Members for their suggestions, agreed to redraft the provision to include
other functionaries alongwith the treasurer for maintaining accounts of the party.  Further on the suggestion of the Chairman that
there should be a limit on the donation above which the details of donors be maintained, he stated that the Government would
consider it sympathetically.  He also mentioned about proposed Section 29 C on declaration of donation received by the political
parties and clarified that the report was to be submitted to the Election Commission and not to the Central Government.  Hence
the Central Government would have no control over the political parties.  Clarifying the need for audit by a Chartered Accountant
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General, the Secretary said that it was because of the tax exemption and transparency.
However, he welcomed constructive suggestions on the point from the Committee.
 
6.         Another Member while drawing parallel between the political parties with the private trusts whose accounts were not
audited by Comptroller and Auditor General certified Chartered Accountants, stated that even those trusts got the tax exemption. 
He desired that accounts of political parties should be audited by Chartered Accountant.
 
7.         The Chairman directed the Secretary to work out the formulation in consultation with the Secretariat, for amendments in
the relevant clauses, in the light of suggestions made by members.
 
(The witnesses then withdrew.)
 
8.         The Committee adjourned at 12.05 P.M.
 
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 8 October 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee― Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Kapil Sibal
3.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.         Shri Kalraj Mishra
6.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9.         Shri Swaraj Kaushal
 
            LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
11.       Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
12.       Shri Anadi Sahu
13.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
14.       Shri Vinay Katiyar
15.       Shri Manabendra Shah
16.       Begum Noor Bano
17.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
18.       Shri Subodh Ray
19.       Shri Adhi Sankar
20.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
21.       Shri Holkhomang Haokip
22.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
23.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
24.       Shri Suresh Chandel
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of  Law  and Justice 
 
1.         Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2.         Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.
            Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
 
 
Representative  of Department of Legal Affairs,  Ministry of  Law  and Justice 
 
            Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
 
            Representative  of Ministry of Finance
           
                        Shri S.K. Choudhari, Director, CBDT
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
3.0       The Committee then took up further consideration of the Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002.  The
Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministries of Law and Justice and Finance.
 
3.1       The Chairman recapitulated the discussion held in the previous sittings of the Committee on the Bill.  He sought
clarifications on certain points on which the Ministry had not responded earlier.   He also flagged the important areas on which
Members had made their observations.
 
3.2       To begin with, the Chairman raised issues which included inter-alia how a political party could maintain the records of all
the small donors which list would be too long, there should be a ceiling on such donations below which the submission of reports
by the political parties would not be necessary; how a political party could ascertain the eligibility of a person or company to
donate as provided in sub-section (2) of the proposed Section 29C of R.P. Act, 1951; intrusion into the affairs of the political
parties as provided by sub-sec (2) of the proposed Section 29 D through the power of auditor to inspect any document and
premises of political parties at any point of time. The Chairman also raised the point as to why Chartered Accountants auditing the
accounts of political parties need to be approved by the CAG whereas those auditing accounts of trusts need not be approved by
it.  He desired that the term ‘otherwise’ in relation to expenditure on general party campaign in Explanation (b) to the proposed
Section 29 D(3) of the R.P. Act, 1951 should be clearly defined.  Thereafter, he requested other Members to express their views
on the Bill.
 
4.0       A Member wanted to know the need for an enabling provision in proposed Section 29B while donations could be regulated
under the existing provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 1976 and the Companies Act;
1956 He opined that it was impossible to give the certificates of eligibility of the donors and maintain list of all donors. 
Furthermore, segregation of income of political party from donation and expenditure therefrom
 
_____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
would be cumbersome as the income  of political parties came from various sources including donations and deposited in a
consolidated account of the party and expenditure incurred therefrom.
 
4.1       Other Members were of the view that the proposed amendment in Section 29C i.e. the qualification to the expression 
“treasurer” by the words “or any other person authorised” was not required as Section 29A of the R.P. Act, 1951 clearly
mentioned about the party functionaries and proposed Sections 29B to 29D should be read in conjuction with the existing
provision.
 
4.2       Many Members objected to the idea of piecemeal reforms and wanted that the Government may come out with a

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
comprehensive electoral reforms Bill rather than these piecemeal reforms.  A large number of members felt that this Bill if passed
in its current form would open the floodgates of litigation and would complicate the matters and make it difficult for political
parties to function. They also felt that even the companies would hesitate in donating to political parties in this kind of
arrangement. 
 
4.3       Some Members raised the point as to how only donations could be audited and not the other form of income of the party;
what the expression ‘leader’ meant for the purposes of Explanation (b) to Section 29D(3). Other points raised included the query
about the date from which the expenditure on general party campaign and constituency campaign would be segregated.
 
5.         The Secretary, Legislative Department responded to some of the queries.  He stated that any suggestion/amendment by the
Committee would be duly considered in the Ministry.
 
6.         At this stage the Chairman enquired from the Secretary the objective which Government sought to achieve through the
Bill.  He added that instead of helping the political parties the Bill would make matters difficult for them.  He urged upon the
Secretary to have a second look at the provisions of the Bill with a view to make the scheme of the law simple and
uncomplicated.  He further felt that expenditure on security and general party campaign should be segregated by devising some
methodology.   Winding-up the discussion the Chairman asked the representatives of the Ministry and the Secretariat to work out
alternative formulations in the light of the views, observations and objections made/raised in the Committee.
 
7.         The Committee deferred clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill to a later date.
 
8.         The Committee adjourned at 4.47    P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M   on   Wednesday   the 9 October 2002.
 
 
XL
FORTIETH   MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 13 November 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee― Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
4.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
5.         Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6.         Shri Swaraj Kaushal
7.         Shri Lalu Prasad
8.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
9.         Smt. Ambika Soni
 
            LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
11.       Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
12.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
13.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.       Shri Subodh Ray
15.       Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
16.       Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
17.       Shri Adhi Sankar
18.       Shri P.H. Pandian
19.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
20.       Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
21.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
22.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
23.       Shri Suresh Chandel
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
           
 
            WITNESSES  
 
            Representatives of  Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
 
1.         Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2.
            Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.            Dr. S.D. Singh, Dy. Legislative Counsel
 
Representative  of  Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)
 
                        Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
 
            Representatives of Ministry of Finance
 
1.
                  Shri A.J. Majumdar, Joint Secretary, CBDT
2.                  Shri S.K. Chowdhury, Director, CBDT
 
2.0       At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Legislative Department, Department
of Legal Affairs and Ministry of Finance to the meeting of the Committee.
 
2.1       Thereafter, he briefly referred to those provisions of the Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment)  Bill, 2002, 
which were objected to by the Members such as the treasurer to submit accounts of the party, maintenance of detailed accounts of 
donations received by political parties, submission of details of expenditure out of such donations, audit of accounts of donations,
etc.
 
2.2       The Chairman then stated that the Secretary had agreed to delete the entire Section 29 D dealing with audit of accounts as
it was not feasible to implement the same in practice, which was yet to be officially communicated to the Committee.  The
Chairman also wanted the Legislative Department  to ascertain the implications of the proposed deletion from the Income Tax
Department.
 
3.0       The Chairman then referred to the various piecemeal electoral reforms in the form of removing of residential qualification
for Rajya Sabha election, open voting etc. and viewed that this legislation may also be passed attempting to introduce some
reforms  till such time  the Government was able to pilot a comprehensive electoral reforms Bill. 
 
3.1       He then invited the Secretary, Legislative Department to make his observations on the proposed amendments to the Bill
for the benefit of the Members.
 
4.0       The Secretary, thanking the Committee for its guidance and help mentioned that major changes were sought to be
incorporated in the Bill on the suggestions of the Committee which would be submitted to the Government for its consideration.
 
4.1       He stated that the ceiling on donation for maintaining accounts had been raised to Rs.  20,000; an amendment had been
suggested by way of which Treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by that political party could also submit
the accounts of the political party; the proposed  section 29 D had been deleted on the assumption of duplication of work; the
names of leaders of national political parties could be communicated to the Election Commission in advance and regarding
equitable sharing of time on electronic media, changes were such that it would apply only to recognised political parties as had
been the extant practice.
 
5.0       Some Members objected to the provision of clause 3 regarding allocation of equitable sharing of time on the electronic
media.  They contended that while these facilities were being made available to the national political parties and not  to the
regional parties, the regional parties at present were in real  terms national parties as they were contributing in formation of
Central Government.  They felt that all political parties should have equal opportunities on national television channel to
propagate its  ideas and  manifestos. 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
5.1       While some Members felt that there should be equal opportunities to all political parties, whether national or regional, 
whereas some of them felt that time sharing on electronic media may be made available on  proportionate  basis.
 
5.2       The Chairman and a Member then clarified the criteria for determination of a national party and a regional party on the
basis of the Election Symbols (Reservation & Allotment) Order, 2000.  It was clarified that the level playing field idea for sharing
electronic media by all political parties was out of tune with the principles governing India’s parliamentary democracy.
 
5.3       Some Members were of the view that by accepting donations from companies the people’s representatives  would become
spokespersons  of corporate houses and not of the common people.  One Member recalled the pre-1969 position when levelling of
corruption charges against politicians was rare and felt that this Bill should be outrightly rejected.  Some Members felt that this
Bill would legalise donations by the corporate sector which would not be a right proposition.
 
6.         The Chairman clarified the issue of donations from corporate sector to the political parties, stating that this was not a new
provision.  Only the new thing in the Bill was that donation may be exempted from income tax for which  a record would be kept
by  the Political party as this would bring transparency.
 
7.0       A Member felt strongly that every politicians knew that in elections money was indispensable and it could come either
from corporate funding or State funding.  The latter being absent, the only way left was corporate funding.  That Member also
wondered as to how a political party could mortgage its political will by receiving donation from companies.  The Member
suggested that there was no harm in the present Bill, which only sought to bring transparency.
 
7.1       A Member dwelling upon the subject viewed that after recommendations of Committees like Dinesh Goswami and
Indrajit  Gupta at least some positive proposal had come from the Government which the political parties should grab.  He further
explained that the new thing in the Bill provided for limited state funding in the form of free supply of certain material to
candidates of recognised political parties.  He suggested that the Committee should apply its mind to the provisions in the Bill
rather than the philosophy thereof.
 
7.2       Another  Member felt that the dichotomy was of the ideal and the real.  He opined that when the political parties were
getting corporate donations clandestinely there was no harm in bringing transparency.  The reason being that we experimented
earlier by banning the corporate funding but it could not help.   He gave the example of Britain where the candidate spending
more gets defeated in the election and the need here too was to bring transparency. He felt that there was greater hegemonial
possibility in clandestine operations.  On the matter of equality in time-sharing he cited the view of the Supreme Court that
unequals could not be treated as equals and equals could not be treated unequally.
 
7.3       Another Member supporting the Bill stated that since a comprehensive reform  could not be brought at least piecemeal
ones  should be expedited.   He also requested for bringing American system  of  sharing of common platform by candidates.
Although a foolproof system needed to be brought forth in the changing circumstances, however, at present the Bill should not be
stopped.
 
8.         The Chairman observed that every member was entitled to his/her own perception of the subject matter and there was no
point in convincing each other with the respective points of view.  However, he felt that the system  which was already in
existence for the last more than 50 years would continue and things like a  level playing field,  equal rights etc. had absolutely no
meaning in a parliamentary democracy  like ours  where 51  was equal to 100, and 49 equal to 0.  Further, he observed that the
Committee would have to meet again to deliberate further on the Bill during the session.
 
9.         On the query of a Member whether any figure was available about the  taxes paid or payable by the political parties, the
representative  of Ministry of Finance stated that Section 13 A of the Income Tax Act provided for the same, through which a
figure could be arrived at,  and the returns were being filed wherever the headquarters of the party were .
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
10.0     *                                                          *                                                          *
 
10.1     *                                                          *                                                          *
 
10.2     *                                                          *                                                          *
 
11.       The Chairman concluded the discussion by announcing that the Committee would further take up the matter in the sittings
to be held during the  session.
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
12.       The Committee adjourned at 12.55 P.M to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 27 November 2002.
 
___________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
XLI
FORTY-FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, 27 November 2002 in Committee Room No. 62, First  Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee― Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Kapil Sibal
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Shri Kalraj Mishra
5.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.         Shri Swaraj Kaushal
9.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
10.       Smt. Ambika Soni
 
            LOK SABHA
 
11.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12.       Shri Subodh Ray
13.       Dr. Bikram Sarkar
14.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
15.       Shri P. H. Pandian
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
 
            WITNESSES  
 
            Representatives of  Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
 
1.         Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2.          Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.
                  Dr. S.D. Singh, Dy. Legislative Counsel
 
Representative  of  Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)
 
                        Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
 
2.0       The Chairman while welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice briefly touched upon the points
raised in the previous meetings on the deficiencies  and infirmities  in  the Election and other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2002.  Thereafter, he mentioned that the Bill had undergone a number of changes in phases due to the infirmities/ deficiencies 
pointed out by the Committee and the Bill  as amended  had been circulated.

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
 
2.1       The Chairman then mentioned that the latest amendment to the Bill was in  proposed Section 78-B in Clause 5  regarding
free supply of identity slips of  electors and other items  during an election.  The Chairman apprised the Committee that the
proposed amendment envisaged that the Election Commission shall supply such items, as the Central Govt. may determine in
consultation with the Election Commission, to electors or to the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.
 
3.0       Some Members strongly suggested that instead of distributing identity slips to the candidates, identity slips may be
distributed to the electors by the Government machinery which would result in saving of huge printing and distribution costs and
that it would do a great service to democracy. It would also help in checking bogus voting.
 
3.1       However, an overwhelming majority of the Members felt that the provision of distributing identity slips to the electors,
would be an ideal situation but not a pragmatic and practicable one as it would put enormous responsibility and pressure on the
administrative machinery at huge cost to the public exchequer.  They also viewed that expenditure on the distribution of identity
slips by the Government might be more than the printing cost of   identity slips of electors, which was then being done by the
political parties themselves at their own expenditure and for their own benefits.  It was also observed that there would be more
scope of complaint against the administration in the event of non-delivery of such identity slips to electors.  Moreover, the
candidates developed contact with the electors through the existing process which was necessary to check bogus voting as the
representatives of political parties remained present at the time of polling.  The Committee overwhelmingly was of the view that
the present practice of distribution of identity slips by the candidates to the electors may continue.
 
3.2       The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.  Clauses 2,3,4,5,7, 9,10 and 11 were adopted as
amended, clause 6 was deleted as it became redundant due to other amendments and clause 8 was adopted without any change. 
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title Were adopted without any change.
 
4.         The Chairman then directed the Secretariat to prepare the draft Report reflecting the viewpoints of the Members and that
the Committee would meet during mid- December to adopt the same.  He requested the Members to send their written comments,
if any, for incorporation in the Report.
           
5.         The Committee adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
 
XLII
FORTY-SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 16 December 2002 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee  ―  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6.         Shri Drupad Borgohain
7.         Shri Moti Lal Vora
 
            LOK SABHA
 
8.         Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
9.         Shri Anadi Sahu
10.       Shri Manabendra Shah
11.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12.       Shri Subodh Ray
13.       Shri P. H. Pandian
14.       Shri E. Ponnuswamy
15.       Shri Suresh Chandel
 
 

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
            Shri Ashok Kumar  Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                         *                                                          *
3.0       The Chairman then placed before the Committee, the draft Ninety-seventh Report on the Election and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2002, for its consideration and invited suggestions from Members.
 
3.1       A Member put forth his viewpoint on the issue of ban on corporate donations to political parties which according to him
had not been reflected adequately in para 3.9.1 of the Report and suggested an alternative formulation in that regard.
_____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
3.2
              The Committee accepted the suggestion of the Member and adopted the report as slightly modified.
 
3.3
              The Committee decided to present/lay the Report along with evidence tendered before it on the Bill in both the Houses on
18 December 2002.
 
3.4              The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri H. R. Bhardwaj and Shri Sangh Priya Gautam to present 
the Report/Evidence  in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anadi Sahu and in his absence Shri Subodh Ray to lay the Report/Evidence in
the Lok Sabha.
 
4.0       *                                                          *                                                          *
4.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
4.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
4.3       The Chairman once again placed on record the whole hearted cooperation of the Members in the deliberations of the
Committee as well as the excellent work done by the Secretariat during the year in servicing the Committee. He bade farewell to
all the Members with the hope that most of the Members would be renominated to the  new Committee.  He also appreciated the
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice for extending its assistance especially in the examination of  the
Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002.
 
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
6.         The Committee then adjourned at  4.00  P.M.
 
___________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
a Nominated  w.e.f. 25 February , 2002.
b Nominated w.e.f. 19 April, 2002.
#  Nominated w.e.f. 2 September, 2002.
 
 
(ii)
· Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 2, dated 19 March, 2002.
¨¨ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 39802, dated 28 May, 2002.
 
(iii)
[1] Italy, Spain, Austria , Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and USA (Presidential election only).
 
[2] The need  for  State funding of  election was for the first time emphasised  by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Amendments to the Election Laws  way back in 1972.  Subsequently,
in 1978 a non-official Committee on Election Expenses appointed by Citizens For Democracy (popularly known as Tarkunde Committee) suggested the forms of financial assistance to be
given to the candidates out of public revenues.  The Committee on Electoral Reforms under the Chairmanship of Late Shri Dinesh Goswami  (1990) recommended state funding of elections
in kind to the candidates of recognised party.  The   Law    Commission   in    its One Hundred Seventieth Report on the Election Laws (1999) recommended partial state funding as a first

97th Report of  Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/97threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:56:47]
step towards total State funding.  The Committee on State Funding of Elections headed by Late Shri Indrajit Gupta had recommended for partial state assistance in kind in terms of certain
facilities to the recognised political parties as a first step and later on shifting total burden to the State for which a creation of a Corpus Fund – Election Fund was suggested on the basis of a
formula (Contribution of an amount @ Rs.10/- per elector by the Centre annually and annual matching contribution by the States/UTs to the Election Fund, which was estimated at that time
to be Rs.12,000 crore (Rs. 600 crore @ Rs.10/- per elector by the Centre  + Rs.600 crore from all States/UTs).
 
[3] Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu and Union Territory of Pondicherry have opposed state funding of election; most of the other States desired that the
entire funding of election might be done by the Central Government and some other States expressed doubt over the efficacy in controlling menace of money power in election.
 
4
 Political parties are classified into recognised and unrecognised on the basis  of  their  performance in election to the House of the People/Legislative Assemblies of the States.  A
recognised political party shall either be a National or State party.  The concept of recognised political party exists since 1952 but its definition has changed from time to time. The   amended
definition as it exists today is enumerated in Paragraph 6 of  the Election Symbols (Reservation & Allotment) Order, 1968.
                6A.  Conditions for recognition as a National Party – A political party shall be treated as a recognised National Party, if only it, -
                either (A) (i) the candidates set up by it, in any four or more States , at the last general election to the House of the People, or the  Legislative Assembly of the  State  concerned,
have secured not less than six per cent of the total valid votes polled in their respective States at that general election; and (ii) in addition,  it has returned at least four members to the House
of the People at the aforesaid last general election from any State or States.
                or (B) (i) its candidates have been elected to the House of the People, at the last general election to that House, from at least two per cent of the total number of parliamentary 
constituencies in India, any fraction exceeding one-half being  counted as one; and (ii) the said candidates have been elected to that House from not less than three States.
 
6B Conditions for recognition as a State party -  A political party, other than a National Party, shall be treated as a  recognised State Party in  a State or States, if and only if-
either (A) (i) the candidates  set up by it, at the last general election to the House of the People, or to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned, have  secured not less than six per cent
of the total valid votes polled in that State at that general election; and (ii) in addition, it has returned at least two members to the Legislative Assembly of the  State at the last general
election to that Assembly;
 
or (B) it wins at least three per cent of the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State, (any fraction exceeding one-half being counted as one), or at least three seats in the
Assembly, whichever is more, at the aforesaid general election.
 
5 Clause 5 of the Bill.
6
 Sections 13 D and 15 of Representation of the People Act, 1950.
 
7
 Corporate donations exist since the enactment of the Companies Act, 1956  {Section 293(1)(e)} although specific mention   of company donation for any political party came into force
through insertion of Section 293A to the Act in 1960, according to which a company can contribute an amount not exceeding Rupees 25,000/- or 5% of its average net profits (taking three
immediately preceding financial years) whichever is greater.  Political donations by companies was totally prohibited and made punishable from 1969 to 1985.
 
8
 Insertion of section 29 D to Representation of the People Act, 1951 through clause 2 of the Bill.
 
9
 The Bill as introduced proposes to insert new sections 88D and 88E to give tax relief in relation to donations given to political parties by the companies/individuals .  The Legislative
Department suo motto in consultation with Ministry of Finance replaced proposed sections 88D and 88E with sections 80GGB & 80GGC in the same clause to give deduction of donations
given by company/individual while computing of total income of donors.
 
10
 Insertion Sections 29 C & 29 D in the Representation  of  the People Act, 1951 vide clause 2 of the Bill.
11 Recording and reporting of donation beyond certain limit exists in the USA & Germany.
12 Section 29 A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
 
13 Amendment of Section 13 A of Income Tax Act, 1961 to increase ceiling to Rs. 20,000/- from Rs.10, 000/- vide clause 9.
14 As per  the recommendations of  late Shri Indrajit Gupta Committee  Report on Electoral Reforms, each political party  has to maintain account and  get it audited annually , which is
being done now  a days under  the provision of Section 13 A of  Income Tax Act, 1961.  The said Section stipulates that the political parties should attach all particular of voluntary
contribution of more than Rs.10, 000 to the accounts of the political parties.
The Supreme Court in its judgement dated April 4, 1996 on the Civil Writ Petition between Common Cause vs. Union of India has also emphasised  that  every political party must file 
return of its income in respect of each assessment year in compliance with the provision of  Income Tax Act, 1961.
15
 The amendment was effected in purusance of the Supreme Court judgement in the case of Kanwar Lal Gupta vs. Amar Nath Chawla and others .The Supreme Court in other judgements
{Gadakh Yashwantrao Kankarrao vs. E.V. alias Balasaheb Vikhe Patil and others (Civil Appeals Nos. .2115,2116,2444 and 1758 of 1993) and {Narayanswamy vs. C.K. Jaffer Sharief and
others (Civil Appeals Nos. 2543, 7194 of 1993)} has declared the provision nugatory and redundant as the amendment rule could not put practical check on election expenses for which it
was intended.
 