PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 131
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF THE MINISTRY
OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16 TH ARPIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-253

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER -I R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE G OVERNMENT ....................................................... 2—4
CHAPTER -II R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE C OMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES ...................................................................... 5—6
CHAPTER -III R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT  OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE G OVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE C OMMITTEE OR C OMMITTEE DESIRES TO MAKE
FURTHER R ECOMMENDATION ................................................................. 7—12
CHAPTER -IV R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT  OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE G OVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN RECEIVED ..................................................................................... 13—14
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 15—16
5. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 17—20

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Vacant
3. Vacant
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Vacant
8. Vacant
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri IIyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Vacant
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 vice  Shri T.K. Hamza who is nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty First Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty Seventh Report on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region.
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 8 May, 2007.
3. The Ministry of DoNER furnished the Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and
Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee. The Minister for Development of North Eastern Region
laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha the status of implementation of the recommendations contained
in the said Report of the Committee, in pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated
24th September, 2004, like the previous year, the Committee is again constrained to observe
that both these documents are identical, word-by-word. If the statement of the Minister laid
after nearly four months of the Action Taken Replies sent by the Ministry to the
Secretariat, is a mere reproduction of the ATR, it would defeat the spirit underlying the
Chairman’s Direction.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
11th April, 2008.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
11th April, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and
Twenty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs on Demands for Grants (2007-08). The Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 8 May, 2007.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government: Paras: 12.8, 18.3, 20.1, 23.2, 24.2, 25.1;
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendation as
mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: – Para: 13.3, 13.4, 16.1;
In respect of this recommendation the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanation advanced by the Ministry and, therefore, does not want to pursue it further.
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted the replies of the Ministry: Paras: 12.7, 14.6, 15.4, 19.6, 21.4, 22.6,
22.7; 27.1
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect
of these recommendations.
Chapter–IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government have not been received: 14.5, 17.3, 24.1, 26.5
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter–IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendations categorized in
Chapter–IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the
Committee.
3. The details of the ATR have been discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER–I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
RECOMMENDATION
1.1 SURRENDER OF LARGE SUM OF MONEY
1.1.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the surrender of large sums of money by
different Ministries, which ultimately go into NLCPR. Even the Ministries of social sector
are also not able to spend 10 per cent of their budget in the Region. If the national norms
for any particular programme are found to be unsuitable for the North-Eastern Region, the
Ministry concerned should relax the norms according to the conditions of the North-Eastern
States so that the allocation made is spent in the year in which it was allocated.
(Para 12.8)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Ministries which are surrendering large sums of money have been requested to revise
the norms according to the conditions of North Eastern States so that they are able to utilize the
money allocated in the year of allocation.
RECOMMENDATION
1.2 PROMOTION OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
1.2.1 The Committee feels that the NE region has an excellent untapped tourist potential.
If the potential is fully tapped with sufficient infrastructure, there would be all sided
development of the region including a large number of employment opportunities. The
Committee is happy to note that several private parties are showing interest in the hotel
and tourism sector in North-East. However, there is a long way to go and a lot of investment
is required to develop tourist infrastructure in the NER to make it one of the best tourist
attractions not just of the country but of the world as well. The Committee desires that a
long-term plan and a roadmap may be prepared for creation of tourism infrastructure on
a fast track basis.
(Para 18.3)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The Ministry organized a Special Sectoral Meeting of the North Eastern Council on Tourism
and Hospitality Sector in Gangtok. A number of recommendations were made at the Summit and
the Ministry has initiated follow up action on the recommendations. These include creating
awareness among tourists about the North-East as a safe and attractive destination. The Ministry
has also taken up the matter of relaxing movement of tourists in the North-East. The Ministry has
also taken up the matter with the Ministry of Tourism which has initiated consultation process to
formulate an action plan.
RECOMMENDATION
1.3 ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
1.3.1 The Committee is happy to note that funds had been released for Tawang Ropeway
2

3
in July, 2006 and construction has already started. The Committee recalls that the
foundation for the Ropeway was laid by the President of India way back in 2002. Since there
was no progress in the work, the Committee in its 120th Report of Demands for Grants
(2006-07) expressed its dismay over the extraordinary delay in the matter. Now that the
funds have been released and work has already commenced, the Committee urges upon the
Ministry to ensure that the work is finished as per the target fixed.
(Para 20.1)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The State Government is implementing the projects. Funds have been released and they
have been requested to implement in a time bound manner as per the fixed target.
RECOMMENDATION
1.4 MEDICINAL PLANTS
1.4.1 The Committee is happy to note that emphasis is being given on utilizing the potential of
medicinal plants in the country by the National Medicinal Plants Board. Out of the total allocation
of Rs.80 crore for current financial year, 10 per cent will be spent on NER and similarly about
Rs.100 crore would be available in Eleventh Plan. The Committee recommends that the fund
proposed to be earmarked for the purpose be utilized fully in the region. Appropriate plans may be
drawn for better utilization of the funds. The Committee feels that more positive initiatives need
to be taken to develop the sector in the naturally rich North-East Region.
(Para 23.2)
Action Taken
1.4.2 According to the National Medicinal Plant Board (NMPB), they are making a special effort
to implement the programmes so as to utilize 10% of their budget for the development of medicinal
plant in the North-East. The proposed measures include strengthening of State Medicinal Plant
Boards and preparation of a road map for each State.
RECOMMENDATION
1.5 VISION 2020: Educational Institution
1.5.1 The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation for including the
establishment of national leveI sports schools and institutes like National Institute of
Fashion Technology in the region in Vision 2020. Similarly, it also recommends that Road
and Power sectors should form an important part of the document.
(Para 24.2)
Action Taken
1.5.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the NIPFP to keep the same
in view while preparing the Vision NER-2020 document.
RECOMMENDATION
1.6 HEALTH SYSTEM
1.6.1 Considering the different demography, topography and the needs of the region,
national norms of MCI for setting up medical colleges cannot be applied there. The
Committee feels that the norms should not come in the way of providing health
infrastructure in the NE Region. The Committee recommends that the norms may be

4
revised for NER. Steps may also be taken to start medical colleges in every State as
recommended by the Committee earlier.
(Para 25.1)
Action Taken
1.6.2 According to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, following decisions have been
taken to facilitate setting up of new medical colleges in the Region:
(i) In the past new medical colleges in the country were permitted to utilize the facilities of
other Government/district hospitals for a period of three years from the date of grant of permission
by the Central Government for their establishment, mainly for utilizalion of ciinical material for
teaching purpose. It was stipulated therein that beds of these Government hospitals should be under
the total administrative control of the concerned college and the hospital should be situated within
5 kms. from the medical college. In view of the difficulties being experienced by medical colleges
located in north-eastern, hilly and tribal areas, it has now been decided that the new medical
colleges may be permitted to utilize the facilities of other Government/district hospitals for clinical
material for teaching purpose upto ten years from the date of permission for establishment of
college subject to the condition that beds of these Govt. owned hospitals must be clearly earmarked
for utilization by teaching faculty and further that the academic and clinical control of the patients
must be with the teaching faculty of the medical colleges and the hospital is situated within a
maximum distance of 10 km. from the medical college. The college authorities are, however,
required to ensure that the infrastructure and other facilities in district/Government hospitals being
so utilized are developed as per MCI Regulations.
(ii) The second issue relates to deficiency in faculty of private medical colleges. The Medical
Council of India has allowed a maximum upto 5% deficiency in faculty as condonable because
delay takes place in filling up of the vacancies and some times suitable candidates are not available.
Also the Council has been allowing renewal/recognition of Government Colleges with 10 per cent
faculty deficiency, if the State Government gives assurance/commitment to fill up vacant faculty
positions within a given time. In case of medical colleges established in North Eastern States, hilly
and tribal areas, which are unable to draw maximum number of faculty because of various
conditions, it has been decided that the MCI may hereafter condone 15 per cent deficiency of
faculty at the time of recognition of the institution with the stipulation that the institution would
fill up vacant faculty positions within a given period of three more years and make itself self-
sufficient in every respect.
(iii) The third issue is that indoor bed occupancy in hospitals attached to medical colleges in
North Eastern States, hilly and tribal areas is not upto the stipulated percentage of 80 per cent as
is required as per MCI norms. Considering the hilly and difficult terrain and sparse population in
those areas, MCI may even allow and consider 65 per cent bed occupancy in hospitals attached
to the private medical college in such areas and to encourage private-public partnership while
considering recognition of colleges located in these areas.

5
CHAPTER–II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
RECOMMENDATION
2.1 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL
2.1.1 The Committee wishes to recall its recommendation made in its One Hundred
Twentieth Report wherein it had expressed its concern that Tenth Plan outlay for NEC had
not been adhered to till 2006-07 which was the terminal year for the Tenth Plan. The
Committee is now informed that the actual allocation to NEC during Tenth Plan has been
Rs.2511.50 crore against Rs.3500 crore. The Committee while reiterating its earlier
recommendation feels that NEC is entitled to an additional allocation of Rs.988.50 crore
during Eleventh Plan as carryover of un allocated outlay from Tenth Plan.
(Para 13.3)
Action Taken
2.1.2 While presenting the demands for allocation for the NEC for Eleventh Five Year Plan, all
the remaining works of the Tenth Plan have been taken into account for adequate allocation in the
Eleventh Plan period.
RECOMMENDATION
2.1 PLAN SCHEME OF NEC
2.2.1 The Committee expresses its concern that though NEC is in a position to absorb the
funds, the Plan schemes of NEC are languishing due to lack of it. The Committee is
surprised to note that there is a committed liability of about Rs.1277 crore for various on
going projects/schemes. With the present allocation, the projects will take a very long time
for completion. In addition, there will be escalation of costs year after year. The better
solution for this could be to transfer funds from NLCPR for the projects of NEC. The funds
that had accrued for a particular sector in NLCPR may be transferred to the same sector
under any NEC projects. The Committee desires that a mechanism may be evolved for such
a transfer of funds to enable the early completion of the Plan projects under NEC. The
Committee also takes note of the fact that certain Plan schemes under NEC would be
transferred to other Ministries. The Committee desires that this may be done at the earliest
so that other Plan schemes may get sufficient funds during the current year.
(Para 13.4)
Action taken
2.2.2 Transfer of NLCPR funds to the projects of NEC is not possible as the committed liabilities
of projects taken up under NLCPR are also quite high and even more than the NEC projects. A
rationalization exercise for Plan schemes under NEC has already been carried out. Some of the
schemes which are adequately taken care of by the schemes of other Central Ministries have been
dropped for the purpose of NEC’s budget allocation. Simultaneously, some of the regional
institutions that were being funded from the Plan Budget of NEC have been transferred to the
concerned line Ministries.
5

6
RECOMMENDATION
2.3 NERAMAC
2.3.1 The Committee was informed that the allocation of Rs.2 crore as loan to NERAMAC
was received at RE 2006-07 stage and this year also the Ministry is hopeful to get the same
at RE stage. The Committee does not appreciate this ad-hoc  approach to such an
organisation like NERAMAC which has one fruit processing unit for the whole of North
East. The Committee also recommends that necessary steps may be taken to strengthen the
organisation. More units of this organisation may be started in various other States in
North-East.
(Para 16.1)
Action Taken
2.3.2 The proposal for loan component for NERAMAC for the 2007-08 has already been sent to
the Integrated Finance Division for re-appropriation from some other provision in the budget of this
Ministry. NERAMAC already has two working units. The third unit for ginger processing has also
started to function in Meghalaya. Efforts are on to have a fourth unit in Assam for cashew
processing. However, more efforts are being made from the organization towards procurement of
farmers produce so as to benefit them directly.

7
CHAPTER–III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH EITHER THE
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY COMMITTEE
OR COMMITTEE DESIRES TO MAKE FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
RECOMMENDATION
3.1 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
3.1.1 The Committee is happy to note that this year, no allocation has been made out of
NLCPR funds, for Bodo Territorial Council and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Schemes, as
recommended by the Committee last year. The Committee is also happy to note that the
Ministry has reviewed the Exempted List of Ministries/Departments in respect of allocation
of 10 per cent of the budget allocation to North-Eastern States. However, the Committee
expresses its concern that even after the review, only the Department of Biotechnology has
been taken out of the List of Exempted Ministries. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation made in the 120th Report on Demands for Grants for 2006-07 that the
other Ministries also may be taken out from the List of Exempted Ministries/Departments.
(Para 12.7)
Action Taken
3.1.2 After a thorough review with the Ministries concerned, the exemption of Department of
Bio-Technology has been withdrawn and some of the Ministries which have some scope available
for expenditure in the North Eastern Region were asked to provide maximum possible percentage
of GBS for the North Eastern Region.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee reiterates its recommends that Government may consider the matter
again and take out some more Ministries from the list of exempted Ministries.
RECOMMENDATION
3.2 UNDUE DELAY IN PILOT AND AIRHOSTESS TRAINING
3.2.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the undue and uncalled for delay in pilot
and airhostess training. It is surprising to note that in the entire year the process of
identifying the institute for training could not be completed. The Committee takes strong
exception to such avoidable delays which also result in cost overrun. Tbe Committee
recommends that the process of identifying the institute may be completed within next
three months and the training may be conducted at the earliest.
(Para 14.6)
Action Taken
3.2.2 In order to expedite the process of selection of suitable institutes for training of pilots and
air hostesses, the Ministry constituted a Committee. The bidding process has been completed and
the proposals have been sent for financial concurrence.
7

8
Further Recommendation
3.2.3 The Committee expresses its disquiet over the continuing delay in identifying the
institute for pilot and airhostess training. The Committee recommends that the institutes
may be selected immediately so that training may start without further delay.
RECOMMENDATION
3.3 EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
3.3.1 The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in coming out with
several projects under the Externally Aided Projects scheme, reiterates its earlier
recommendation that the faster such schemes are processed the better it would be. The
Planning Commission may give ‘in principle’ approval for the North Eastern State Roads
Project early so that the remaining processes may be completed during the current financial
year and the project started. The Committee also strongly recommends that at least the
first phase of North Eastern Urban Development Project may be put in place during the
current financial year. The Committee cautions the Ministry about the user charges to be
recovered in six years. This aspect should be carefully considered before taking a final view.
The Committee is also of the view that the 10 per cent loan component, which has been
assigned to the State Governments to be raised on their own, should be re-examined in light
of the difficulties being faced by the North East States.
(Para 15.4 )
Action Taken
3.3.2 (a) For the North Eastern State Roads Project, ‘in-principle’ approval of the Planning
Commission has been received. The Planning Commission has stated that Ministry of DONER will
avail loan from ADB amounting to 70 per cent of the project cost while balance 30 per cent of
the project cost will be borne by the Government of India and the funds will be released to the
State Governments as 100 per cent grant treating it as Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The project
proposal is under process for EFC’s approval and then approval of the Cabinet/CCEA.
3.3.3 (b) The Ministry of DONER had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Urban
Development for transfer of North Eastern Urban Development Project (NEUDP) so as to avoid
duplication in the efforts of the two Ministries in the implementation of the instant ADB project
and the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) as there are lot of
commonalities between the two Ministry of Urban Development has since conveyed acceptance of
transfer of this project to their Ministry. The concerns of the Hon’ble Committee are being
conveyed to the MoUD.
Further Recommendation
3.3.4 The Committee apprehends that both the projects, viz. North Eastern Urban
Development Project (NEUDP) and Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) may be delayed in the process of approval and transfer. The Committee desires
that these projects should start without any further delay.
RECOMMENDATION
3.4 CIVIL A VIATION
3.4.1 The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry is of the opinion that civil
aviation should be declared a priority sector for NER. It also feels that the Government
should be more proactive in implementing its announcement for the region and sectors like

9
Civii Aviation should get priority and special impetus. The Committee’s considered view is
that a boost to civil aviation in the region and improving air connectivity within the region
as well as from the rest of tbe country is of paramount importance if the region has to be
brought to the mainstream. The Committee recommends that all the airports in the NER
may be upgraded at the earliest. The Committee is dismayed over the fact that Planning
Commission has yet not given the ‘in principle’ approval for ‘Teju’ airport, despite the
recommendation made by it in its 120th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Ministry of DoNER. The Committee is also of the view that the offer of the Ministry of
Defence for providing trained pilots on permanent absorption basis should be gladly accepted
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, if it is really serious about development of civil aviation
in the region and that Ministry should take early decisions on such important proposals.
They should also expedite the matter relating to technical assistance for the Pilot Training
Institute at Lilabari.
(Para 19.6)
Action Taken
3.4.2 Government has been making special efforts in Civil Aviation sector. A full Council Summit
of NEC was held to review schemes and programmes under this sector in Aizawl in the month
of May, 2007.
3.4.3 The Annual Plan 2007-08 of NEC has identified Connectivity, including air connectivity as
one of the priority sectors for North East. Intra region air connectivity as well as connectivity with
the rest of the country needs to be substantially augmented. In view of the same, efforts are
continuously being made to improve infrastructure and other facilities for better air connectivity in
the North Eastern Region. There are 12 operational airports in NER, at present. The NEC has
entered into a MoU with the AAI for funding upgradation of 10 airports in the ratio of 60:40. Work
on 7 airports has since been completed and is continuing at 3 airports. An amount of
Rs.50.00 crore has been earmarked for ongoing upgradation works of airports in NER in the
Annual Plan, during 2007-08. In addition to the upgradation of existing airports, upgradation of
non-operational airports is also proposed to be undertaken during Eleventh Plan. NEC has kept
provision in its Annual Plan for supporting DPR preparation and the Airports Authority of India has
been requested to prepare the DPRs for the upgradation of 5 non-operational airports at Kalashar
and Kamlapur in Tripura, Pasighat and Tezu in Arunachal Pradesh and Tura in Meghalaya.
3.4.5 The Planning Commission has granted “in principle” approval to the upgradation of airport
at Pasight on 8th November, 2006 and to the upgradation of airport at Tezu on 23.4.2007.
However, Planning Commission has directed that the project be implemented by the Airports
Authority of India (AAI) and be funded through a mix of internal accruals of AAI and Gross
Budgetary Support in the ratio of 1:1. This has been conveyed to the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and the NEC.
3.4.6 The Ministry of Defence have informed that IAF have a vast pool of trained pilots and
technical staff who could be spared for gainful utilization by Indian Airlines/Alliance Air only on
permanent absorption basis. This has been conveyed to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Response is
awaited.
Further Recommendation
3.4.7 The Committee reiterates its observation that inter and intra air connectivity of NER
would prove a sine qua non  for the all round development of North Eastern Region, be it
a tourist destiny or economic development or inducement investment. The Committee,
therefore, strongly, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should not confine itself

10
merely to forwarding the development projects from one Ministry to the other but, being
the territorial Ministry endowed with role and responsibility of developing the North-Eastern
Region, should play pro-active and result-oriented role in pursuing continuously so far as
the inception and implementation of the proposal/undertaken projects are concerned viz.
improvement of inter and intra region air services; setting up of Greenfield airports at
Kohima, Itanagar, Gangtok and for upgradation of airports of Pasight and Tezu in Arunachal
Pradesh, Baljek in West Garo Hills, Meghalaya and Kamalpur and Kailashar in Tripura.
These projects should be completed within the stipulated time frame and should not incur
time and cost overruns. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
should take adequate follow up action with the Ministry of Civil Aviation for harnessing the
vast pool of trained pilots and technical staff of IAF by inducting them on permanent
absorption basis.
RECOMMENDATION
3.5 PROMOTION OF INDUSTRIES
3.5.1 The Committee notes the contents of the North-East Industrial and Investment
Promotion Policy (NEIIPP), 2007 vis-a-vis NE Industrial Policy, 1997 and also the negative
list whereunder industries like Tobacco, Pan Masala, Plastic Carry bags of less than 20
microns and some specified goods produced by petroleum oil and gas refineries are not
eligible for benefits under NEIIPP, 2007. The Committee feels t hat the incentives and
subsidies mentioned in the new policy if implemented in the right earnest would go a long
way in giving a fillip to the tourism, hospitality and power sectors. The Committee is also
of the considered view that considering the region’s diversity, the Government should
ensure that the small scale and agro based industries get support in the new Industrial
Policy.
(Para 21.4)
Action Taken
3.5.2 Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (Government of India) as well as North
Eastern Development Finance Corporation (NEDFC) have been advised to ensure that the small
scale and agro-based industries get support under the new industrial policy.
Further Recommendation
3.5.3 The Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER should not ony pro-actively liase
and take follow-up initiatives/action with the Department of IPP, (Government of India) and
NEDFC (North Eastern Development Finance Corporation) but should also interact with the
Ministry of Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises for promoting micro, small and medium
enterprises in the NE region.
RECOMMENDATION
3.6 AGRICULTURE SECTOR
3.6.1 The Committee agrees that agriculture sector plays a predominant role in the North-
Eastern Region. There is a huge potential for increasing the revenue and the allied
industries in the North-Eastern Region by which employment opportunities can be increased
and there can be more income-generating activities. However, the investment being made
by NEC under agriculture and allied sector is only 1.74 per cent of the total Plan allocation
which is very meagre and it will not have any significant impact. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that allocation may be increased for agricultural activities under the Plan

11
allocation of NEC. Similarly, the Ministry of Agriculture may also increase the agricultural
and allied activities in the North-Eastern Region. The Committee feels happy to learn that
Bamboo Mission was initiated during 2006-07 with a budget of Rs.568.23 crore. If the
Mission is implemented in the right earnest, it is going to have a great impact on the
economy of the States.
(Para 22.6)
Action Taken
3.6.2 Agriculture is the S tate subject and the Ministry of Agriculture has large number of schemes
including those for horticulture sector. NEC though concentrates on infrastructure development in
the Region, takes care of agriculture and allied activities for agriculture and allied sector, which
have increased to 2.2 per cent. It is also in view of the fact that Ministry of Agriculture are not
able to spend their entire allocation in the NER.
3.6.3 The budget allocation of the NEC for 2007-08 has not been increased and it has been
retained at Rs. 600 crore. Moreover, a large number of spill over works are required to be
completed. However, in the Annual Plan 2007-08 of NEC, an outlay of Rs. 10.42 crores has been
provided for Agriculture and Allied sector. The Ministry of Agriculture has also been requested to
take action as suggested by the Committee.
3.6.4 The National Bamboo Mission (NBM) has been approved at a cost of Rs. 568.23 crore. The
scheme is being implemented by Ministry of Agriculture.
Further Recommendation
3.6.5 The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry of Agriculture is not able to
spend their entire allocation in the NER. The Ministry of Agriculture must ensure that the
allocated budget is spent.
RECOMMENDATION
3.7 PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
3.7.1 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the small tea growers in Assam,
who are about 50,000 in number, do not have pattas due to which they are not able to carry
out any improvements on the land nor are they able to get loans. The Committee makes
a strong recommendation that immediate steps may be taken to ensure that the small tea
growers are issued pattas at the earliest. The Committee also agrees that the North-Eastern
States have a great potential for rubber production. The Committee expresses its concern
that production of rubber in the North-Eastern States has not been taken up very seriously
so far. The Report of the Committee set up by NEC under one of the full-time Members,
if submitted, may be examined thoroughly and immediate steps may be taken to introduce
rubber plantation in the North-Eastern States wherever it has potential. If necessary,
separate technology mission may be initiated for this purpose exclusively for North-Eastern
States with separate budgetary provision. The Committee takes note of the fact that North-
Eastern States have a great potential for ginger production. However, there is no proper
system for marketing and for processing of the ginger produced to enable the farmers to
sell their produce at a profitable rate. The Committee is happy to learn that the initiative
already taken by the Government has been very successful but the Government should not
be complacent with this. This is only an initial effort and a lot more has to be done for
marketing of the produces such as ginger of the North-Eastern States. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that processing facilities may be established for all the agricultural
produce along with marketing facilities.
(Para 22.7)

12
Action Taken
3.7.2 The State Governments of North Eastern Region have been requested for taking action on
the point of issuance of pattas to the small growers. A Task Force has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri P.P. Shrivastav, Member, NEC to examine the existing central programmes,
identify gap and recommend specific measures for promoting rubber plantation in the selected areas
of the region. Three meetings of the Task Force have been held so far with the Nodal Officers
of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur; Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland Governments to discuss
the strategies for implementation of rubber plantation in the region. The consultation meetings were
held with the State Governments. Detailed Project Reports are awaited from them. For procurement
and marketing of ginger and other agricultural/horticultural produce, efforts have been enhanced.
Ginger processing has been started in the plant established by the Ministry.
Further Recommendations
3.7.3 The Committee desires that pattas may be issued to the small tea growers at the
earliest. The Committee also desires that the projects reports may be obtained from State
Governments on Rubber Plantations and the Task Force may finalize its recommendations
at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATION
3.8 SPECIAL INITIATIVES
3.8.1 The Committee is happy to note that in the meeting chaired by the Prime Minister
on 16.10.2006, decisions had been taken inter-alia  that the line Ministries would consult
Ministry of DoNER before finalizing any scheme to be implemented in North East. The
Committee recommends that this decision should be formalized by incorporating the same
in the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 and by effectively communicating the same to all
Ministries/Departments so that there is no confusion in any quarter in this regard.
(Para 27.1)
Action Taken
3.8.2 In this connection Cabinet Secretary had already written to all the Secretaries to
Government of India to consult Ministry of DoNER before finalizing any scheme to be implemented
in the North East. The Ministry has requested the Cabinet Secretariat to make appropriate provision
in the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.
Further Recommendation
3.8.3 The Committee desires that the Cabinet Secretariat may make the provision in the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 as the earliest, that the line
Ministries would consult the Ministry of DoNER before finalizing any scheme to be
implemented in North East.

13
CHAPTER–IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
RECOMMENDATION
4.1 ADVOCACY, PUBLICITY, CAPACITY BUILDING  AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
4.1.1 The Committee do recognise the importance of showcasing North East through Plan
Schemes such as Advocacy and Publicity and appreciates the efforts of the Ministry under
where it had taken such programmes in capital cities and other cities of various States
during last year. The Committee however wants to impress upon the Ministry to adopt some
innovative methods.
(Para 14.5)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The Ministry has initiated new approaches for showcasing the potential and the strength of
the North-East. Recently, a North-East Business Summit was organized. Further as an step to
attract investment we facilitated a visit of a high level business delegation from Thailand. The
Ministry has also proposed to show case the NER abroad through various events in collaboration
with organizations like CII and ICC. A Committee has been constituted to prepare a media plan for
projecting the North-East as a safe and attractive destination through electronic and print media.
RECOMMENDATION
4.2 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ( ALLOCATION OF BUSINESS) RULES, 1961
4.2.1 The Committee is concerned that even though the two programmes i.e., Hill Area
Development Programme (HADP) and Border Area Development Programme (BADP) are
shown in tbe Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 to be with the
Ministry of DoNER but the programmes are yet to be transferred to it. The Committee feels
that it is not right on the part of the Government to show the programmes against a
Ministry without transferring them to it. The Committee recommends that the issue may
be resolved expeditiously.
(Para 17.3)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The Ministry has already requested the Cabinet Secretariat for resolving this Issue.
RECOMMENDATION
4.3 VISION NER 2020
4.3.1 The Vision document is undoubtedly the most ambitious project of NEC since its
inception. To achieve the developmental goals of a region, which has lagged far behind from
the mainstream, such measures are a necessity. The final version of the document was
scheduled to be in place by June, 2006. The Committee is of the view that of the fifteen
years period, two more years would be lost in finalizing the document. Hence, it feels that
efforts be taken to complete such an ambitious document on time, without further delay.
(Para 24.1)
13

14
Action Taken
4.3.2 NEC has entrusted the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), New Delhi
to Prepare Vision NER-2020. The Institute has agreed to submit the final document within a period
of 9 months i.e. by November 2007
RECOMMENDATION
4.4 TRADE PROMOTION
4.4.1 Trade promotion is an important aspect for the development of any region and the
North-Eastern Region is no exception to it. The existing infrastructure is very inadequate
to give sufficient avenues to the North-Eastern Region for trade promotion. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry may make an overall assessment of the requirement of trade
promotion activities for the North-Eastern Region and necessary steps may be taken in this
regard. The trade centre proposed to be set up at Guwahati is a good proposal for promoting
trade and industry not only in Assam but in the entire North-Eastern Region. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Centre may be commissioned as early as
possible so that it may commence functioning soon. The project for the North-Eastern
States’ Trade and Investment Creative Initiative undcrtaken with the technical assistance
of Asian Development Bank (ADB) is an important project for the overall growth of trade
and industry in the North-Eastern States. The Draft Report submitted by the ADB
Consultants may be examined at the earliest and a final decision may be taken soon to
make the project functional. The Committee also learned that the North-Eastern States are
asking for more land custom stations and development of infrastructure in the existing
stations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine these issues and take
up with the concerned Ministries and take an early decision. Development of infrastructure
at the custom stations is very essential because without proper infrastructure, the custom
stations will not be successful. The Ministry of DoNER may consider this aspect and take
up the infrastructure development for custom stations on a priority basis with separate
allocation, if required.
(Para 26.5)
Action Taken
4.4.2 As per Min istry of Commerce, the infrastructure for the International Trade Promotion
Centre at Guwahati is in place. The centre is likely to be commissioned shortly. Another Centre
in the name of “North Eastern Agri-Expo Centre” at Dimapur, Nagaland sanctioned, under NLCPR
scheme of Ministry of DONER, for establishment.
4.4.3 Ministry of DONER through Technical Assistance (TA) of Asian Development Bank (ADB)
seeks to develop a project for the North Eastern States Trade and Investment Creative Initiative
(NES-TICI) so as to build on the locational advantage of the NER States with international borders
with five countries. Draft study report prepared through ADB assistance was discussed with the
NE States and other stakeholders in a Regional Workshop held at Guwahati. It was circulated to
all the stakeholders and the consultations are on to finalise the report taking into consideration
the new North East Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy (NEIIPP) 2007 launched from
1st April, 2007.

15
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—
AT A GLANCE
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
The Committee reiterates its recommends that government may consider the matter
again and take out some more Ministries from the list of exempted Ministries.
(Para 3.1.3)
UNDUE DELAY IN PILOT AND AIRHOSTESS TRAINING
The Committee expresses its disquiet over the continuing delay in identifying the
institute for pilot and airhostess training. The Committee recommends that the institutes
may be selected immediately so that training may start without further delay.
(Para 3.2.3)
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
The Committee apprehends that both the projects, viz.  North Eastern Urban
Development Project (NEUDP) and Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) may be delayed in the process of approval and transfer. The Committee desires
that these projects should start without any further delay. (Para 3.3.4)
CIVIL A VIATION
The Committee reiterates its observation that inter and intra air connectivity of NER
would prove a sine qua non  for the all round development of North Eastern Region, be it
a tourist destiny or economic development or inducement investment. The Committee,
therefore, strongly, recommends that the Ministry of DoNER should not confine itself
merely to forwarding the development projects from one Ministry to the other but, being
the territorial Ministry endowed with role and responsibility of developing the North-Eastern
Region, should play pro-active and result-oriented role in pursuing continuously so far as
the inception and implementation of the proposal/ undertaken projects are concerned viz.
improvement of inter and intra region air services; setting up of Greenfield airports at
Kohima, Itanagar, Gangtok and for upgradation of airports of Pasight and Tezu in Arunachal
Pradesh, Baljek in West Goro Hills, Meghalaya and Kamalpur and Kailashah in Tripura.
These projects should be completed within the stipulated time frame and should not incur
time and cost overruns. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of DoNER
should take adequate follow up action with the Ministry of Civil Aviation for harnessing the
vast pool of trained pilots and technical staff of IAF by inducting them on permanent
absorption basis. (Para 3.4.7)
PROMOTION OF INDUSTRIES
The Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER should not ony pro-actively liase
and take follow-up initiatives/action with the Department of IPP, (Government of India) and
NEDFI (North Eastern Development Finance Corporation) but should also interact with the
Ministry of Small Micro and Medium Enterprises for promoting micro, small and medium
enterprises in the NE, region. (Para 3.5.3)
15

16
AGRICULTURE SECTOR
The Committee is constrained t6 note that the Ministry of Agriculture is not able to
spend their entire allocation in the NER. The Ministry of Agriculture must ensure that the
allocated budget is spent. (Para 3.6.5)
PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
The Committee desires that pattas may be issued to the small tea growers at the
earliest. The Committee also desires that the projects reports may be obtained from state
governments on Rubber Plantations and the Task Force may finalize its recommendations
at the earliest. (Para 3.7.3)
SPECIAL INITIATIVES
The Committee desires that the Cabinet Secretariat may make the provision in the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 as the earliest, that the line
Ministries would consult the Ministry of DoNER before finalizing any scheme to be
implemented in North East. (Para 3.8.3)

17
MINUTES

18

19
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 11 April, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ajit Jogi
8. Shri Sachin Pilot
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
12. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
2. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
3. Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the following draft Reports of the Committee:—
(i) One Hundred and Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred and Twenty-sixth Report on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) One Hundred and Thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Report
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region;
(iii) One Hundred and Thirty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Home Affairs; and
19

20
(iv) One Hundred and Thirty-third Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region.
2.1 After some discussion, the Reports were adopted with some minor modifications suggested
by Members. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to carry out the necessary changes.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament on
16th April, 2008. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri R.K. Dhawan,
to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Naveen Jindal and in his absence, Dr. Rattan
Singh Ajnala, to lay a copy each of the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.