PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 128
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  AUGUST, 2007)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  AUGUST, 2007)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  AUGUST, 2007)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 

107
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16 TH AUGUST, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16 TH AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAV ANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-247


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... 1—13
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS /CONCLUSIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE  —
AT A G LANCE .................................................................................................................... 14—17
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 19—44
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 45—106
I. Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 .................................... 47—90
II. Gist of Views/Suggestions of Members/individuals/organizations on the Bill,
and comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs thereto. ............................. 91—106

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2006)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Raghunath Jha
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Ajit Jogi
22. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
*27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
* Nominated w.e.f. 10th October, 2006 vice Shri Rahul Gandhi who was nominated to Standing Committee on Human Resource
Devlopment.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 ( Annexure I ).
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred* the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2006, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 23 August 2006 and pending therein, to the
Committee for examination and report within three months. The Committee in its sitting held on
30
th October, 2006, took stock of the progress made in respect of the Bill and decided that in view
of its preoccupation with the examination of another Bill, it may seek extension of time for
presentation of Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 from Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha till the first day of the last week of the Budget Session of 2007. On the
authorisation of the Committee, I approached Hon’ble Chairman for grant of extension of time
which was acceded to.
3. The Committee held eleven sittings in all spread over fifteen hours on the Bill. In its meeting
held on 8 January, 2007, the Committee heard the presentation of the Home Secretary, Government
of India on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon. The Committee in its meeting held on
17 January, 2007 decided to hear the views of jurists and some legal experts. The Committee also
felt that it would be necessary to seek the comments of various State Bar Councils on the
provisions of the Bill.
4. In its sittings held on 1, 2, 12 & 13 February, 2007, the Committee heard following
witnesses on the subject:-
(i) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jaspal Singh, Retd. Judge, High Court of Delhi and Senior
Advocate, Supreme Court;
(ii) Hon’ble Mr. Justice K. Jayachandra Reddy, Retd. Judge, Supreme Court and former
Chairman, Law Commission of India;
(iii) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Bhawani Singh, Former Chief Justice of J&K, Madhya Pradesh
and Gujarat High Courts and Lokayukta, Himachal Pradesh;
(iv) Hon’ble Mr. Justice B. N. Srikrishna, Retd. Judge, Supreme Court and Chairman,
Sixth Central Pay Commission;
(v) Shri M. N. Krishnamani, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court,
(vi) Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon, Former Director, National Law Academy, Bhopal; and
(vii) Representatives of Bar Council of India.
4.1 In its sitting held on 22
nd February, 2007 the Committee heard the representatives of non-
governmental organizations namely ‘RAKSHAK’ and ‘498A.org’ on the various provisions of the Bill
and particularly on Section 498A of Indian Penal Code, 1860. The Committee also received written
* Vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 43429 dated 29 August, 2006.

views/suggestions from Shri K.N. Chandrashekharan Pillai, a legal expert and a former Director,
Indian Law Institute and the State Bar Councils of (a) Andhra Pradesh, (b) West Bengal and
(c) Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh & Sikkim. The
Committee had also received written suggestions/views of Bar Council of India.
5. The Committee in its sitting held on 4
th May, 2007, while taking stock of the progress made
on the Bill and the remaining stages of examination, felt that further extension of time upto the last
week of the Monsoon Session 2007 would have to be sought from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha. As authorised by the Committee, I approached Hon’ble Chairman to grant further extension
to it which was kindly accorded by him.
6. In its sitting held on 11 June 2007, the Committee held discussion on the Bill in the light
of evidence tendered by witnesses, written views submitted by individuals, organisations and
various State Bar Councils. The meetings of the Committee were convened for 5 & 6 July, 2007
to take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
7. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 3 August, 2007 and
adopted the same. It also decided that the evidence tendered before the Committee may be laid on
the Table of both the Houses of Parliament.
8. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following documents:
(i) Background note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) One hundred fifty fourth, one hundred seventy seventh and one hundred seventy
eighth Reports of the Law Commission of India;
(iii) One Hundred and Eleventh Report (2004) of the Committee on Home Affairs on the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003;
(iv) Comments of the Ministry on the points/queries raised by the Members/witnesses/
organizations on various provisions of the Bill;
(v) Oral evidence tendered before the Committee; and
(vi) Written views/suggestions submitted to the Committee.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
10. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before it and facilitated the Committee in
formulating its views on the Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
August 3, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has been amended nine times in the years 1978,
1980, 1983, 1988, 1990, 1991, 1993, 2001 and 2005. The 1973 Code was enacted after a
comprehensive review of the old code was undertaken by the Law Commission in its Fifth Report
(1969). Second comprehensive review of the Code was taken up by the Law Commission in its
One Hundred Fifty Fourth Report (1996). The thrust of all the suggestions/recommendations of the
successive Law Commissions have been on speedy disposal of cases.
2. The recommendations of the Law Commission as contained in its One Hundred and Fifty
Fourth Report (1996) relate to law of arrest; custody; bail, anticipatory bail and sureties; changes
in procedure relating to summons cases and warrant cases and summary trial; examination of
witnesses and recording of statements; protection and facilities to witnesses; examination of the
accused; compounding of offences; victimology; inquiry and trial of persons of unsound mind;
procedure for maintenance of wives, children and parents; special protection in respect of women;
measures for speedy justice etc. The Law Commission meanwhile has suo motu reviewed the
provisions relating to arrest with a view to clearly delineate and regulate the power of arrest
without warrant, vested in the police by section 41 and other provisions of the Criminal Procedure
Code and submitted its One Hundred Seventy Seventh Report (2001). The Law Commission in its
subsequent report viz.  One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report (2001) made certain
recommendations for prevention of witnesses turning hostile.
3. Emphasizing the necessity and delineating the salient features of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006, the Home Secretary in his presentation before the Committee
stated that the present legislation is a step forward in the endeavour of the Government for
improving the criminal justice system. The present Bill is mainly on the basis of the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Fifty Fourth, One Hundred Seventy Seventh and
One Hundred Seventy Eighth Reports of the Law Commission on various issues concerning
Criminal Justice System. The Law Commission suo motu reviewed the provisions relating to arrest
in its One Hundred Seventy Seventh Report in the wake of the Supreme Court Judgment in the
D.K. Basu vs State of West Bengal (1997) 1 SCC 416. The report basically pertains to regulating
the power to arrest by the police without warrant. These recommendations have also been
incorporated in the proposed amendments. In the backdrop of Jessica Lal murder case, there was
a huge demand from the public to check the practice of witnesses turning hostile. The Malimath
Committee and various other reports have highlighted the plight of the victim who was the worst
sufferer of the crime but had no role presently in the functioning of the Criminal Justice System.
The victims had to rely mainly on the efficacy of the prosecution side, which was invariably
represented by the State. Therefore, it has been proposed in the Bill that victim should be given
right to appeal against any adverse order passed by the courts. Video recording of statements of
witnesses would reduce the possibility of their changing statements at a later stage. Therefore, in
certain sections of the CrPC, enabling provisions for audio/video recording of statements of
witnesses are sought to be provided.
4. As already stated, the Bill focuses upon various issues, which can be categorized broadly
as following:
(i) Law relating to arrests;
(ii) Summons and warrants cases - mandatory summary trial in all the summons cases;
(iii) W itnesses turning hostile;

2
(iv) Special provisions for protection of women;
(v) Victimology;
(vi) Inquiry and trials of persons of unsound mind;
(vii) A voidance of adjournments;
(viii) Compounding of offences; and
(ix) V ideo conferencing.
Various issues in the Bill and views of jurists/experts/organisations and Members thereon are
given below seriatim:-
ISSUE
4.1.0 Changes in the law relating to arrests
4.1.1 In view of the Supreme Court’s judgment in the D.K. Basu Case, the proposed Bill places
an embargo on the arbitrary arrests made by the Police. The apex Court propounded eleven
guidelines in this case which are proposed to be incorporated in the CrPC vide clauses 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10 and 17 by amending Sections 41, 46, 54, 55, 60 and 172. These amendments will
incorporate provisions to the Code of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 like - exercise of power of
arrest after reasonable care and justification; right of the arrested person to have his advocate
present during the investigation; issuance of notice of appearance for investigation instead of
arresting the person; avoiding of touching the body of female accused by male police officers;
examination of arrested persons by medical practitioner soon after the arrest; health and safety of
the arrested person to be the duty of person having his custody; arrest to be made strictly
according to the Code; case diary to contain statement of witnesses etc.
4.1.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Under sub clause (ii) (b) of clause 5, a police officer is empowered to arrest a person
for proper investigation of the offence or for the reason that detention of such person
in custody is in the interest of his safety. Arresting a person in the interest of his
safety is highly objectionable as the provision is likely to be misused by the Police;
(ii) The words ‘credible information’ in clause 5 (i) (b) are liable to be misused as it gives
a free hand to police officer to arrest people without warrant. The words “who has
been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable complaint
has been made” in the existing code are more appropriate and thus may be retained;
(iii) Clause 6 (New Section 41A) proposes to provide that the police officer may, instead
of arresting the person concerned, issue to him a notice requiring him to appear
before the Police Officer issuing the notice, or at such other place as may be specified
in the notice and to cooperate with the Police Officer. Police will never arrest an
accused but he would just send a notice to the accused to come over the police
station or any other place where he may be arrested. Secondly, if he defies the notice
he is exposed to prosecution for not responding to the notice of the public servant.
Anticipatory bail application is also circumscribed inasmuch as when the police officer
calls the accused he has no option but to appear and surrender;
(iv) In Section 54 (clause-8), it has been suggested that the words “registered medical
practitioner” should be substituted by the words “registered government medical
practitioner”.

3
ISSUE
4.2.0 Summons and Warrant Cases
4.2.1 To expedite the trial of minor offences, definition of warrant case and summons case are
proposed to be changed so that more cases can be disposed of in a summary manner. Based on
the recommendations of One hundred and fifty fourth Report of the Law Commission, it is
proposed vide Clauses 2, 21, 22, 23 and 24 that amendments may be carried out in Sections 2,
242, 260 and 262 and deletion of Chapter XX of CrPC (Sections 251 to 259) is also proposed
which will modify the definition of summons and warrants cases so that offences with
imprisonment of a term of more than 3 years will come under the warrant cases; summons
procedure to be dispensed with; all summons cases are to be tried summarily and if a summons
case cannot be tried summarily the court has to record reasons and convert it to warrant case.
It is also proposed that all statements recorded during investigation are to be supplied in advance.
4.2.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Deletion of Sections 251-259 (Chapter XX) of Cr. PC may not be prudent as the
accused will be deprived of the benefits and protection of the summons trials;
(ii) By changing the definition of warrant cases and summons cases, the number of
offences likely to be tried summarily will increase from 153 to 211, as 58 offences
under Cr.PC carry imprisonment upto three years, other than the 153 offences which
carry imprisonment up to two years. This will not serve the intended purpose as it
will include serious offences like, theft (Section 379), extortion (Section 384), criminal
breach of trust (Section 406), subjecting married women to cruelty (Section 498 A)
etc. If these serious offences are tried summarily, it would not be possible for the
appellate court to appreciate the case as the evidence recorded in those cases will be
very scanty.
(iii) Sub-clause (2) of clause 23 seeking to amend section 260 of the Code, seems to be
incomplete as it provides that when in summons case, of a summary trial it appears
to the magistrate that nature of the case is such that it is improper to try the case
summarily, he may, as the case may be, record reasons for not tryil1g the case
summarily. It does not provide how such a case shall be dealt;
(iv) To dispense with summons procedure for the purpose of quick disposal of cases
would go against the basic tenets of criminal jurisprudence.
ISSUE
4.3.0 Victimology
4.3.1 The Malimath Committee Report on Reforms in Criminal Justice System has highlighted the
plight of the victim who is the worst sufferer of the crime but has no role presently in the criminal
justice system. Therefore, provisions have been proposed vide Clauses 3, 37 and 38 to provide for
a comprehensive scheme to be prepared for compensating the victim or his dependants who have
suffered loss or injury as a result of crime and who require rehabilitation. It is also proposed that
the victim may be permitted to engage an advocate in a case and he shall have a right to prefer
an appeal against any adverse order passed by the court.
4.3.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Permission under proviso to section 24 of the Code should be given by the court and
it should be made mandatory; it is suggested that there is no need for consulting the

4
State Government or the Central Government to engage an advocate. The Clause may
be re-worded as: “the victim may engage an advocate of his choice to coordinate with
the prosecution”;
(ii) With r eference to Clause 37 (new section 357A) it has been suggested that the Central
Government and every State Government should allocate special funds and deposit the
same in the courts for the purpose of Victim Compensation Scheme.
ISSUE
4.4.0 Special provisions for protection of women
4.4.1 The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs while making their presentation on the
Bill inter-alia highlighted the special provisions incorporated for the protection of women by
making amendment in Sections 26, 54, 157, 173, 327 and 416 of Cr.PC vide clauses 4, 8, 11, 18A,
31 and 39. The proposed amendments incorporate provisions like all rape cases as far as
practicable to be tried in the court of a woman judge; the medical examination for arrested women
will be done only by or under supervision of a female registered medical practitioner; investigation
in cases of rape, to be conducted at the residence of the victim as far as practicable by a woman
police officer and if the victim is less than 18 years old, her parents or a social worker may remain
present during the investigation; investigation of child rape cases may be completed within three
months of time; in-camera trial of sexual offences cases shall be conducted as far as practicable
by woman judge and death sentence of a pregnant woman shall be mandatorily commuted to life
imprisonment.
4.4.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Woman judges are not adequate in number. Appointments of new woman judges will
only help the successful implementation of the new provisions;
(ii) In Section 157 (clause 11), it has been proposed that in case of offence of rape, the
investigation shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or any other place of
her choice;
(iii) Under clause 11 questioning of victim in the presence of parents or social workers,
should be expanded and may include “close relatives” too;
(iv) In clause 11, the word “questioned” should be substituted by some other suitable
word;
(v) In clause 11, all victims of rape, irrespective of age, should be covered.
ISSUE
4.5.0 Avoidance of adjournments
4.5.1 In view of the Law Commission’s recommendations and Supreme Court’s directives to
avoid adjournments, the government is bringing forward certain amendments by inserting proviso
to section 309, sub-sections (1) and (2) vide clause 28 of the Bill. According to the amendments
no adjournments will be granted at the request of the party unless circumstances are beyond the
control of that party.
4.5.2 Views of Members/witnesses
Clause 28 prohibits adjournment in case of non-availability or inconvenience of an advocate
on the ground that he is engaged in some other court. This provision will equally be applicable to

5
a prosecuting as well as defending counsel. Such rigid provisions will do no good for smooth
conduct of the criminal trials.
ISSUE
4.6.0 Compounding of Offences
4.6.1 The Bill proposes amendments to the Table, under sub-section (1) of Section 320 (Clause
30) relating to compounding of offences punishable under various sections of Indian Penal Code,
1860. 24 more offences contained in IPC are proposed to be included under Table-l of Section 320.
The officials of the Ministry has stated that it is also proposed that if an offence is compoundable,
its abatement or an attempt to commit the offence will also be made compoundable.
4.6.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Offence under section 498 IPC should be made compoundable by the woman
concerned in addition to husband of a woman;
(ii) Section 498 A, IPC should also be included in the Table-I of Section 320 Cr.PC and
made bailable as well as compoundable;
(iii) Compounding of offences under section 451 (house tresspass), section 497 (adultery)
and section 498 (enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married
woman) is not desirable.
ISSUE
4.7.0 Inquiry and trial of persons of unsound mind
4.7.1 Law Commission in its 154th Report had inter-alia recommended the amendment to laws
relating to inquiry and trial of persons of unsound mind. The proposed legislation amend sections
328 to 330 ( vide clauses 32 to 34) so that an accused incapable of defending himself due to
unsoundness of mind is given a fair trial. It is also proposed that such a person should
appropriately be referred for medical treatment. Besides, psychiatrist or clinical psychologist may
be consulted in such cases. Such a person may be discharged or released on bail also.
4.7.2 Views of Members/witnesses
In the proposed insertion of sub-section 1 (A) to Section 329 the following proviso should
be added:-
“Provided any party being aggrieved by the report of the psychologist or clinical psychiatrist
for care and treatment may appeal, to the medical board and the persons constituting the
medical board be provided.”
ISSUE
4.8.0 Video Conferencing
4.8.1 It has been proposed in the Bill vide clause 16 that the Magistrates may extend detention
of an accused in judicial custody through the medium of electronic video linkages except for the
first time where the production of the accused in person is required. Enabling provisions for video
recording of statement of witnesses before police and magistrates are also introduced in the Bill
vide clause 12, 14 and 27 by inserting new proviso to Section 161, Section 164 and Section 275
of Cr.PC.

6
4.8.2 Views of Members/witnesses
(i) Person in judicial custody during video conferencing cannot explain whatever he
wants to say had he appeared before the judge;
(ii) Recording of statement through audio/video electronic means can be misused;
(iii) The provision of video linkages should not be implemented unless a foolproof system
is in place to ensure that the statement by the witness is made voluntary; and
(iv) An advocate will become a witness if he remains present during video conferencing.
Then he cannot appear as an advocate. Hence, the amendment is totally opposed.
ISSUE
4.9.0 Witness turning hostile
4.9.1 The Government in the backdrop of media hyped high profile cases introduced certain
provisions seeking to amend Section 161, 162 and section 344 and insert sections 164A and 344A
in CrPC with a view to prevent the witness turning hostile vide the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Bill, 2003.
4.9.2 As per the amendments proposed in the 2003 Bill to Sections 161, 162 of Cr. PC and
insertion of Sections 164A into the Code, the following provisions were proposed to be put in place
in the criminal justice system:-
(a) Police Officer has to acknowledge statement made to him/her by the witness and
signed by the latter for the offence for which punishment is less than seven years and
quickly transmit the same to the Magistrate; and
(b) Recording of evidence of material witnesses by Magistrate for all offences punishable
with death or imprisonment for seven years or more during investigation.
4.9.3 It is pertinent to note that signed statement made to police officer would not have
evidentiary value in the court of law which may help check perjury. Therefore, punishment for
perjury is intended to be enhanced under proposed Section 344A of Cr.PC. Further, for cognizable
offence punishable with seven years imprisonment, the Magistrates are empowered to record
statement of the material witnesses instead of police officer.
4.9.4 Similar amendments to the Cr.PC as suggested by the Law Commission in its one hundred
seventy eighth Report with minor amendments like enhanced punishment upto 10 years instead of
7 years have again been proposed in the Cr. PC (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
Views of the Committee on Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
4.9.5 The proposed amendments were opposed by the Committee in its One Hundred Eleventh
Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 on following grounds:
(i) Such power may be misused by Investigating Officer (I.O.) by forcing the witness
to sign the statement without knowing fully the implication of it. Furthermore, police
officer may force the witness to sign on blank paper which can be manipulated by
the former later on;
(ii) In some cases the material witness may be the accused and in that circumstance it
would violate provisions of Article 20 (3) of Constitution (self-incrimination);

7
(iii) I.O. has discretion to decide who would be material witness in a criminal case, where
punishment is more than seven years. The professional/fictitious witnesses available in
police station can be turned as material witness by the police, which may increase
corruption;
(iv) Since the power available with the police officers is already being misused, it was
apprehended that enhancement of power of the police may lead to more misuse and
resultant corruption; and
(v) Since the Magistrates are already overburdened making the recording of statement
mandatory will increase their burden.
5. Comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the views/suggestions of Members witnesses
and others are placed at Annexure II  for perusal.
Further Deliberations in the Committee
6. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. After considering a few
clauses in detail, the Committee found that some of the new definitions/concepts/provisions
introduced in the Bill, particularly relating to summons and warrants cases, arrest, video
conferencing and witnesses turning hostile seem to be not well thought of and it could gather from
the Ministry that they are based solely on the recommendations of the Law Commission and due
deliberations had not taken place on various pros and cons and consequences that may flow from
these provisions. The Ministry was not able to satisfy the Members about the questions regarding
necessity and consequences of these new provisions.
6.1 The issue of doing away with summons procedure and compulsory trial of summons cases
summarily came to the centrestage repeatedly in the deliberations of the Committee. When the
representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law & Justice were asked to comment on
this issue they informed the Committee using the refrain that the main reason for bringing the Bill
is to implement the recommendations contained in certain reports of the Law Commission aiming
at reducing the pendency of cases before Courts. The Committee was surprised to take note of the
fact that while the Government was trying to alter the basic tenets of criminal jurisprudence it was
not addressing the primary issue of filling up of a large number of vacancies existing in various
courts. As per the statistics available with the Committee, the number of sanctioned posts in the
High Courts is 721  against which number of judges in position is 610, leaving 111  vacancies of
judges in various High Courts. Similarly in lower courts the total sanctioned strength of
Magistrates and Judges is 14641  against which only 11840 are in position, leaving vacancies of
2801 Judicial Officers. The Government instead of addressing the core issue of ensuring
functioning of the courts with full capacity is seeking to tamper with the criminal jurisprudence.
6.2 A unanimous view, therefore, emerged in the Committee that no useful purpose would be
served by proceeding further with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill as the Committee
could not be convinced of the rationale for introducing drastic changes in the criminal
jurisprudence of the country. The Committee, instead decided to submit its observations and
conclusions on various concepts incorporated in the Bill while reporting its examination to the two
Houses of Parliament. The following paragraphs deal with the major issues involved in the Bill
and contain Committee’s views and observations on each of them.
SUMMONS AND WARRANT CASES – MANDATORY SUMMARY TRIAL IN ALL SUMMON
CASES
6.1 (i) Definition of summons and warrants cases has been sought to be modified so that
only offences with imprisonment of term of more than 3 years to come under the
warrant cases (Clause 2).

8
(ii) All statements recorded during investigation to be supplied in advance (Clause 21).
(iii) Summons Procedure to be dispensed with (Clause 22).
(iv) If a summons case cannot be tried summarily the court to record reasons and convert
it to warrant case (Clause 23).
(v) All summons cases to be tried summarily (Clause 24).
6.2 As per existing provisions there are three procedures for trial under the Code of Criminal
Procedure (i) Summons Procedure (ii) Summary Procedure (iii) Warrant Procedure. Summons
cases and warrant cases have been defined under sub-section (w) & (x) of Section 2 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. Summary trials are dealt with under Sections 260 to 265 of the Code.
6.3 In the proposed Bill, Summons Procedure is proposed to be done away with. Under the
existing provisions offences punishable with imprisonment upto two years are triable as summons
cases, while in the proposed Bill Summons Cases and Warrant Cases have been redefined as follows:
‘Summons Case’ means a case relating to an offence triable summarily not being a warrant
case.
‘Warrant Case’ means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years.
6.4 It will be seen from the above definitions that all summons cases with punishment upto
three years are to be tried summarily. The Committee was informed that there are 153 offences
in the Indian Penal Code, which carry punishment of imprisonment upto 2 years which were being
tried summarily as per existing provisions. By increasing the scope of summons cases to three
years, which are to be tried summarily in the new provision, 58 new offences would be added to
that list. Thus, there will be 211 offences which can be tried summarily.
6.5 When the Committee enquired from the Home Ministry and the Law Ministry about the
justification for bringing about such a radical change in the criminal justice system, the Committee
was informed by the Ministry that the change in the definitions of Summons and Warrant cases
is on the basis of 154
th report of the Law Commission. A relevant portion of that report was read
out to the Committee which is as follows: -
“A perusal of the two procedures would show that they are somewhat alike in many
respects. To ensure speedy trial, the procedure must be simplified so that the bulk of cases
which are being handled by the Magistrates can be disposed of more expeditiously. In all
the workshops conducted, it was unanimously voiced that the summary procedure is not
being adopted and that is one of the reasons for heavy pendency and delay. It is also
suggested that all the summons cases and the other offences mentioned under section 260
should be made compulsorily triable by way of summary trial. The survey conducted also
shows that there is unanimity about the suggestion to convert all offences carrying
punishment up to three years’ imprisonment into summons cases and to make it mandatory
that all such offences should be tried summarily”.
6.6 Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the provision in sub-clause (a) of clause 24
in the Bill, whereunder a bar has been imposed on sentence of imprisonment which cannot exceed
for a term exceeding six months or fine up to rupees three thousand or both in case of convictions
under the Summons Case.
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
6.7 On the above mentioned proposed amendments the Committee is of the view that:
(a) There seems to be no application of mind in attempting to expand the scope of
Summons Case for offences which entails punishment up to three years. No

9
scrutiny of each of the 58 new offences that would be added for summary trial
has been undertaken. The proposed amendment has been brought about in a
routine way. Instead of including all offences punishable up to three years in the
Summons Cases mechanically, each of the offence ought to have been examined
separately for its inclusion keeping in view its implications.
(b) There has not been any empirical evidence to suggest that by trying offences
punishable up to 3 years summarily, the pendency of cases in courts will get
reduced. On the contrary under proposed sub-section (2) of Section 260 of the
Code, Magistrates may resort not to try summons case summarily if it appears
to him that the nature of the case is such that it is improper to try the case
summarily.
(c) Sub-section (2) of section 260 of the principal Act, proposed to be substituted by
clause 23 of the Bill is somewhat incomplete. It does not provide how the case
would be proceeded when it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the
case is such that it is improper to try the case summarily. Only reasons for not
trying such case summarily are to be recorded.
(d) The proposed amendments have been averred to be ‘accused friendly’ but it may
prove otherwise since maximum punishment for summarily tried cases cannot be
more than six months, a tendency may develop to punish all accused for six
months routinely to maximize the disposal of cases and thus reduce pendency.
In this way it may be detrimental to the accused.
(e) The proposed amendment is not even ‘victim friendly’ because all the accused
tried summarily may get maximum punishment of six months instead of
maximum three years. In fact the provisions should not be looked at as ‘accused
friendly’ or ‘victim friendly’. It should only be justice friendly. But by this
amendment, justice will be the first casualty.
(f) Under sub-section (9) of section 262 proposed to be substituted by clause 24 of
the Bill, sentence beyond six months imprisonment cannot be awarded in
summons case tried summarily. Therefore, the very purpose of prescribing
maximum punishment of three years may come to naught because that
punishment cannot be awarded in a summary trial.
(g) Summarily tried cases may cause problem for those who want to appeal against
such judgment because there is no evidence before the appellate court to
appreciate.
(h) It may even be violative of article 21 of the Constitution i.e. Right to Life and
Liberty on the ground that summary trial deprives the accused of his Life and
Liberty.
(i) It may make the Indian Evidence Act redundant because 211 offences of the IPC
would be tried summarily under the proposed amendment without any
appreciation of evidence.
(j) A review of earlier measures taken for reducing pendency of cases in the courts
like Fast Track Courts, Plea Bargaining should be undertaken.
(k) There may be cases in the 211 offences which may have provision of minimum
imprisonment beyond six months. This may cause repugnancy to proposed sub
section (a) of section 262.

10
7. VICTIMOLOGY :
(i) Victim may be permitted to engage an advocate in a case (Clause 3).
(ii) A comprehensive scheme to be prepared for compensating the victim or his
dependants who have suffered loss or injury, as a result of crime and who require
rehabilitation (Clause 37).
(iii) V ictim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any adverse order passed by the
court (Clause 38).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
7.1 The Committee is of the view that consultation with the Central Government or the
State Government, provided in Clause 3 of the Bill, may cause delay and defeat the very
purpose of allowing the victim the facility of engaging an advocate of his choice. The
Government too agreed to the deletion of this stipulation. The Committee also finds that
details like the stage when the victim is allowed to engage advocate of his choice, his
responsibilities, his relationship with the Public Prosecutor and situations wherein there is
more than one victim etc., are not provided in the Bill. This aspect needs to be looked into
so that this facility is availed of by the victim without any hitch.
7.2 The Committee also visualises a scenario wherein there is a conflict in the approach
to the case between the Public Prosecutor and the advocate engaged by the victim. The issue
as to how that conflict would be resolved needs to be addressed in the Bill.
8. CHANGES IN THE LAW RELATING TO ARREST
(a) Power of arrest must be exercised after reasonable care and justification (clauses 5
and 6).
(b) Arrested persons to have right of having his advocate present during investigation
(clause 6).
(c) Notice of appearance to be issued for investigation instead of arresting the person
(clause 6).
(d) Avoiding touching of the body of the female accused by male police officers (clause 7).
(e) Arrested person to be examined by medical practitioner soon after the arrest (clause 8).
(f) Health and safety of the arrested person to be the duty of person having his custody
(clause 9).
(g) Arrest to be made strictly according to the code (clause 10).
(h) Case diary to contain statement of witnesses (clause 17).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
8.1 The Committee is of the view that detention of a person in custody in the interest
of his own safety, provided in Clause 5 (ii)(b), is totally unacceptable as personal liberty is
the most treasured freedom of an individual. This provision should be deleted. The
Government also agrees to the said deletion.
8.2 The Committee is of the view that the words ‘or a reasonable complaint has been
received’ as provided in sub section l(b) of section 41 of Code should be retained besides
‘credible information’ as proposed in Clause 5(i)(b) of the Bill.

11
8.3 The Committee also feels that the rank of the police officer who can effect arrest
mentioned in Clause 5(i) (a) should be specified.
9. WITNESS TURNING HOSTILE – MEASURES TO CURB
(i) The statement made by a person to police during investigation to be signed by the
person making it and to be recorded by audio-video electronic means (clause 12).
(ii) Material witnesses in crimes having punishment of more than 10 years imprisonment
to be produced before the Magistrate for recording of statement (clause 15).
(iii) Summary trial of witnesses deposing contrary to statement made under Section 164B
and punishment up to 2 years for the offence (clause 36).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
9.1 The Committee wishes to reiterate its earlier recommendations made in its One
Hundred and Eleventh Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 wherein it had
expressed the view that evidentiary value of the recorded statement before Police Officer
does not change even after it is signed by the witness. In the present Bill the statement
is proposed to be recorded by audio-video electronic means. Even that does not change the
evidentiary value of the statement. Therefore its earlier recommendation that in a given
situation it may violate the Fundamental Right of a person enshrined under Article 20(3)
as some of the potential witnesses can be accused also and thus there is an apprehension
that the provision can be misused by the police which could increase corruption, still holds
good. The Committee is also of the view that presence of an advocate of the accused of an
offence while recording confession by audio-video electronic means is likely to expose him
as a witness in the trial and thus may cause breach of professional ethics which prescribe
that an advocate should not accept a brief where he is likely witness. On the issue of
recording of statement before the Magistrate, under section 164B and limiting the offences
punishable with imprisonment for ten years or more in the Bill the Committee still feels
that the Magistrates are already overburdened and by making the recording of statement
mandatory will increase their burden.
9.2 The Committee once again deliberated on this aspect and came to the conclusion that
there were no compelling circumstances that warrant a review of the recommendation made
by the Committee in its One Hundred and Eleventh Report. Hence, the Committee opposes
the provision again, as it is not a workable proposition.
10. COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES (CLAUSE 30) (procedural simplification)
(i) 24 more IPC offences to come under Table 1 of Section 320 of CrPC so that parties
can compound the offence without intervention of the court. (Sections 324, 335, 343,
344, 346, 379, 403, 406, 407, 411, 414, 417, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424, 428, 429, 430,
451, 482, 483 & 486). This totals up to 45.
(ii) One more offence being made compoundable under Table 2 (Section 312).
(iii) If an offence is compoundable, its abatement or an attempt to commit it will also be
compoundable.
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
10.1 The Committee reiterates its observations made in the One Hundred and Eleventh
Report regarding Section 498A IPC wherein it had recommended that express provisions

12
may be made in Section 320 of CrPC to reflect the availability of compounding of offence
to the relatives of the husband. The Committee also feels that offence under section 498
need be made compoundable by the woman concerned in addition to the husband of the
woman.
11. ADJOURNMENTS – A VOIDANCE OF
No adjournment to be granted at the request of the party unless circumstances are beyond
the control of that party (clause 28).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
11.1 The Committee feels that this provision, particularly sub-clause (c) may cause
practical difficulties in its implementation. Engaging another advocate/pleader for a
particular hearing is difficult not only for the party applying for adjournment but even for
courts. Because all papers of the case etc. may not be available with the new advocate
engaged and thus might be of no help/assistance to the court.
12. PROTECTION OF WOMEN
(i) All rape cases shall be tried in the court of a woman judge as far as practicable
(clause 4).
(ii) If an arrested person is a woman, the medical examination will be made only by or
under supervision of a female RMP (Clause 8).
(iii) In rape cases investigation shall be conducted at the residence of the victim as far as
practicable by a woman police officer and if victim is less than 18 years her parents
or a social worker may be present during investigation (Clause 11).
(iv) Investigation of child rape cases may be completed within three months (Clause 18A).
(v) In-camera trial of sexual offence cases shall be conducted as far as practicable by
woman judge. (clause 31).
(vi) Death sentence of a pregnant woman shall be mandatorily commuted to life
imprisonment. (clause 39).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
12.1 In view of the suggestions by various witnesses before the Committee, proviso to
Clause 11 needs to be amended. The reformulation may read as follows:-
“Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement
shall be conducted at the residence of victim or place of her choice and, as far as
practicable by a woman police officer, and she should be questioned in the presence
of her parents or near relatives or a social worker of the locality.” The Government
agreed to the revised formulation and also to substitute the word ‘questioned’ by an
appropriate word.
13. USE OF TECHNOLOGY
(i) Video linkages to be used for production of accused in judicial custody before the
Magistrate (Clause 16).
(ii) Enabling provision for video recording of statement of witnesses before police and
Magistrates (Clauses 12, 14 & 27).

13
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
13.1 Even though video linkages are to be used only for extending judicial custody, the
Committee has its apprehensions that ill treatment and atrocities committed on the accused
in jail may not be shown/manifested to the judge as it would have been if the accused had
been presented physically before him. Since there would be physical gap of space between
the accused, who will be in jail and his advocate, who will be in court, effective
communication between them may not take place in such a situation.
14. INQUIRY AND TRIAL OF PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND
An accused incapable of depending himself due to unsoundness of mind to be given a fair
trial. He may be discharged or released on bail also. Psychiatrist or clinical psychologist may be
consulted in such cases (Clause 32 to 34).
VIEWS OF THE COMMITTEE
14.1 The Committee is of the view that a proviso may be added to sub-clause (a) of clause
33 of the Bill to the effect that any party being aggrieved by the report of the psychologist
or clinical psychiatrist for care and treatment may appeal to a medical board and that the
composition of the Board be provided in the proviso itself. The Government agreed to the
suggestion.
15. BAIL BOND : (IN CASE OF ACQUITTALS)
All criminal courts to take bail bond before the conclusion of the trial or disposal of the
appeal, requiring the accused to appear before the next Appellate Court. (Clauses 40 & 41)
15.1 The Committee does not have any objection to the said clauses.
RECOMMENDATION
16. The Committee recommends to the Government to have a relook at the entire Bill
in the light of its observations/recommendations made in the previous paragraphs. The
Committee in this context would like to reiterate its recommendations made in the One
Hundred and Eleventh Report that Government should attempt to bring forward a
comprehensive Bill for revamping the criminal justice system.

14
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
SUMMONS AND WARRANT CASES – MANDATORY SUMMARY TRIAL IN ALL SUMMON CASES
On the above mentioned proposed amendments the Committee is of the view that:
(l) There seems to be no application of mind in attempting to expand the scope of
Summons Case for offences which entails punishment up to three years. No
scrutiny of each of the 58 new offences that would be added for summary trial
has been undertaken. The proposed amendment has been brought about in a
routine way. Instead of including all offences punishable up to three years in the
Summons Cases mechanically, each of the offence ought to have been examined
separately for its inclusion keeping in view its implications.
(m) There has not been any empirical evidence to suggest that by trying offences
punishable up to 3 years summarily, the pendency of cases in courts will get
reduced. On the contrary under proposed sub-section (2) of Section 260 of the
Code, Magistrates may resort not to try summons case summarily if it appears
to him that the nature of the case is such that it is improper to try the case
summarily.
(n) Sub-section (2) of section 260 of the principal Act, proposed to be substituted by
clause 23 of the Bill is somewhat incomplete. It does not provide how the case
would be proceeded when it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the
case is such that it is improper to try the case summarily. Only reasons for not
trying such case summarily are to be recorded.
(o) The proposed amendments have been averred to be ‘accused friendly’ but it may
prove otherwise since maximum punishment for summarily tried cases cannot be
more than six months, a tendency may develop to punish all accused for six
months routinely to maximize the disposal of cases and thus reduce pendency.
In this way it may be detrimental to the accused.
(p) The proposed amendment is not even ‘victim friendly’ because all the accused
tried summarily may get maximum punishment of six months instead of
maximum three years. In fact the provisions should not be looked at as
‘accused friendly’ or ‘victim friendly’. It should only be justice friendly. But by
this amendment, justice will be the first casualty.
(q) Under sub-section (9) of section 262 proposed to be substituted by clause 24 of
the Bill, sentence beyond six months imprisonment cannot be awarded in
summons case tried summarily. Therefore, the very purpose of prescribing
maximum punishment of three years may come to naught because that
punishment cannot be awarded in a summary trial.
(r) Summarily tried cases may cause problem for those who want to appeal against
such judgment because there is no evidence before the appellate court to
appreciate.
14

15
(s) It may even be violative of article 21 of the Constitution i.e. Right to Life and
Liberty on the ground that summary trial deprives the accused of his Life and
Liberty.
(t) It may make the Indian Evidence Act redundant because 211 offences of the IPC
would be tried summarily under the proposed amendment without any
appreciation of evidence.
(u) A review of earlier measures taken for reducing pendency of cases in the courts
like Fast Track Courts, Plea Bargaining should be undertaken.
(v) There may be cases in the 211 offences which may have provision of minimum
imprisonment beyond six months. This may cause repugnancy to proposed sub
section (a) of section 262. (Para 6.7)
VICTIMOLOGY :
The Committee is of the view that consultation with the Central Government or the
State Government, provided in Clause 3 of the Bill, may cause delay and defeat the very
purpose of allowing the victim the facility of engaging an advocate of his choice. The
Government too agreed to the deletion of this stipulation. The Committee also finds that
details like the stage when the victim is allowed to engage advocate of his choice, his
responsibilities, his relationship with the Public Prosecutor and situations wherein there is
more than one victim etc., are not provided in the Bill. This aspect needs to be looked into
so that this facility is availed of by the victim without any hitch. (Para 7.1)
The Committee also visualises a scenario wherein there is a conflict in the approach
to the case between the Public Prosecutor and the advocate engaged by the victim. The issue
as to how that conflict would be resolved needs to be addressed in the Bill. (Para 7.2)
CHANGES IN THE LAW RELATING TO ARREST
The Committee is of the view that detention of a person in custody in the interest
of his own safety, provided in Clause 5 (ii)(b), is totally unacceptable as personal liberty is
the most treasured freedom of an individual. This provision should be deleted. The
Government also agrees to the said deletion. (Para 8.1)
The Committee is of the view that the words ‘or a reasonable complaint has been
received’ as provided in sub section l(b) of section 41 of Code should be retained besides
‘credible information’ as proposed in Clause 5(i)(b) of the Bill. (Para 8.2)
The Committee also feels that the rank of the police officer who can effect arrest
mentioned in Clause 5(i) (a) should be specified. (Para 8.3)
WITNESS TURNING HOSTILE - MEASURES TO CURB
The Committee wishes to reiterate its earlier recommendations made in its One
Hundred and Eleventh Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 wherein it had
expressed the view that evidentiary value of the recorded statement before Police Officer
does not change even after it is signed by the witness. In the present Bill the statement
is proposed to be recorded by audio-video electronic means. Even that does not change the
evidentiary value of the statement. Therefore its earlier recommendation that in a given
situation it may violate the Fundamental Right of a person enshrined under Article 20(3)
as some of the potential witnesses can be accused also and thus there is an apprehension

16
that the provision can be misused by the police which could increase corruption, still holds
good. The Committee is also of the view that presence of an advocate of the accused of an
offence while recording confession by audio-video electronic means is likely to expose him
as a witness in the trial and thus may cause breach of professional ethics which prescribe
that an advocate should not accept a brief where he is likely witness. On the issue of
recording of statement before the Magistrate, under section 164B and limiting the offences
punishable with imprisonment for ten years or more in the Bill the Committee still feels
that the Magistrates are already overburdened and by making the recording of statement
mandatory will increase their burden. (Para 9.1)
The Committee once again deliberated on this aspect and came to the conclusion that
there were no compelling circumstances that warrant a review of the recommendation made
by the Committee in its One Hundred and Eleventh Report. Hence, the Committee opposes
the provision again, as it is not a workable proposition. (Para 9.2)
COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES (CLAUSE 30) (procedural simplification)
The Committee reiterates its observations made in the One Hundred and Eleventh
Report regarding Section 498A IPC wherein it had recommended that express provisions
may be made in Section 320 of CrPC to reflect the availability of compounding of offence
to the relatives of the husband. The Committee also feels that offence under section 498
need be made compoundable by the woman concerned in addition to the husband of the
woman. (Para 10.1)
ADJOURNMENTS – A VOIDANCE OF
The Committee feels that this provision, particularly sub-clause (c) may cause
practical difficulties in its implementation. Engaging another advocate/pleader for a
particular hearing is difficult not only for the party applying for adjournment but even for
courts. Because all papers of the case etc. may not be available with the new advocate
engaged and thus might be of no help/assistance to the court. (Para 11.1)
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
In view of the suggestions by various witnesses before the Committee, proviso to
Clause 11 needs to be amended. The reformulation may read as follows:–
“Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement
shall be conducted at the residence of victim or place of her choice and, as far as
practicable by a woman police officer, and she should be questioned in the presence
of her parents or near relatives or a social worker of the locality.” The Government
agreed to the revised formulation and also to substitute the word ‘questioned’ by an
appropriate word. (Para 12.1)
USE OF TECHNOLOGY
Even though video linkages are to be used only for extending judicial custody, the
Committee has its apprehensions that ill treatment and atrocities committed on the accused
in jail may not be shown/manifested to the judge as it would have been if the accused had
been presented physically before him. Since there would be physical gap of space between
the accused, who will be in jail and his advocate, who will be in court, effective
communication between them may not take place in such a situation. (Para 13.1)

17
INQUIRY AND TRIAL OF PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND
The Committee is of the view that a proviso may be added to sub-clause (a) of clause
33 of the Bill to the effect that any party being aggrieved by the report of the psychologist
or clinical psychiatrist for care and treatment may appeal to a medical board and that the
composition of the Board be provided in the proviso itself. The Government agreed to the
suggestion. (Para 14.1)
BAIL BOND : (IN CASE OF ACQUITTALS)
The Committee recommends to the Government to have a relook at the entire Bill
in the light of its observations/recommendations made in the previous paragraphs. The
Committee in this context would like to reiterate its recommendations made in the One
Hundred and Eleventh Report that Government should attempt to bring forward a
comprehensive Bill for revamping the criminal justice system. (Para 16)

MINUTES

20

21
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, January 8, 2007 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri T. K. Hamza
10. Shri Raghunath Jha
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
13. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2. Shri P.V . Bhide, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Seth, Joint Secretary
4. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director (Judicial)
21

22
2. At the outset, the Chairperson extended greetings for the New Year to all the members.
Thereafter, she informed the Committee about the agenda for the day, which included presentation
of the Home Secretary on Cr. PC (Amendment) Bill, 2006 and consideration of the replies of
the Home Secretary on the issues which were raised by the Members on the Sashastra Seema Bal
Bill, 2006.
3. The Chairperson, thereafter, informed the Committee that the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Bill, 2006 had been referred to it by Hon’ble Chairman for examination and report
thereon. She informed that the visit of the Committee to Daman and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
scheduled for 2
nd to 10 th February, 2007 has been rescheduled from 21 st to 25 th January, 2007.
4. The Chairperson, then welcomed the Home Secretary and invited him to make presentation
on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Home Secretary made a power-
point presentation on the various provisions of the Bill. According to the Home Secretary the said
Bill was a step forward in the endeavour of the Government for improving the judicial system of
the country. The concerned Joint Secretary of the Ministry made a detailed presentation on the Bill.
He stated that the concerns expressed in various quarters about the inordinate delay in the disposal
of criminal cases and miscarriage of justice due to witnesses turning hostile were sought to be
addressed in the Bill. He also apprised the Committee that the proposed amendments were based
on the recommendations made in the 154
th, 177 th and 178 th Reports of the Law Commission of
India.
5. The Joint Secretary thereafter explained to the Committee the salient features of the Bill,
through a powerpoint presentation. His presentation focussed on the following themes/issues:
(a) Amendments in law relating to arrest;
(b) Mandatory summary trial for all summons cases;
(c) Compounding of offences;
(d) Victimology;
(e) Protection of women;
(f) Avoidance of adjournments,
(g) Measures to curb witnesses turning hostile;
(h) Use of Technology;
(i) Inquiry and Trial of persons of unsound mind; and
(j) Bail Bonds.
6. The Chairperson and some Members raised certain queries and the Home Secretary clarified
those. Thereafter, Chairperson requested the Home Secretary to send written replies to the queries/
clarification which remained unanswered.
(The witnesses then withdrew )
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

23
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, January 17, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ilyas Azmi
6. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
7. Shri T.K. Hamza
8. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
9. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
11. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairperson recapitulated the discussions held in the Committee during
the presentation made by the Home Secretary on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2006.
2. The Chairperson mentioned that provisions relating to witnesses turning hostile had been
reintroduced through the Bill. In this context, she apprised the Committee that the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, seeking to amend the provisions relating to witnesses turning hostile,
had been examined by the Committee earlier in detail. However, these provisions were opposed
by the Committee in the light of views/suggestions of various legal experts and members of the
Committee. She informed the Committee that since those provisions had again been brought in
the current Bill, the present Committee had to take its stand on the provisions with cogent
reasons.
23

24
3. The Committee was of the unanimous view that it should hear some legal experts on the
proposed amendments in the Bill before going for clause-by-clause consideration. The Chairperson
then directed the Secretariat to prepare a list of the names of witnesses as well as possible dates
for taking evidence of the legal experts on the Bill.
4. The Chairperson then informed the Committee that the meeting scheduled on 18
th January
2007, stood postponed.
5. The Committee then, discussed its tour programme to Daman and Dadra & Nagar Haveli.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then, adjourned at 3.40 P.M.

25
XIV
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, February 1, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shri T.K. Hamza
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
9. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
11. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jaspal Singh, Former Judge, Delhi High Court
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jaspal Singh, Former Judge,
Delhi High Court to the sitting of the Committee and expressed gratitude to him for having spared
time to appear before the Committee. The Chairperson then briefly touched upon the proposed
amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 which was under
consideration of the Committee. Justice Singh was, thereafter, requested to make his submissions
on the Bill.
3. He was of the view that dispensing away with summons trials for the purpose of quick
disposal of cases would not be appropriate. He pointed out that the evidence taken during. the
25

26
summary trial would be so scanty that it would not be possible for the appellate court to appreciate
the facts. While appreciating the objective behind clause 3 of the Bill, which dealt with Section 24
CrPC, he drew the attention of the Committee on clumsy drafting and was of the view that the
words “to coordinate” may be replaced by the words “to assist”. He was also of the view that
the words “in consultation with Central Government or the State Government as the case may be”
under the proposed section may be deleted, as obtaining such permission would only delay the
matter.
3.1 On the proposed amendment in the law relating to arrest under Section 41 Cr.PC, Justice
Singh was of the opinion that arrest of a person for his own safety was highly objectionable as
that provision may be misused by the Police. He also suggested that the presence of an advocate
should be made compulsory through out the interrogation and suitable provision may be
incorporated in the clause.
3.2 On the proposed amendments relating to special protection to women, Justice Singh
suggested that the word “questioned” should be replaced with by an appropriate word. He was also
of the view that the victim should be examined at residence or in a place of her choice. He also
suggested that the words “victim under 18 years of age” should be removed and it may be
substituted by the words “victim of any age” in the clause.
4. Regarding amendments relating to witness turning hostile, Justice Singh recalled grounds for
deletion of the proposed amendments as mentioned in the 111
th Report of the Standing Committee
and stated that they were still valid. He also mentioned about two sections i.e., Section 406 and
Section 498 A, Indian Penal Code, 1860, which were often misused. Referring to these two
offences, he was of the view that Section 498 A should be made bailable and Section 406, as far
as it related to stridhan and dowry, be made bailable.
5. The Chairperson thanked the witness for his valuable suggestions.
(The witness then withdrew )
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.

27
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, February 12, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri T.K. Hamza
10. Shri Raghunath Jha
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
14. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Bhawani Singh (Former Chief Justice, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya
Pradesh and Gujarat High Courts and Lokayukta, Himachal Pradesh)
2. Shri M.N. Krishnamani, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
27

28
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed Member of the Committee and apprised the agenda
for the day. She also gave a hearty welcome to Justice Bhawani Singh to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, she gave a brief introduction of Justice Bhawani Singh.
3. The Chairperson then gave a brief background of the Criminal Procedure Code
(Amendment) Bill 2006 and asked justice Bhawani Singh to express his views on the Bill.
3.1 The Witness then presented his views on the various provisions of the Bill.
3.2 A few clarifications were sought by the Committee Members which were given by the
witness, accordingly.
3.3 The Chairperson, then, thanked the witness for presenting his views on the Bill and
implication thereof. Thereafter the witness withdrew.
4. The Chairperson then welcomed Shri M.N. Krishnamani, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of
India to the sitting of the Committee. After a brief introduction of Shri M.N. Krishnamani, the
Chairperson requested Shri Krishnamani to express his views on the various aspects of proposed
amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 through the Criminal Procedure Code
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
4.1 The Witness then presented his views on the Bill.
4.2 A few queries were raised by the Committee Members which were solved by the witness,
accordingly.
4.3 The Chairperson, then, thanked the witness for presenting his views on the Bill. After that
the witness withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
5. The Committee then, adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.

29
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, February 13, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri N. Jothi
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Raghunath Jha
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.N. Srikrishna (Former Judge, Supreme Court of India and Chairman,
Sixth Central Pay Commission)
2. Prof. N. R. Madhava Menon, Former Director, National Law Academy, Bhopal
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed Member of the Committee and apprised the agenda
for the day. She also gave a hearty welcome to Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.N. Srikrishna (Former Judge,
29

30
Supreme Court of India and Chairman, Sixth Central Pay Commission) to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, she gave a brief introduction of Justice Bhawani Singh.
3. The Chairperson then gave a brief background of the Criminal Procedure Code
(Amendment) Bill 2006 and asked justice Srikrishna to express his views on the Bill.
3.1 The Witness then presented his views on the various provisions of the Bill.
3.2 A few clarifications were sought by the Committee Members which were given by the
witness, accordingly.
3.3 The Chairperson, then, thanked the witness for presenting his views on the Bill and
implication thereof. Thereafter the witness withdrew.
4. The Chairperson then welcomed Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon, Former Director, National
Law Academy, Bhopal to the sitting of the Committee. After a brief introduction of Prof. N.R.
Madhava Menon, the Chairperson requested Shri Menon to express his views on the various
aspects of proposed amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 through the Criminal
Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
4.1 The Witness then presented his views on the Bill.
4.2 A few queries were raised by the Committee Members which were solved by the witness,
accordingly.
4.3 The Chairperson, then, thanked the witness for presenting his views on the Bill. After that
the witness withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
5. The Committee then, adjourned at 5.18 
P.M.

31
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 22 nd February, 2007 in Main Committee
Room ‘A’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri Raghunath Jha
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shri Sachin Bansal
2. Prof. Virendra Bansal
3. Dr. Sudeep
4. Dr. Anupama Singh
5. Mrs. Preeti Goel
6. Mrs. Saroj Rani
Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
31

32
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the team of persons representing “Rakshak” and
“498a.org” who have been given their oral evidence on the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
3. The Committee has also considered and adopted the Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006 with
the slight modifications/minor corrections.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.08 
P.M.

33
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 4 May, 2007 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Shri T.K. Hamza
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Shri Sachin Pilot
10. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft One Hundred Twenty- seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER. After some discussion, the draft
report was adopted with addition of a paragraph.
4. Members of the Committee appreciated the efforts of the Chairperson and Secretariat for
preparing a comprehensive report by incorporating all the relevant issues in the draft.
5. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Report to/in both Houses of Parliament on
8 May, 2007. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence Shri R.K. Dhawan to
present the Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Tapir Gao and in his absence Shri T.K. Hamza to
lay a copy of the Report on the Table ofthe Lok Sabha.
33

34
6. The Chairperson thereafter recalled that Convenors and Members of some of the sub-
Committees, during the meeting of the Committee held on 17 April, 2007, requested for enlarging
the scope of the subjects assigned to the sub-Committees for study. The Chairperson informed
them that after careful consideration of the matter, she was of the view that it would be better
for the sub-Committees to first complete the examination of the subjects already identified and
report thereon. If more issues were to be taken up for detailed discussion, it could be done after
the sub-Committees had completed their present task. The Chairperson, accordingly, requested the
Convenors of the sub-Committees to start working on the subjects allotted to the respective sub-
Committees.
7. The Committee then reviewed the work pending before it and also took note of the fact
that it had to present Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 by the
last week of the Budget Session. The Committee felt that a few more meetings were still required
to be held to complete the remaining stages of consideration of the Bill and report thereon, and
the time available during the current session was insufficient. The Committee, therefore, decided
to seek further extension of time up to the last week of the Monsoon Session for completing the
consideration of the Bill and present its report thereon. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its
Chairperson to approach Hon’ble Chairman Rajya Sabha to seek extension of time for presentation
of the Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 up to the last week of
the Monsoon Session, 2007 of the Rajya Sabha.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

35
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, June 11, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
2. At the onset the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
then recapitulated the discussion held on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
in seven sittings of the Committee. The Chairperson mentioned some important issues raised in the
Memoranda, oral evidence and by Members of the Committee which are as under:-
Summons and warrant cases:
(a) Deletion of summary procedure (Section 251-259 of CrPC);
(b) Deprivation of the benefits and protection of the summons trial;
(c) The Magistrate not to give detailed reasons and need not record evidence under
Summary trial;
(d) Scanty evidence under summary trial to the appreciation of the Appellate court.
35

36
Choice of Advocate to victim:
(i) Deletion of the word ‘may’ from Clause 3 and mandatory permission to be given by
the Court.
(ii) No need for consulting the Central Government or the State Governments;
(iii) Advocate of the victim to assist the prosecution only and not to coordinate with the
prosecution.
Law relating to Arrest:
(i) the possibility of misuse of the provision arresting a person in the interest of his
safety.
(ii) Deprivation of liberty of the person taken into custody.
Video Linkages
(i) The person in judicial custody during video conferencing might not explain whatever
he wanted to had he appeared before the Judge.
(ii) Absence of free and accused friendly atmosphere in the jails for fair interaction
between accused and advocate.
(iii) A vailability of the facility of video conferencing is available only in few jails; and
(iv) Use of latest technology which cannot be tampered with.
Witness turning hostile/video recording of statements:
(i) Video recording of the statement of an accused could be misused as the same might
be self-incriminatory.
(ii) The rules of professional ethics prescribe that an advocate should not accept a brief
where he was a likely witness. Presence of an advocate would expose him as he
becomes a witness in the trial.
(iii) Inadequacy of the number of Magistrates rendering the procedure unworkable under
Section 164B; and
(iv) The rule of evidence states that a person cannot be a witness against himself.
2.1 One Member, referring to the evidence tendered before the Committee, felt that Government
wanted to reduce the pendency in the courts by bringing the amendments but the same was bereft
of vision, therefore, not achievable.
2.2 Another Member while referring to the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
111
th  Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003 stated that the stand by taken it on the
issue of witness turning hostile still holds good and the Committee should reiterate those
recommendation in its report, on the subject under consideration.
2.3 One Member expressed the view that the piecemeal approach of the Government for revamping
the criminal justice system would not be able to serve the intended purpose. He was of the view
that the Government should consider the Code of Criminal Procedure in its entirety and bring
forward a comprehensive bill incorporating necessary changes in the core. He further opined that
while drafting the Bill the Ministry should be aware that the essence of the criminal justice system
should not be lost sight of.

37
2.4 The Chairperson concluded the discussion with an observation that instead of bringing piece
meal amendments to the Cr.P.C. Code, the Government should examine the reports submitted by
Commissions and Committees on reforming the Criminal Justice System and after considering all
the pros and cons of the intended changes, take a holistic view and introduce a comprehensive Bill.
She then informed the Committee that the detailed discussion on the Bill would be held in the
presence of Home Secretary and Law Secretary during the clause-by-clause consideration.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.

38
XXVIII
TWENTY EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 5 July, 2007 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri N. Jothi
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Sachin Pilot
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
4. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary (Legislative Department)
2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs)
3. Shri N.L. Meena, JS & LC, (Legislative Department)
38

39
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda for the day. She also welcomed the officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Law & Justice to the sitting of the Committee.
2.1 The Chairperson informed the Members that the Cr. PC (Amendment) Bill, 2006 introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on 23 rd August, 2006 was referred to the Committee on 28th August, 2006 for
examination and report within three months. The stipulated period had been extended in the first
instance upto the first day of the last week of the Budget Session of 2007. However, as the
Committee could not complete its work by the extended date, Hon’ble Chairman had kindly granted
further extension of time to it, up to the last week of the Monsoon Session, 2007.
3. The Chairperson then gave a brief account of the discussions held on Bill and thereafter,
took up the clause-by-clause consideration thereof.
Clause 2
4.0 The Committee observed that the issue of doing away with summons procedure and
compulsory trial of summons cases summarily came to the centre stage repeatedly in the
deliberations of the Committee. The Committee found that by changing the definition of warrant
cases and summons cases, the number of offences likely to be tried summarily would increase
from 153 to 211, as 58 offences under Cr.PC carry imprisonment upto three years. The proposed
amendment would not serve the intended purpose as it would include serious offences like, theft
(Section 379), extortion (Section 384), criminal breach of trust (Section 406), subjecting married
women to cruelty (Section 498 A) etc. If these serious offences are tried summarily, it would not
be possible for the appellate court to appreciate the case as the evidence recorded in those cases
will be very scanty.
4.1 The Committee felt that due deliberations had not taken place on the pros and cons and
consequences that may flow from these provisions. The Ministry was not able to satisfy the
Members about the necessity and consequences of these new provisions. According to the
Ministries of Home Affairs and Law & Justice, the main reason for bringing the Bill was to
implement the recommendations of the Law Commission, aiming at reducing the pendency of cases
before Courts. The Committee was astonished to take note of the fact that while the Government
was trying to alter the basic tenets of criminal jurisprudence, it was not addressing the primary
issue of filling up of a large number of vacancies existing in various courts.
4.2 The Committee adopted clause 2, subject to the above observations.
Clause 3
5.0 The Committee was of the view that permission under proviso to section 24 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure should be given by the court and it should be made mandatory. It has
suggested that there was no need for consulting the State Government or the Central Government
to engage an advocate. The Committee, therefore, decided that in clause 3, the proviso intended
to be inserted in section 24 of the principal Act may be read as under:
“provided that the court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to
co-ordinate with the prosecution.”
Clause 4
6.0 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.

40
Clause 5
7.0 The Committee discussed the proposed amendments and implications thereof on the
individual liberty vis-a-vis Public Order and adopted the clause subject to retention of the words
‘credible information’ and ‘or a reasonable complaint has been received’ in the Principal Act.
8.0 The Committee decided to take up the consideration of the remaining clauses of the Bill on
the following day.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M.

41
XXIX
TWENTY NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 6 July, 2007 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri T. K. Hamza
10. Prof. K. M. Kader Mohideen
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
4. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary (Legislative Department)
2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs)
3. Shri N.L. Meena, JS & LC, (Legislative Department)
41

42
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of
the agenda for the day. She also welcomed officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Ministry of Law & Justice.
3.0 The Committee took up further clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. After some
discussion, the Committee felt that some of the new definitions/concepts/provisions introduced in
the Bill, particularly relating to summons and warrants cases, arrest, video conferencing and
witnesses turning hostile seemed to be not well thought of and that they were based solely on the
recommendations of the Law Commission and due deliberations had not taken place on the pros
and cons and consequences that might flow from those provisions. The representatives of the
Ministries of Home Affairs and the Law and Justice could not give satisfactory replies to the
questions regarding necessity and consequences of these new provisions.
3.1 The issue of doing away with summons procedure and compulsory trial of summons cases
summarily came to the centre-stage repeatedly in the deliberations of the Committee. When the
representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs and Law & Justice were asked to comment on
this issue, they informed the Committee using the refrain that the main reason for bringing the Bill
was to implement the recommendations contained in certain reports of the Law Commission aiming
at reducing the pendency of cases before Courts. The Committee was surprised to take note of
the fact that while the Government was trying to alter the basic tenets of criminal jurisprudence,
it was not addressing the primary issue of filling up of a large number of vacancies existing in
various courts.
3.2 A unanimous view, therefore, emerged in the Committee that no useful purpose would be
served by proceeding further with the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill as the Committee
could not be convinced of the rationale for introducing drastic changes in the criminal
jurisprudence of the country. The Committee, instead decided to submit its observations and
conclusions on various concepts incorporated in the Bill while reporting its examination to the two
Houses of  Parliament.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.56 
A.M.

43
XXXII
THIRTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, 3 August, 2007 in Room No. 63, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri T. K. Hamza
9. Shri Raghunath Jha
10. Prof. K. M. Kader Mohideen
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Joint Director
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Assistant Director
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt draft 128th Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
2.1 After some discussion the Report was adopted with some minor changes suggested by
Members. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to carry out the necessary modifications.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report along with evidence tendered before it on
the Bill in both Houses of Parliament in the ensuing monsoon session and authorised the
Chairperson of the reconstituted Committee to decide the names of Members who may present the
Report alongwith evidence and date of presentation.
4. The Committee then took up the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 for
consideration and reviewed the work done so far on the Bill. The Committee felt that it should hear
43

44
the views of more NGOs that have submitted written memoranda for which a few more sittings
are required. After that, the Committee would require at least four-five sittings for in-house
discussions and c1ause-by-c1ause consideration and adoption of the Report. The Committee,
therefore, felt that it would not be possible for it to finish the remaining stages of the consideration
of the Bill during the Monsoon Session and, accordingly, decided to seek extension of time up to
the last week of the Winter Session, 2007 for presenting its Report on the Bill. The Committee,
accordingly, authorized its Chairperson to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the
purpose.
5. The Chairperson then recapitulated the work done by the Committee during its tenure
coming to an end on 4 August 2007. She informed Members that during the period, the Committee
had held 35 sittings and presented 6 Reports to the Parliament. She also mentioned about the visit
undertaken by the Committee to UTs of Daman & Dadra and Nagar Haveli. She also made a
reference to the reconstitution of five sub-Committees on the following subjects: (i) Modemisation
of Prison Administration, (ii) Rehabilitation of Tsunami Affected Persons, (iii) Civil Defence &
Rehabilitation of J & K Migrants, (iv) Boder Fencing and Floodlighting Projects and (v) Housing
scheme for Central Police Forces and Delhi Police. She also informed the Members that the sub-
Committee on Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects visited some border areas in Rajasthan and
Gujarat.
5.1 The Chairperson thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation in the
deliberations of the Committee and stated that the Standing Committees were going to be
reconstituted soon and she wished that most of the colleagues might be renominated to the
Committee. On behalf of the Committee, she also placed on record deep sense of appreciation for
the good work done by the Secretariat while assisting it.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.

45
ANNEXURES

AS INTRODUCED  IN THE RAJYA S ABHA
23 AUG., 2006
Bill No. LXXX of 2006
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act.
2. In section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clauses ( w) and
(x), the following clauses shall respectively be substituted, namely:—
‘(w) “summons-case” means a case relating to an
offence triable summarily and not being a warrant-case;
(wa) “victim” means a person who has suffered any
loss or injury caused by reason of the act or omission for which
the accused person has been charged and the expression “victim”
includes his or her guardian or legal heir;
47
Short title and
commencement.
ANNEXURE-I
Amendment of
section 2.
2 of 1974.

48
(x) “warrant-case” means a case relating to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term exceeding three years;’.
3. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 8), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage
an advocate of his choice to co-ordinate with the prosecution in
consultation with the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may, be, under this sub-section,”.
4. In section 26 of the principal Act, in clause ( a), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any offence under section 376 and sections
376A to 376D of the Indian Penal Code shall be tried as far as
practicable by a Court presided over by a woman.”.
5. In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( l), for clauses ( a) and ( b), the following
clauses shall respectively be substituted namely:
“(a) who commits, in the presence of a police
officer, a cognizable, offence;
(b) against whom credible information has been
received that he has committed a cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the
following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on
the basis of that information that such person has
committed the said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such
arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from
committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the
offence or for the reason that detention of
such person in custody is in the interest of
his safety; or
(c) to prevent such person from
causing the evidence of the offence to
disappear or tampering with such evidence in
any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from
making any inducement, threat or promise to
any person acquainted with the facts of the
case so as to dissuade him from disclosing
such facts to the Court or to the police
officer; or
Amendment of
section 24.
Amendment of
section 26.
Amendment of
section 41.
45 of 1860.

49
(e) that unless such person is arrested;
his presence in the court whenever required
cannot be ensured; and
the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his
reasons in writing.
(ba) against whom credible information has been received
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven
years whether with or without fine or with death sentence and
the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that
information that such person has committed the said offence;”;
(ii) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person
concerned in a non-cognizable offence or against whom a
complaint has been made or credible information has been
received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so
concerned; shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of
a Magistrate.”.
6. After section 41 of the principal Act the following new-
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“41 A. ( 1) Where the case falls under sub-section ( 1) of
section 41, the police officer may, instead of arresting the
person concerned, issue to him a notice of appearance requiring
him to appear before the police officer issuing the notice or at
such other place as may be specified in the notice and to co-
operate with the police officer in the investigation of the offence
referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 41.
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall
be the duty of that person to comply with the terms of the
notice.
(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply
with the notice, he shall not be arrested in respect of the
offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be
recorded, the police is of the opinion that he ought to be
arrested.
(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with
the terms of the notice, it shall be lawful for the police officer
to arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice, subject to
such orders as may have been passed in this behalf by a
competent Court.
4lB. Every police officer while making an arrest shall—
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification
of his name which will facilitate easy identification;
Insertion of new
sections 41A,
41B, 41C and
41D.
Notice of
appearance
before police
officer.
Procedure of
arrest and duties
of the officer
making arrest.

50
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall
be
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a
member of the family of the person arrested or a
respectable member of the locality where the arrest is
made;
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the
memorandum is attested by a member of his family that
he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by him
to be informed of his arrest.
41 C. ( 1) The State Government shall establish a police
control room—
(a) in every district; and
(b) at State level.
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on
the notice board kept outside the control rooms at every district,
the names and addresses of the persons arrested and the name
and designation of the police officers who made the arrests.
(3) The control room at the Police Headquarters at the
State level shall collect from time to time details about-the
persons arrested, nature of the offence with which they are
charged and maintain a database for the information of the
general public.
41 D. When any person is arrested and interrogated by
the police, the arrestee shall be entitled to meet an advocate of
his choice during interrogation, though not throughout
interrogation.”.
7. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless
the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission to
custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and
unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police
officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person
of the woman for making her arrest:”.
8. For section 54 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“54. (1) When any person is arrested, he shall be examined
by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is
made:
Provided that where the arrested person is female, the
examination of the body shall be made only by or under the
supervision of a female registered medical practitioner.
Control room at
districts.
Right of arrested
person to meet
an advocate of
his choice during
interrogation.
Amendment of
section 46.
Substitution of
new section for
section 54.
Examination of
arrested person
by medical
practitioner.

51
(2) The registered medical practitioner so examining the
arrested person shall prepare the record of such examination,
mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the
person arrested, and the approximate time when such injuries or
marks may have been inflicted.
(3) Where an examination is made under sub-section ( 1),
a copy of the report of such examination shall be furnished by
the medical practitioner to the arrested person or the person
nominated by such arrested person.”.
9. After section 55 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“55A.It shall be the duty of the person having the custody
of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety
of the accused.”.
10. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“60A. No arrest shall be made except in accordance with
the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being
in force providing for arrest.”
11. In section 157 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape,
the investigation shall be conducted at the residence of the
victim and, as far as practicable by a woman police officer and
if the victim is under eighteen years of age, she should be
questioned in the presence of her parents or a social worker of
the locality.”.
12. In section 161 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), the
following provisos shall be inserted namely:—
“Provided that statement made under this sub-section
may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means:
Provided further that in respect of offences specified in
sub-section ( 1) of section 164B, where such person is required
to be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate for recording his
statement under that section, his statement to the police officer
shall not be reduced into writing under this sub-section:
Provided also that where any statement has been recorded
under section 164B, the police officer shall enclose a copy of
such statement as part of his police diary recording therein that
such person has made such statement before the Metropolitan
Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate and
proceed further investigation in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.”.
Insertion of new
section 55A.
Insertion of new
section 60A.
Amendment of
section 157.
Arrest to be
made strictly
according to the
Code.
Amendment of
section 161.
Health and
safety of
arrested person.

52
13. For section 162 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“162. ( 1) The statement made by any person to a police
officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter shall,
if reduced into writing, be signed by the person making it and
a copy of the statement as recorded shall be given forthwith
free of cost by the police officer to the person who made the
Statement, under acknowledgement.
(2) Every statement referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
contain the date, time and place as to when and where the
statement was recorded and shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-section ( 3) of section 173, be forwarded forthwith by the
officer-in-charge of the police station to the Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence upon a police
report.
(3) Any statement referred to in sub-section ( 1) or any
record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any
part of such statement or record shall not be used for any
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when
such statement was made:
Provided that when any witness is called for the
prosecution in such inquiry or trial, whose statement has been
reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement if
duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the
permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such
witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is so
used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination
of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any
matter referred to in his cross-examination.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to
any statement falling within the provisions of clause ( 1) of
section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or to affect the
provisions of section 27 of that Act.
Explanation—An omission to state a fact or circumstance
in the statement referred to in sub-section ( 1) may amount to
contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise
relevant having regard to the context in which such omission
occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in
the particular context shall be a question of fact.”.
14. In section 164 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for
the proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that any confession or statement made under
this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic
means in the presence of the .advocate of the person accused
of an offence:
Substitution of
new section for
section 162.
Statement to
police to be
signed: Use of
statements in
evidence.
Amendment of
section 164.
1 of 1872.
1 of 1872.

53
Provided further that no confession shall be recorded by
a police officer on whom any power of a Magistrate has been
conferred under any law for the time being in force.”.
15. After section 164A of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“164B. (1) Any police officer not being below the rank of
sub-inspector making an investigation of any offence punishable
with death or imprisonment for ten years or more, shall, in the
course of such investigation, produce all persons whose statement
appears to him to be material and essential for proper investigation
of the case, to the nearest Metropolitan Magistrate or the
Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, for recording their
statements.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3), the
Magistrate shall record the statements of such persons produced
before him under sub-section ( 1) on oath and shall forward
such statements so recorded to the Magistrate by whom the
case is to be inquired into or tried.
(3) The Magistrate shall, before recording any statement
of a Person under sub-section ( 2), satisfy himself that such
person is making the statement voluntarily and not under any
inducement, threat or promise.
(4) Copies of such statements shall be furnished to the
police officer referred to in sub-section ( 1).”.
16. In section 167 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2)—
(a) in the proviso,—
(i) for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of
the accused in custody of the police under this
section unless the accused is produced before him
in person for the first time and subsequently every
time till the accused remains in the custody of the
police, but the Magistrate may extend further
detention in judicial custody on production of the
accused either in person or through the medium or
electronic video linkage.”;
(ii) for Explanation 11, the following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation 11 —If any question arises whether
an accused person was produced before the Magistrate
as required under clause ( b), the production of the
accused person may be proved by his signature on the
order authorising detention or by the order certified by
the Magistrate as to production of the accused person
through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the
case may be.”;
Insertion of new
section 164B.
Amendment of
section 167.
Recording of
confessions and
statements in
certain cases.

54
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted
namely:—
“Provided further that in case of woman under
eighteen years of age, the detention shall be authorised to
be in the custody of a remand home or recognised social
institution.”.
17. In section 172 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1),
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
“(1A) The statements of witnesses recorded, during the
course of investigation, under section 161 shall be inserted in
the case diary.
(1B) The diary referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be a
bound volume and duly paginated.”.
18. In section 173 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section ( 1); the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) the investigation in relation to rape of a child
may be completed within three months from the date on
which the information was recorded by the officer-in-
charge of the police station.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( g), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely;-
“(h) whether the report of medical examination of
woman has been attached where investigation relates to
an offence under section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C or
376D of the Indian Penal Code.”.
19. After section 195 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“195A. A witness or any other person may file complaint
in relation to an offence under section 195A of the Indian Penal
Code.”.
20. In section 198 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 6), for
the words “fifteen years of age”, the words “eighteen years of age”
shall be substituted.
21. In section 242 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( l), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Magistrate shall in advance supply to
the accused, the statement of witnesses recorded during
investigation by the police.”.
Amendment of
section 172.
Amendment of
section 173.
Insertion of new
section 195A.
Procedure for
witnesses in case
of threatening,
etc.
Amendment of
section 242.
45 to 1860.
45 to 1860.
Amendment of
section 198.

55
22. In the principal Act, Chapter XX of the Code containing
sections 251 to 259 shall be omitted.
23. For section 260 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“260. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,
any Court or Magistrate shall try in a summary way all summons-
cases.
(2) When in summons-case, of a summary trial it appears
to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is
improper to try the case summarily, the Court of the Magistrate,
as the case may be, shall record reasons for not trying the case
summarily.”.
24. For section 262 of the principal Act, the, following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“262. ( 1) When in a summons-case the accused appears
or is brought before the Magistrate, the particulars of the
offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he
shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to
make, but it shall not be necessary to frame a formal charge.
(2) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall
record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the
accused and may in his discretion, convict him thereon.
(3) Where a summons has been issued under section 206
and the accused desires to plead guilty to the charge without
appearing before the Magistrate, he shall transmit to the
Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea
and also the amount of fine specified in the summons.
(4) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), the Magistrate shall proceed to record
evidence as provided under section 274 and conclude the trial
as provided under sections 263 and 264.
(5) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application
of the prosecution or the accused, issue a summon to any
witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or
other thing and may require that the reasonable expenses of the
witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be
deposited in Court.
(6) ( a) If the summons has been issued on complaint;
and on the day appointed for the appearance of the accused, or
any day subsequent thereto on which the hearing may be
adjourned the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall,
notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, acquit the
accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn
the hearing of the case to some other day.
Omission of
sections 251 to
259.
Substitution of
new section for
section 260.
Substitution of
new section for
section 262.
Power to try
summarily.
Procedure for
summary trials.

56
(b) The provisions of clause ( a) shall, so far as may be,
apply also to cases where the non-appearance of the complainant
is due to his death.
 ( 7) If a complainant, at any time before a final order is
passed in any case under this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate
that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw
his complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one
accused, against all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit
him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the
accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.
(8) In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon
complaint, the Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous
sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other Judicial
Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the
proceedings at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and
where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence
or the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a
judgment of acquittal, and in any other case release the accused,
and, such release shall have the effect of discharge.
(9) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding
six months or fine up to rupees three thousand or both shall be
passed in case of any conviction under this Chapter.”.
25. In section 263 of the principal Act, clause ( f) shall be
omitted.
26. In section 274 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the words summons-cases tried", the word “summarily” shall be-
inserted.
27. In section 275 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-
section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means
in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the
offence.”.
28. In section 309 of the principal Act,—
(a) In sub-section ( 1) the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to
an offence under sections 376 to 376D of the Indian Penal
Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible, be completed
within a period of two months from the date of commencement
of the examination of witnesses.”.
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the third proviso and before
Explanation 1, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that—
Amendment of
section 263.
Amendment of
section 274.
Amendment of
section 275.
Amendment of
section 309.

57
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the
request of a party except where the circumstances
are beyond the control of that party;
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is
engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for
adjournment;
(c) where the illness of a pleader or his
inability to conduct the case for any reason, other
than his being engaged in another Court, is put
forward as a ground for adjournments, the Court
shall not grant the adjournment unless it is satisfied
that the party applying the adjournment could not
have engaged another pleader in time;
(d) where a witness is present in Court but a
party or his pleader is not present or the party or
his pleader though present in Court, is not ready to
examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court
may, if thinks fit, record the statement of the
witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit
dispensing with the examination-in-chief or cross-
examination of the witness, as the case may be.".
29. In section 313 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 4),
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence
Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to be put to
the accused and the Court may permit filing of written statement
by the accused as sufficient compliance of this section.”.
30. In section 320 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the T
ABLE, the following T ABLE
shall be substituted, namely:—
“TABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom
Indian Penal offence may
Code applicable be compounded
12 3
Uttering words, etc., 298 The person whose
with deliberate intent religious feelings are
to wound the religious intended to be
feelings of any person. wounded.
V oluntarily causing hurt. 323 The person to whom
the hurt is caused.
V oluntarily causing hurt 324 Ditto.
by dangerous weapons
or means.
Amendment of
section 313.
Amendment of
section 320.

58
12 3
V oluntarily causing hurt 334 Ditto.
on provocation.
V oluntarily causing 335 Ditto.
grievous hurt on grave
and sudden provocation.
Wrongfully restraining or 341, The person restrained
confining any person. 342 or confined.
Wrongfully confining a 343 The person confined.
person for three days
or more.
Wrongfully confining a 344 Ditto.
person for ten days or
more.
Wrongfully confining a 346 Ditto.
person in secret.
Assault or use of criminal 352, The person assaulted
force. 355, or to whom criminal
358 force is used.
Theft 379 The owner of the
property stolen.
Dishonest misappropriation 403 The owner of the
property. property misappropriated
Criminal breach of trust. 406 The owner of the
property in respect of
which the breach of
trust has been
committed.
Criminal breach of trust by 407 Ditto.
a carrier, wharfinger, etc.
Dishonestly receiving stolen 411 The owner of the
property knowing it to be property stolen.
stolen.
Assisting in the concealment 414 Ditto.
or disposal of stolen
property, knowing it to be
stolen.
Cheating. 417 The person cheated.
Cheating by personation. 419 Ditto.

59
12 3
Fraudulent removal or 421 The creditors who are
concealment of property, a ffected thereby.
etc., to prevent distribution
among creditors.
Fraudulently preventing from 422 Ditto.
being made available for his
creditors a debt or demand
due to the offender.
Fraudulent execution of deed 423 The person affected
of transfer containing false thereby.
statement of consideration.
Fraudulent removal or 424 Ditto.
concealment of property.
Mischief, when the only loss 426, The p erson to whom
or damage cause is loss or 427 the loss or damage is
damage to a private person. caused.
Mischief by killing or 428 The owner of the
maiming animal. animal.
Mischief by killing or 429 The owner of the
maiming cattle, etc. cattle or animal.
Mischief by injury to works 430 The person to whom
of irrigation by wrongfully the loss or damage is
diverting water when the caused.
only loss or damage caused
is loss or damage to private
person.
Criminal trespass. 447 The person in possession
of the property
trespassed upon.
House-trespass. 448 Ditto.
House-trespass to commit an 451 The person in possession
offence (other than theft) of the house trespassed
punishable with imprisonment. upon.
Using a false trade or property 482 The p erson to whom
mark. loss or injury is caused
by such use.
Counterfeiting a trade or 483 The person to whom
property mark used by another. loss or injury is caused
by such use.

60
12 3
Knowingly selling, or exposing 486 Ditto.
or possessing for sale or for
manufacturing purpose, goods
marked with a counterfeit
property mark.
Criminal breach of contract 491 The person with whom
of service. the offender has
contracted.
Adultery. 497 The h usband of the
woman.
Enticing or taking away or 498 Ditto.
detaining with criminal intent
a married woman.
Defamation, except such cases 500 The person defamed.
as are specified against
section 500 of the Indian
Penal Code in column 1 of
the Table under sub-
section (2).
Printing or engraving matter, 501 Ditto.
knowing it to be defamatory.
Sale of printed or engraved 502 Ditto.
substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing
it to contain such matter.
Insult intended to provoke a 504 The person insulted.
breach of the peace.
Criminal intimidation. 506 The person intimidated.
Inducing person to believe 508 The person induced.”;
himself an object of divine
displeasure.

61
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the T ABLE the following T ABLE
shall be substituted, namely:—
“TABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom
Indian Penal offence may
Code applicable be compounded
12 3
Causing miscarriage; 312 The woman to whom
miscarriage is caused.
V oluntarily causing 325 The person to whom
grievous hurt. hurt is caused.
Causing hurt by 337 Ditto.
doing an act so rashly
and negligently as to
endanger human life
or the personal safety
of others.
Causing grievous hurt 338 Ditto.
by doing an act so
rashly and negligently
as to endanger human
life or the personal
safety of others.
Assault or criminal 354 The woman assaulted
force to woman with to whom the criminal
intent to outrage her force was used.
modesty.
Assault or criminal force 357 The person assaulted
in attempting wrongfully or to whom the force
to confine a person. was used.
Theft, by clerk or servant 381 The owner of the
of property in possession property stolen.
of master.
Criminal breach of trust 408 The owner of the
by a clerk or servant. property in respect
of which the breach
of trust has been
committed.
Cheating a person whose 418 The person cheated.
interest the offender was
bound, either by law or
by legal contract, to
protect.

62
12 3
Cheating and dishonestly 420 The person cheated.
indusing delivery of
property or the making,
alteration or destruction
of a valuable security.
Marrying again during the 494 The husband or wife
life-time.of a husband or of the person so
wife. marrying.
Defamation against the 500 The person defamed.
President or the Vice-
President or the Governor
of a State or the
Administrator of a Union
territory or a Minister in
respect of his public
functions when instituted
upon a complaint made
by the Public Prosecutor.
Uttering words or sounds 509 The woman whom it
or making gestures or was intended to insult
exhibiting any object or whose privacy was
intending to insult the intruded upon.”;
modesty of a woman or
intruding upon the privacy
of a woman.
(iii) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(3) When an offence is compoundable under this
section, the abetment of such offence or an attempt to
commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an
offence) or where the accused is liable under sections 34
or 149 of the Indian Penal Code may be compounded in
like manner.”.
31. In section 327 of the principle Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that in camera trial shall be
conducted as far as practicable by a woman Judge or
Magistrate.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
45 of 1860.
Amendment of
section 327.

63
“Provided that the ban on printing or publication of
trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be
lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and
address of the parties.”.
32. In section 328 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be
of unsound mind, he shall refer such person to a
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for care, treatment
and prognosis of the condition and the psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the
Magistrate whether the accused is suffering from
unsoundness of mind or mental retardation.”;
(b) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(3) If such Magistrate is informed that the person
referred to in subsection ( 1A) is a person of unsound
mind, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the
unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of
entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable,
the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and
shall examine the record of evidence produced by the
prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused
but without questioning the accused, if he finds that no
prima facie case is made out against the accused, he
shall, instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the
accused and deal with him in the manner provided under
section 330:
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima
facie case is made out against the accused in respect of
whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he
shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the
opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is
required for the treatment of the accused, and order the
accused to be dealt with as provided under section 330.
(4) If such Magistrate is informed that the person
referred to in subsection ( 1A) is a person with mental
retardation, the Magistrate shall further determine whether
the mental retardation renders the accused incapable of
entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable,
the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal
with the accused in the manner provided under section
330.”.
Amendment of
section 328.

64
33. In section 329 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of
Sessions finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he or
it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist
or clinical psychologist shall report to the Magistrate or
Court whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness
of mind.”;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that
the person referred to in sub-section ( 1A) is a person of
unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further
determine whether unsoundness of mind renders the
accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused
is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record
a finding to that effect and shall examine the record of
evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing
the advocate of the accused but without questioning the
accused, if the Magistrate of Court finds that no prima
facie case is made out against the accused, he or it shall,
instead of postponing the trial, discharge the accused and
deal with him in the manner provided under section 330:
Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that
a prima facie case is made out against the accused in
respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is
arrived at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as
in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist,
is required for the treatment of the accused.
(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima
facie case is made out against the accused and he is
incapable of entering defence by reason of mental
retardation, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the
accused to be dealt with in accordance with section
330.”.
34. For section 330 of the principal Act the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“330. ( 1) Whenever a person if found under section 328
or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of
unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or
Court, as the case may be shall, whether the case is one in
which bail may be taken or not, order release of such person
on bail:
Amendment of
section 329.
Substitution of
new section for
section 330.
Release of
person of
unsound mind
pending
investigtion or
trial.

65
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness
of mind or mental retardation which does not mandate in-patient
treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular
out-patient psychiatric treatment from the nearest medical facility
and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other
person.
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, bail cannot be granted
or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall order
the accused to be kept in such a place where regular psychiatric
treatment can be provided, and shall report the action taken to
the State Government:
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused
in a lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in accordance
with such rules as the state Government may have made under
the Mental Health Act, 1987.
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 328 or
section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of
unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or
Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the nature of
the act committed and the extent of unsoundness of mind or
mental retardation, further determine if the release of the accused
can be ordered:
Provided that—
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of
a specialist, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be,
decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided
under section 328 or section 329, such release may be
ordered, if sufficient security is given that the accused
shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any
other person;
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be,
is of opinion that discharge of the accused cannot be
ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility
for persons of unsound mind or mental retardation may
be ordered wherein the accused may be provided care
and appropriate education and training.”.
35. In section 344 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the words “such evidence should be used in such proceeding”, the
words, figures and letter "then, subject to the provisions of section
344A” shall be inserted.
36. After section 344 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment of
section 344.
Insertion of new
section 344A.

66
“344A. ( 1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or
final order disposing of any judicial proceeding, a Court of
Session or Magistrate of the first class expresses an opinion to
the effect that any witness, whose statement recorded under
sub-section ( 2) of section 164B in respect of an offence referred
to in sub-section ( 2) of section 221, had subsequently retracted
his statement in material particulars by stating inconsistent facts
or had changed his version by narrating new facts which were
destructive of the prosecution case, and the Court of Session or
a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that such retraction,
contradiction or change of version is of such a nature that the
witness is guilty of knowingly or wilfully giving false evidence
or fabricating false evidence with the intention that such evidence
should be used in such proceeding, it or he may, if satisfied that
it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the
witness should be tried summarily for giving or fabricating false
evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving
the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he
should not be punished for such offence, try such offence
summarily, and notwithstanding anything contained in the
provisions of this Code, sentence him to imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three months but which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall apply
only where the giving or fabrication of false evidence relates to
the conduct of the witness subsequent to the recording of his
statement under sub-section ( 2) of section 164B:
Provided further that the prosecution may apply to the
Court or Magistrate to initiate proceeding under this section
against a witness who has retracted from his statement.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections ( 2), ( 3) and ( 4) of
section 344 shall apply for trial of an offence under this section
as they apply to the summary trial of an offence referred to in
sub-section ( 1) of that section.”.
37. After section 357 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“357A. ( l) Every State Government in co-ordination
with the Central Government shall prepare a scheme for
providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the
victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or injury
as a result of the crime and who require rehabilitation.
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the
Court for compensation, the District Legal Service Authority
or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be,
shall decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded
under the scheme referred to in sub-section ( 1).
Procedure for
trial of witnesses
deposing
contrary to
statement made
in section 164B.
Insertion of new
section 357A.
Victim
compensation
scheme.

67
(3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial,
is satisfied, that the compensation awarded under section
357 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the
cases end in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be
rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensation.
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified,
but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes place,
the victim or his dependents may make an application to
the State or the District Legal Services Authority for award
of compensation.
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the
application under sub-section ( 4), the State or the District
Legal Services Authority shall after due enquiry award adequate
compensation by completing the enquiry within two months.
(6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority,
as the case may be, to alleviate the suffering of the victim,
may order immediate first-aid facility or for medical benefits
to be made available free of cost on the certificate of the
police officer not below the rank of the officer-in-charge of
the police station or a Magistrate of the area concerned, or
any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems
fit.".
38. In section 372 of the principal Act, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an
appeal against any order passed by the Court acquitting the
accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate
compensation; and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which
an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such
Court.”.
39. In section 416 of the principal Act, the words “order the
execution of the sentence to be postponed, and may, if thinks fit” shall
be omitted.
40. After section 437 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“437 A. ( l) Before conclusion of the trial and before
disposal of the appeal, the trial-Court trying the offence or the
Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall require the accused
to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher
Court as and when such Court issues notice in respect of any
appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective
Court and such bail bonds shall be in force for six months.
(2) If such accused fails to appear the bond stands
forfeited and the procedure under section 446 shall be applicable.”.
41. In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, in Form No. 45,
after the figures “437”, the figures and letter “437A” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
section 372.
Amendment of
section 416.
Insertion of new
section 437A.
Bail to require
accused to
appear before
next appellate
Court.
Amendment of
Form 45.

68
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The need to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to ensure fair
and speedy justice and to tone up the criminal justice system has been felt for
quite sometime. The Law Commission has undertaken a comprehensive review
of the Code of Criminal Procedure in its 154th report and its recommendations
have been found very appropriate, particularly those relating to provisions
concerning arrest, custody and remand, procedure for summons and warrant-
cases, compounding of offences, victimology, special protection in respect of
women and inquiry and trial of persons of unsound mind. Also, as per the Law
Commission’s 177th report relating to arrest, it has been found necessary to
revise the law to maintain a balance between the liberty of the citizens and the
society’s interest in maintenance of peace as well as law and order.
2. The need has also been felt to include measures for preventing the
growing tendency of witnesses being induced or threatened to turn hostile by the
accused parties who are influential, rich and powerful. At present, the victims
are the worst sufferers in a crime and they don’t have much role in the court
proceedings. They need to be given certain rights and compensation, so that
there is no distortion of the criminal justice system. The application of
technology in investigation, inquiry and trial is expected to reduce delays, help
in gathering credible evidences, minimise the risk of escape of the remand
prisoners during transit and also facilitate utilisation of police personnel for other
duties. There is an urgent need to provide relief to women, particularly victims
of sexual offences, and provide fair-trial to persons of unsound mind who are
not able to defend themselves. To expedite the trial of minor offences, definition
of warrant-case and summons-case are to be changed so that more cases can
be disposed of in a summary manner.
3. The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 seeks to
achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL.
The 14th August, 2006.
68

69
69
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2 amends the, definition, of “summons-case” and
“warrant-case”. It defines summons-case as a case triable
summarily and not being a warrant-case, and warrant-case as a case
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a
term exceeding three years. This clause introduces a definition of
“Victim” to confer certain rights on the guardians and legal heirs of
the victim.
Clause 3 amends section 24 relating to appointment of Public
Prosecutors. A proviso is added to sub-section ( 8) so as to
empower the Court to permit the victim to engage an advocate of
his choice to co-ordinate with the prosecution in consultation with
the Central or the State Government, as the case may be.
Clause 4 amends section 26 relating to Courts by which
offences are triable. A proviso is inserted in clause ( a) of the said
section so as to provide that any offence under section 376 and
sections 376A to 376D of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be tried
as far as particable by a Court presided over by a woman.
Clause 5 amends section 41 relating to power of police to
arrest without warrant. It amends clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section
(1) so as to provide that the powers of arrest conferred upon the
police officer must be exercised after reasonable care and
justification and that such arrest is necessary and required under the
section. Amendment is also made in sub-section (2) of section 41
so as to provide that subject to the provisions of section 42 relating
to arrest on refusal to give name and residence, no person shall be
arrested in a non-cognizable offence except under a warrant or
order of a Magistrate.
Clause 6 inserts new sections 41A, 41B, 41C and 41D.
Section 41A provides that where a case falls under sub-section ( 1)
of section 41, the police officer may, instead of arresting the person
concerned, issue to him a notice of appearance requiring him to
appear before the police officer. Section 41 B lays down the
procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. Section
41C requires the State Government to establish a police control
room in every district and at the State level, where the names and
addresses of the persons arrested, nature of offences with which
they are charged, and the name and designation of the police
officers who made the arrest are to be displayed. Section 41D
makes provisions for right of the arrested persons to meet an
advocate of his choice during the interrogation, though not
throughout interrogation.

70
Clause 7 amends  section 46 relating to how arrest is to be
made. A proviso is added to sub-section ( 1) so as to provide that
where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the police
officer shall not touch the person of the woman to arrest her.
Clause 8 substitutes section 54 relating to examination of
the arrested person by medical practitioner. The proposed
amendment makes it obligatory on the part of the State to have the
arrested person examined by a registered medical practitioner soon
after the arrest is made. It also provides that where the arrested
person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only
by or under the supervision of a female registered medical
practitioner.
Clause 9 inserts a new section 55A so as to make it
obligatory on the part of the person having the custody of the
accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the
accused.
Clause 10 inserts a new section 60A with a view to prohibiting
arrest except in accordance with the Code or any other law for the
time being in force providing for arrest.
Clause 11 amends section 157 relating to procedure for
investigation. A proviso is added to sub-section ( 1) so as to provide
that in relation to an offence of rape, the investigation shall be
conducted at the residence of the victim and so far as practicable
by a woman police officer. It also makes provision for a victim
under eighteen years of age to be questioned in the presence of her
parents or a social worker of the locality.
Clause 12 amends section 161 relating to examination of
witnesses by police. Three provisos are added to sub-section (3).
The first proviso provides for recording of statement of witnesses
by police by audio-video electronic means. The second proviso
provides that in respect of offences specified in sub-section ( 1) of
section 164B where such person is required to be forwarded to the
nearest Magistrate for recording his statement under that section,
his statement to the police officer shall not be reduced into writing
under his sub-section. The third proviso provides that where any
statement has been recorded under section 164B, the police officer
shall enclose a copy of such statement as part of his police diary
recording therein that such person has made such statement before
the Metropolitan Magistrate or the Judicial Magistrate, as the case
may be.
Clause l3 substitutes section 162 to provide that the
statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of
an investigation under Chapter XII shall, if reduced into writing, be
signed by the person making it and copy of the statement as
recorded shall be given forthwith free of cost by the police officer
to the person who made the statement under acknowledgement.

71
Clause 14 amends section 164 relating to recording of
confessions and statements. It provides that any confession or
statement made may also be recorded by audio-video electronic
means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an
offence.
Clause 15 inserts a new section 164B to require any police
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector, in the course of
investigation of any offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for ten years or more, to produce all persons whose statement
appears to him to be material and essential for proper investigation
of the case, to the nearest Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial
Magistrate, as the case may be, for recording their statements.
Clause 16 amends section 167 relating to procedure when
investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours. It amends
proviso to sub-section ( 2) of section 167 in order to make provision
for the Magistrate to extend further detention in judicial custody of
the accused also through the medium of electronic video linkage
except for the first time where the production of the accused in
person is required. The clause also inserts a further proviso to the
said sub-section ( 2) to provide that in the case of a woman under
eighteen years of age, the detention shall be authorized to be in the
custody of a remand home or recognized social institution.
Clause  17 amends section 172, relating to diary of
proceedings in investigation. Two new sub-sections ( 1A) and ( 1B)
are inserted so as to provide that the statements of witnesses
recorded during the course of investigation under section 161 shall
be recorded in the case diary and that such diary shall be a bound
volume and duly paginated.
Clause 18 amends section 173 relating to report of police
officer on completion of investigation. A new sub-section ( 1A) is
inserted with a view to provide that the investigation of the offence
of rape of a child shall be completed within three months from the
date on which the information was recorded by the officer-in-
charge of the police station. A new clause ( h) is added to sub-
section ( 2) of section 173 to ensure that the police report in cases
of rape and custodial rape includes the report of medical
examination where investigation relates to an offence under sections
376, 376A to 376D of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 19 inserts a new section 195A in the Code to make
provision for a witness or any other person on his behalf to file
complaints in relation to an offence under section 195A of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 20 amends section 198 relating to prosecution for
offences against marriage. It amends sub-section ( 6) so as to raise
the age limit of the wife from 15 years to 18 years to provide that
no Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 376 of
the Indian Penal Code where such offence is alleged by a man’s
own wife under eighteen years of age.

72
Clause  21 amends section 242 relating to evidence for
prosecution. A proviso is added to sub-section ( 1) so as to provide
that in the evidence for prosecution the Magistrate shall, in advance,
supply to the accused, the statement of witnesses recorded during
investigation by the police.
Clause 22 omits Chapter XX of the Code containing sections
251 to 259 relating to trial of summons-cases by Magistrates.
Clause 23 substitutes section 260 so as to provide that all
summons-cases shall be tried in a summary way instead of making
such summary trial discretionary.
Clause 24 substitutes section 262 in order to lay down the
procedure for trying summons-cases summarily.
Clause 25 amends section 263 relating to record in summary
trials. Clause ( f), which refers to records to be maintained by
Magistrate in summary trials is omitted. The proposed amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause  26 amends section 274 of the Code as a
consequential amendment of all summons-cases being summarily
tried.
Clause 27 amends section 275 of the Code relating to record
in warrant cases. Sub-section ( 1) relates to taking of evidence of
each witness. A proviso is proposed in the said sub-section so as to
provide that evidence of a witness may also be recorded by audio-
video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the
accused.
Clause 28 amends section 309 of the Code relating to power
to postpone or adjourn proceedings. The clause inserts a proviso to
sub-section ( 1) in order to prevent trials in rape cases including
child rape cases, from being unduly delayed by providing that the
inquiry or trial in such cases shall, as far as possible, be completed
within a period of two months from the date of commencement of
the examination of witnesses. This clause inserts another proviso to
sub-section ( 2) specifying the circumstances where adjournment
shall not be granted by the Court.
Clause 29 amends section 313 of the Code relating to power
of the Court to examine the accused. The clause inserts a new sub-
sections (5) to the said section so as to eliminate delay in trial, by
providing that the Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defecne
Counsel in preparing relevant questions to be put to the accused.
Clause 30 amends section 320 relating to compounding of
offences punishable under sections of the Indian Penal Code
specified in the Table provided under the section. It substitutes the
tables in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) in order to bring more offences
under the category of offences compoundable by the parties
themselves without the intervention of the Court.

73
Clause 31 amends section 327 of the Code which deems
Criminal Court to be an open Court. Sub-section ( 2) of the said
section relates to in camera  trials in case of certain offences. The
clause seeks to provide that in camera  trial under sub-section ( 2) of
the said section shall be conducted as far as practicable by a
woman Judge or Magistrate. A proviso is also added to sub-section
(3) of the said section so as to lift the ban on printing or publication
of trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape, subject to
maintaining confidentiality as to identity of the parties.
Clause 32 and 33 amend sections 328 and 329 related to
procedure of enquiry and trial in case of person of unsound mind.
The clauses provide that if the Magistrate finds that the accused in
incapable of making his defence due to unsoundness of mind, to
refer such a person for appropriate medical treatment in accordance
with section 330.
Clause 34 substitutes section 330 which provides for
medical treatment of  an accused person of  unsound mind pending
the trial. It also provides that no order for the detention of the
accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in
accordance with such rules as the State Government may have
made under the Mental Health Act, 1982.
Clause 35 amends section 344 of the Code relating to
summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. Amendment
is made in sub-section ( 1) of section 344, consequential to insertion
of a new section 344A relating to procedure for trial of witnesses
deposing contrary to statement made in section 164B.
Clause 36 inserts a new section 344A so as to provide
summary procedure for trial of witnesses deposing contrary to the
statement recorded under sub-section ( 2) of section 164B. The
punishment for perjury has been increased to imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three months but which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. It also provides
the Court or Magistrate to initiate proceedings under this section
against a witness who has retracted from his statement.
Clause 37 inserts a new section 357A in order to provide for
the State Government to prepare, in coordination with the Central
Government, a scheme called “victim compensation scheme” for the
purpose of compensation to the victim or his dependants who have
suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime.
Clause 38 amends section 372 of the Code relating to
appeals from judgment or order of a Criminal Court. It gives to the
victim the right to prefer an appeal against any adverse order passed
by the trial Court.
Clause  39 amends section 416 of the Code relating to
postponement of capital sentence to pregnant woman. It provides
for the High Court to postpone execution of the sentence and also

74
to commute the sentence to imprisonment for life in case a woman
accused to death is found to be pregnant.
Clause 40 insets a new section 437A to provide for the
Court to require accused to execute bail bonds with sureties to
appear before the higher Court as an when such Court issues notice
in respect of an appeal against the judgment of the respective Court.
Clause 41 amends From 45 of the Second Schedule to the
Code. This amendment is consequential to the insertion of a new
section 437A.

75
75
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 37 of the Bill provides for preparation of a Scheme
for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim
or his dependants who have suffered loss or injury as a result of
the crime and who require rehabilitation. Ever State Government will
prepare the Scheme in coordination with the Central Government.
The Scheme also provides for immediate first-aid or any other
interim relief as deemed fir. The State Government themselves
would bear the expenditure on execution of the Scheme. The
Central Government would have to bear the expenditure in respect
of operation of the Scheme in those Union territories which do not
have a Consolidated Fund of their own. Provision for such
expenditure would be made in the appropriate budget for the Union
territory concerned as and when the Scheme is finalized and made
operational. It is, therefore, not possible to give an estimate of the
expenditure involved (recurring and non-recurring) in this behalf at
this stage. However, the proposal for execution of the Scheme in
Union territories would be processed in consultation with the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

76
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL P ROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
** * * *
2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
** * * *
(w) “summons-case” means a case relating to an
offence, and not being a warrant-case;
(x) “warrant-case” means a relating to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term exceeding two years;
** * * *
CHAPTER V
A
RREST OF P ERSONS
41. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a
Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence,
or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable
suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned; or
(b) who has in his possession without lawful excuse,
the burden of proving which excuse shall, lie on such person,
any implement of house breaking; or
** * * *
(2) Any officer in charge of a police station may, in like
manner, arrest or cause to be arrested any person, belonging to one
or more of the categories of persons specified in section 109 or
section 110.
** * * *
54. When a person who is arrested, whether on a charge or
otherwise alleges, at the time when he is produced before a
Magistrate or at any time during the period of his detention in
custody that the examination of his body will afford evidence which
will disprove the commission by him of any offence or which will
establish the commission by any other person of any offence against
his body, the Magistrate shall, if requested by the arrested person so
to do direct the examination of the body of such person by a
registered medical practitioner unless the Magistrate considers that
76
Definitions.
When police
may arrest
without warrant.
Examination of
arrested person
by medical
practitioner at
the request of
the arrested
person.

77
the request is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for
defeating the ends of justice.
** * * *
162. ( 1) No statement made by any person to a police officer
in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced
to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such
statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such
statement was made:
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution
in such inquiry or trial whose statement has been reduced into
writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may
be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court; by
the prosecution, to contradict such Witness in the manner provided
by section. 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and when any
part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be
used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only
of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any
statement falling within the provisions of clause (I) of section 32 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or to affect the provisions of section
27 of that Act.
Explanation.— An omission to state a fact or circumstance in
the statement referred to in sub-section (1), may amount to
contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise
relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs
and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the
particular context shall be a question of fact.
** * * *
164. ( 1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate
may, whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any
confession or statement made to him in the course of an
investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time
being in force, or at any time afterwards before the commencement
of the inquiry or trial:
Provided that no confession shall be recorded by a police
officer on whom any power of a Magistrate has been conferred
under any law for the time being in force.
** * * *
167. (1)* * * * *
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded
under this section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try
the case, from time to time, authorize the detention of the accused
Statements to
police not to be
signed: Use of
statements in
evidence.
1 of 1872.
1 of 1872.
Recording of
confessions and
statements.
Procedure when
investigation
cannot be
completed in
twenty-four
hours.

78
in such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not
exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to
try the case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention
unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a
magistrate having such jurisdiction:
Provided that—
(a) the Magistrate may authorize the detention of the
accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the police,
beyond the period of fifteen days; if he is satisfied that
adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall
authorize the detention of the accused person in custody
under this paragraph for a total period exceeding,—
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates
to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten
years;
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates
to any other offence,
and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days,
as the case may be, the accused person shall be released on bail if
he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every person released
on bail under this sub-section shall be deemed to be so released
under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that
Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention in any
custody under this section unless the accused is produced
before him;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially
empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall authorize
detention in the custody of the police.
Explanation I .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby
declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in
paragraph ( a), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as
he does not furnish bail;
Explanation II .—If any question arises whether an accused
person was produced before the Magistrate as required under
paragraph ( b), the production of the accused person may be proved
by his signature on the order authorizing detention.
** * * *
198. (1)* * * * *
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under
section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where such offence consists
of sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife being
under fifteen years of age, if more than one year has elapsed from
the date of the commission of the offence.
Prosecution for
offences against
marriage.

79
CHAPTER XX
TRIAL OF SUMMONS -CASES  BY MAGISTRATES
251. When in a summons-case the accused appears or is
brought before the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of
which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be asked
whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not
be necessary to frame a formal charge.
252. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record
the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the accused and
may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.
253. (1) Where a summons has been issued under section 206
and the accused desires to plead guilty to the charge without
appearing before the Magistrate, he shall transmit to the Magistrate
by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the
amount of fine specified in the summons.
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion convict the accused
in his absence, on his plea of guilty and sentence him to pay the
fine specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the
accused shall be adjusted towards that fine, or where a pleader
authorized by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of
the accused, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as
possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his discretion,
convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.
254. (1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under
section 252 or section 253, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the
prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in
support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take
all such evidence as he produces in his defence.
(2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of
the prosecution or the accused, issue a summons to any witness
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on
such application require that the reasonable expenses of the witness
incurred in attending for the purposes of the trail be deposited in
Court.
255. ( 1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred
to in section 254 and such further evidence, if any, as he may, of
his own motion, cause to be produced; finds the accused not guilty,
he shall record an order of acquittal.
(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance
with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall, if he
finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him according to law.
(3) A Magistrate may, under section 252 or section 255,
convict the accused of any offence triable under this Chapter, which
from the facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed,
Substance of
accusation to be
stated.
Conviction on
plea of guilty.
Conviction on
plea of guilty in
absence of
accused in petty
cases.
Procedure when
not convicted.
Acquittal or
conviction.

80
whatever may be the nature of the complaint or summons, if the
Magistrate is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced
thereby.
256. ( 1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and
on the day appointed for the appearance of the accused, or any day
subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be adjourned, the
complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding
anything hereinbefore contained, acquit the accused, unless for
some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case
to some other day:
Provided that where the complainant is represented by a
pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or where the
Magistrate is of opinion that the personal attendance of the
complainant is not necessary the Magistrate may dispense with his
attendance and proceed with the case.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall, so far as may be
apply also to cases where the non-appearance of the complainant is
due to his death.
257. If a complainant, at any time before a final order is
passed in any case under this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that
there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his
complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one
accused, against all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him
to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused
against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.
258. In any summons-case instituted otherwise-than upon
complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous
sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other Judicial
Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him; stop the
proceedings at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and
where such, stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of
the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of
acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such
release shall have the effect of discharge.
259. When in the course of the trial of a summons-case
relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
exceeding six months it appears to the Magistrate that in the
interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with
the procedure for the trial, of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may
proceed to re-hear the case in the manner, provided by this Code
for the trial of warrant-cases and may recall a witness who may
have been examined.
CHAPTER XXI
S
UMMARY T RIALS
260. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code—Power to try
summarily.
Non-appearance
of death of
complainant.
Withdrawal of
complaint.
Power to stop
proceedings in
certain cases.
Power of Court
to convert
summons-cases
into warrant-
cases.

81
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(b) any Metropo1itan Magistrate;
(c) any Magistrate of the first class specially
empowered in this behalf by the High Court,
may if he thinks fit, try in a summary way all or any of the
following offences:—
(i) offences not punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term
exceeding two years;
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or
section 381 of the India Penal Code, where the value of
the property stolen does no exceed two hundred
rupees;
(iii ) receiving or retaining stolen property,
under section 411 of the Indian penal Code, where the
value of the property does not exceed two hundred
rupees;
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of
stolen property under section 414 of the Indian, Panel
Code, where the value of such property does not
exceed two hundred rupees;
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the
Indian Penal Code;
(vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of
the peace, under section 504, and criminal intimidation,
under section 506 of the Indian Penal Code;
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
(viii ) an attempt to commit any of the
foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence;
(ix) any offence constituted by an act in
respect of which a complaint may be made under
section 20 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871.
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the
Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable
to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who
may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the
manner provided by this Code.
** * * *
262. ( 1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified
in this Code for the trial of summons-case shall be followed except
as hereinafter mentioned.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1871.
Procedure for
summary trials.

82
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three
months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under this
Chapter.
263. In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter,
in such form as the State Government may direct, the following
particulars, namely:—
** * * *
(f) the offence complained of and the offence, (if any)
proved, arid in cases coming under clause ( ii) clause ( iii) or
clause ( iv) of sub-section ( 1) of section 260, the value of the
property in respect of which the offence has been committed;
** * * *
274. ( 1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all
inquiries under sections 145 to 148 (both inclusive), and in all
proceedings under section 446 otherwise than in the course of a
trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness
proceeds, make a memorandum of the substance of his evidence in
the language of the Court:
Provided that if the Magistrate unable to make such
memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the reason of his
inability, cause such memorandum to be made writing or from his
dictation in open Court.
** * * *
320. ( 1) The offences punishable under the sections of the
Indian Penal Code specified in the first two columns of the Table
next following may be compounded by the persons mentioned in the
third column of that Table:—
T
ABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom
Indian Penal offence may
Code applicable be compounded
12 3
Uttering words, etc., 298 The person whose
with deliberate intent religious feelings are
to wound the religious intended to be
feelings of any person. wounded.
Causing hurt 323, 334 The person to whom
the hurt is caused.
Wrongfully restraining or 341, 342 The person restrained
confining any person. or confined.
Record in
summary trials.
Record in
summons-cases
and inquiries.
Compounding of
offences.

83
12 3
Assault or use of criminal 352, 355, The person assaulted
force. 358 or to whom criminal
force is used.
Mischief, when the only loss 426, The p erson to whom
or damage cause is loss or 427 the loss or damage is
damage to a private person. caused.
Criminal trespass. 447 The person in possession
of the property
trespassed upon.
House-trespass. 448 Ditto.
Criminal breach of contract 491 The person with whom
of service. the offender has
contracted.
Adultery. 497 The h usband of the
woman.
Defamation, except such 500 The person defamed.
cases as are specified against
section 500 of the Indian
Penal Code in column 1 of
the Table under sub-
section (2).
Printing or engraving matter, 501 Ditto.
knowing it to be defamatory.
Sale of printed or engraved 502 Ditto.
substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing
it to contain such matter.
Insult intended to provoke a 504 The person insulted.
breach of the peace.
Criminal intimidation except 506 The person intimidated.
when the offence is
punishable with imprisonment
for seven years.
Act caused by making a 508 The person against
person believe that he will whom the offecne
be an object of divine was committed.
displeasure.

84
(2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian
Penal Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next
following may, with the permission of the Court before which any
prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by the
persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:
T
ABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom
Indian Penal offence may
Code applicable be compounded
12 3
V oluntarily causing hurt 324 The person to whom
by dangerous weapons hurt is caused.
or means.
V oluntarily causing 335 Ditto.
grievous hurt on grave
and sudden provocation.
Causing hurt by doing 337 The person to whom
an act so rashly and hurt is caused.
negligently as to
endanger human life
or the personal safety
of others.
Causing grievous hurt 338 Ditto.
by doing an act so
rashly and negligently
as to endanger human
life or the personal
safety of others.
Wrongfully confining a 343 The person confined.
person for three days
or more.
Wrongfully confining for 344 The person confined.
ten days or more days.
Wrongfully confining a 346 Ditto.
person in secret.
Assault or criminal 354 The woman assaulted
force to woman with to whom the criminal
intent to outrage her force was used.
modesty.
Assault or criminal force 357 The person assaulted
in attempting wrongfully or to whom the force
to confine a person. was used.

85
12 3
Theft, where the value of 379 The owner of the
property stolen does not property stolen.
exceed two hundred and
fifty rupees.
Theft, by clerk or servant 381 Ditto.
of property in possession
of master, where the value
of the property stolen does
not exceed two hundred and
fifty rupees.
Dishonest misappropriation 403 The owner of the
of property. property misappropriated
Criminal breach of trust, 406 The owner of the
where the value of the property in respect of
property does not exceed which the breach of
two hundred and fifty trust has been
rupees. committed.
Criminal breach of trust, by 407 Ditto.
a carrier, wharfinger, etc.,
where the value of the
property does not exceed
two hundred and fifty
rupees.
Criminal breach of trust 408 Ditto.
by a clerk or servant,
where the value of the
property does not exceed
two hundred and fifty
rupees.
Dishonestly, receiving stolen 411 The owner of the
property knowing it to be property stolen.
stolen, when the value of
the stolen property does
not exceed two hundred
and fifty rupees.
Assisting in the concealment 414 Ditto.
or disposal of stolen
property, knowing it to be
stolen, where the value of
the stolen property does
not exceed two hundred
and fifty rupees.

86
12 3
Cheating. ........ 417 The person cheated.
Cheating a person whose 418 Ditto.
interest the offender was
bound, either by law or
by legal contract, to
protect.
Cheating by personation. 419 The person cheated.
Cheating and dishonestly 420 Ditto.
inducing delivery of
property or the making,
alteration or destruction
of a valuable security.
Fraudulent removal or 421 The creditors who are
concealment of property, a ffected thereby.
etc., to prevent distribution
among creditors.
Fraudulently preventing from 422 Ditto.
being made available for his
creditors a debt or demand
due to the offender.
Fraudulent execution of deed 423 The person affected
of transfer containing false thereby.
statement of consideration.
Fraudulent removal or 424 Ditto.
concealment of property.
Mischief by killing or 428 The owner of the
maiming animal of the value animal.
of ten rupees or upwards
Mischief by killing or 429 The owner of the
maiming cattle, etc. of any cattle or animal.
value or any other animal
of the value of fifty rupees
or upwards.
Mischief by injury to work 430 The person to whom
of irrigation by wrongfully the loss or damage is
diverting water when the caused.
only loss or damage caused
is loss or damage to private
person.

87
12 3
House-trespass to commit an 451 The person in possession
offence (other than theft) of the house trespassed
punishable with imprisonment. upon.
Using a false trade or property 482 The p erson to whom
mark. loss or injury is caused
by such use.
Counterfeiting a trade or 483 The person to whose
property mark used by another. trade or property mark
is counterfeited.
Knowingly selling or exposing 486 Ditto.
or possessing for sale or for
manufacturing purpose, goods
marked with a counterfeit
property mark.
Marrying again during the 494 The husband or wife
lifetime of a husband or of the person so
wife. marrying.
Defamation against the 500 The person defamed.
President or the Vice-
President or the Governor
of a State or the
Administrator of a Union
Territory or a Minister in
respect of his conduct
in the discharge of his
public functions when
instituted upon a complaint
made by the Public
Prosecutor.
Uttering words or sounds or 509 The woman whom it
making gestures or exhibiting was intended to insult
any object intending to insult or whose privacy was
the modesty of a woman or instruded upon.
instruding upon the privacy
of a woman.
(3) When any offence is compoundable under this section, the
abetment of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence
(when such attempt is itself an offence) may be compounded in like
manner.
** * * *

88
CHAPTER XXV
PROVISIONS AS TO A CCUSED P ERSONS OF U NSOUND M IND.
328. (1)* * * * *
(3) If such Magistrate is of opinion that the person referred
to in sub-section (l) is of unsound mind and consequently incapable
of making his defence, he shall record a finding to that effect and
shall postpone further proceedings in the case.
329. (1)* * * * *
(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind and
incapacity of the accused shall be deemed to be part of his trial
before the Magistrate or Court.
330. ( 1) Whenever a person is found, under section 328 or
section 329, to be of unsound mind and incapable of making his
defence, the. Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, whether the
case is one in which bail may be taken or not, may release him on
sufficient security being given that he shall be properly taken care
of and shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any
other person, and for his appearance when required before the
Magistrate or Court or such officer as the Magistrate or Court
appoints in this behalf.
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the
Magistrate or Court, bail should not be taken, or if sufficient
security is not given, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be,
shall order the accused to be detained in safe custody in such place
and manner as he or it may think fit; and shall report the action
taken to the State Government:
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a
lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in accordance with
such rules as the State Government may have made under the
Indian Lunacy Act, 1912.
** * * *
344. ( 1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or final
order disposing of any judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or
Magistrate of the first class expresses an opinion to the effect that
any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully
given false evidence or had fabricated false evidence with the
intention that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, it or
he may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the interest
of justice that the witness should be tried summarily forgiving or
fabricating, as the case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of
the offence and may, after giving the offender a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for
such offence, try such offender summarily and sentence him to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or to
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Procedure in
case of accused
being lunatic.
Procedure in
case of person
of unsound
mind tried
before Court.
Release of
lunatic pending
investigation or
trial.
Summary
procedure for
trial for giving
false evidence.
4 of 1912.

89
** * * *
416. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be pregnant,
the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be
postponed, and may, if it thinks fit, commute the sentence to
imprisonment for life.
** * * *
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
 (See section 476)
** * * *
FORM No. 45
B
OND AND B AIL-BOND FOR A TTENDANCE B EFORE O FFICER IN C HARGE
OF P OLICE S TATION OR C OURT
[See sections 436, 437, 438(3) and 441]
I, (name)   , of       (place), having been arrested
or detained without warrant by the Officer in charge of
police station (or having been brought before the Court of     ),
charged with the offence of , and required to give security for my
attendance before such Officer or Court on condition that if shall
attend such Officer or Court on every day on which any
investigation or trial is held with regard to such charge, and in case
of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government
the sum of rupees
Dated, this day of ,19
(Signature)
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare
ourselves and each of us) surety (or sureties) for the above said
(name) that he shall attend the Officer in charge of police station or
the Court of on every day on which any investigation into
the charge is made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall
be, and appear, before such Officer or Court for the purpose of
such investigation or to answer the charge against him (as the case
may be), and, in case of his making default herein, I hereby bind
myself (or we, hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the
sum of  rupees.
Dated, this day of ,19
(Signature)
** * * *
Postponement of
capital sentence
to pregnant
woman.

90
90
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

91
GIST OF VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF MEMBERS/INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS ON THE BILL,
AND COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS THERETO.
Sl. Clause in Suggestion by Suggestion Comments
No. the Bill whom
12 3 4 5
1. 3 Bar Council of
S.24 Andhra Pradesh
2. ” Shri M.N.
Krishnamani
Senior Advocate
Supreme Court
3. ” Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
4. ” Justice Jaspal
Singh
5. ” Bar Council of
Andhra Pradesh
6. ” Bar Council of
West Bengal
The words “in consultation with Central or State
Government as the case may be” deleted
Engagement of an advocate by victim in consultation with
the Central Government or State Government is redundant
or unnecessary. The word “to coordinate with the
prosecution” will do.
The proposed provision vide clause 3 needs to be further
explained/elaborated whether this provision gives the victim
an opportunity to engage his choice of lawyers.
Consultation with. State Governments or the Central
Government would unnecessarily delay the proceedings.
The word 'coordinate' should be replaced by the word
‘assist’.
(i) The word as provided in clause 3 'to coordinate'
may be replaced by the word ‘to assist’.
(ii) The words ‘in consultation with Central Government
or the State Governments as the case may be’
under this section may be deleted as obtaining
such permission would only delay the matter.
‘Consultation’ with the Central Government or the State
Governments should be deleted.
The word “coordinate” should be substituted by the word
“assist”.
Agreed
Agreed
Agreed
(i) The suggestion to replace the
word “to coordinate” with the word
“assist” is not agreed to.
(ii) Agreed.
Agreed
Not agreed to.

92
12 3 4 5
7. 4 Ditto
S.26
8. ” Shri K.
Chandrashekar
Pillai,
Director, Indian
Law Institute
9. 3 Prof. N.R.
S.24 Madhava
Menon
10. 5 Shri M.N.
S.41 Krishnamani
Senior
Advocate
Supreme Court
11. 5(1)(b) Ju stice Jaspal
(ii)(b) Singh
To make compulsory “Trial by a Women Judge” is result
of gender discrimination and is not always conducive to
justice.
It is a misconception that woman judge alone will
appreciate properly the facts about rape cases. This
provision may send out a message to the accused, that
the judge would be in favour of the prosecution. Such a
provision should not find a place in the statute book.
He has suggested that there would be no difficulty in
allowing the victim in appropriate cases or in serious
offences for which punishment is above seven years of
imprisonment, to have his own counsel alongwith the
prosecution to conduct the proceedings.
In the proposed Section 41 (1)(b), the offence punishable
with seven years of imprisonment is to be bifurcated with
those with three years imprisonment and with those with
more than three years but less than seven years. In case
of offences less than three years, no arrest is to be made.
Arrest of a person reasons that detention of such person
in custody is in the interest of his safety may not be
advisable as this provision may be misused by the police.
A woman victim may feel at ease with a woman
Judge. This need not be construed as gender
discrimination. Further this is subject to ‘as
far as practicable’ only.
Ditto
To allow the victim’s side to have a separate
counsel to conduct the case may not be
appropriate as his counsel may come into
conflict with the government’s counsel.
Therefore, it is proposed in the Bill that the
victim can have a counsel of his choice to
coordinate the case alongwith the Public
Prosecutor.
The intention of the proposed provision in the
Bill is to bring in some checks on the process
of arrest. A complete ban on arrest in case of
offences involving less than three years
punishment would not be in the interest of
justice.
We may agree to the proposal.

93
12. 5 (i)(b) Shri M.N.
Krishnamani
Senior Advocate
Supreme Court
13. ” Ditto
14. ” Ditto
15. 6 Ditto
S.41
16. ” Bar Council of
India
Instead of the word “credible information” the word
“case” and instead of terms “received” the terms
“registered” to be substituted.
In respect of offences which are compoundable, the
accused are not to be arrested.
In case of arrest, instead of allowing the police officer to
decide, the police officer be directed to take the permission
of the Magistrate concerned and after satisfying the
Magistrate that the arrest of the accused person is
absolutely necessary for anyone or more reasons set out
in sub-clause (a) to (e) of Clause 5 of the Bill.
With regard to section 41(D), when a person is arrested
and interrogated by the police, the arrestee shall be allowed
to engage an advocate of his own choice during
interrogation though not throughout interrogation. He has
suggested that the accused may be allowed to meet the
advocate once in every eight hours.
The insertion in sub-section (1) of Section 41A is vague.
The direction before the police officer to give self-
incriminating statement, which will be in violation of
Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India. If the person
does not appear before the police officer for various
reasons, he is also exposed to prosecution under section
174 of !PC for defying the notice. If a person is in the
intention of seeking anticipatory bail but he receives a
notice he has to appear before the police officer who can
arrest him. Hence, insertion of section 41 A byway of
amendment is not acceptable.
It may be necessary to have some preliminary
inquiry before registration of a case. Hence,
not agreed to.
The enormity of the crime can be assessed only
after proper investigation. Hence, not agreed
to.
The existing provision in Cr.P.C. gives wide
powers to the police. The proposals are, in fact,
meant to check the powers of the police. Hence,
not agreed to the suggestion.
The proposed provision gives right to the
arrested person to have a lawyer during
interrogation which is adequate. Hence,
proposal not agreed to. However, there is no
objection in deleting the words 'though not
through out the interrogation’.
The provision under this clause is in retation to
provisions contained in the proposed section
41 (1). Instead of resorting to the provision at
41(1), the police officer may also follow the
provision proposed at 41 A.
It is also pointed out that the proposed section
41 A(iii) also provides that such person shall
not be arrested while person complies and
continues to comply with the notice. In case,
the person is to be arrested in spite of this, the
police has to record the reasons”. Hence, there

94
12 3 4 5
17. ” Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
18. ” Bar Council of
West Bengal
19. ” Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
This clause proposes to provide that the police officer
may, instead of arresting the person concerned, issue to
him a notice of appearance requiring him to appear before
the Police Officer issuing the notice, or at such other
place as may be specified in the notice and to cooperate
with the Police Officer. Police will never arrest an accused
but he would just send a notice to the accused to come
over the police station or any other place when he may
be arrested. Secondly, if he defies the notice he is exposed
to prosecution for not responding to the notice of the
public servant. Also anticipatory bail application also
circumscribed where the police officer calls the accused
who has to come and has to surrender.
Issuing “notice” and calling people to police station will
be a weapon for harassing people.
With reference to the proposed new section 41B(b)(i), it is
suggested that the Memorandum of arrest shall be attested
by at least one witness who is a member of the family of
the person arrested or a respectable member of the locality
where the arrest is made. It is suggested that an ‘independent
and respectable member of the locality’ may be inserted.
should not be ground for the apprehension
expressed in the suggestion.
In fact the provision proposed is to avoid
unwanted arrest and make the law more people
friendly.
Ditto
The provision is proposed so that advance
intimation is given to a person before arrest if
required instead of arresting a person directly
without any notice. “Notice of appearance”
would thus help to mitigate harassment.
Not agreed to as respectable member of the
society is nonnally expected to be independant.

95
20. ” Ditto
21. ” Justice Jaspal
Singh
22. ” Shri Jagannath
Sec.41 Patnaik
B
23. “ Bar Council of
Sec.41 India
C(2)
24. S.41C Shri K.
Chndrashekar
pillai, Director,
Indian Law
Institute
25. S.41D Ditto
26. 41D Ditto
With reference to Clause 6, Section 41 C(2), it is suggested
that there should be time limit for displaying the name and
details of the arrested person. Also it is suggested that
such details should be displayed outside the police station
and control room of the District Headquarters.
With reference to insertion of section 41(D), it is suggested
that the presence of the advocate should be made
compulsory throughout the interrogation.
In (i) after the words “the person arrested”, the words
“or may be arrested” may be added.
The date and time of the arrest may also be included.
It will be practicable and effective if every police station
is made obliged to furnish the particulars of the person
arrested.
The lawyer’s presence should be allowed throughout the
interrogation.
Duration of such interrogation in the presence of an
advocate should be recorded and signed by police officer
and Advocate and a copy must be served to the advocate.
It may not be practicably possible to put a time
limit on displaying the details of the arrested
person in the control rooms at every district.
There are provisions in the law to produce the
arrested person before the Magistrate within
twenty-four hours. Suggestion regarding
displaying such details in the respective police
stations is agreed.
The proposed provision gives right to the
arrested person to have a lawyer during
interrogation, which is adequate. Hence the
suggestion is not agreed to.
The certainty of arrest has already been
established. Hence suggestion is not agreed to.
Agreed.
There may not be any objection in displaying
such details in the respective police stations.
The proposed provision gives right to the
arrested person to have a lawyer during
interrogation, which is adequate. Hence,
suggestion is not agreed to.
Not agreed to.

96
12 3 4 5
27. 6 Shri Bhawani
S.41A Singh
to
41D
28. 8 Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
29. ” Ditto
30. ” Bar Council of
India
31. ” Shri K.
Chandrashekaran
Pillai, Director,
Indian Law
Institute
32. 10 Shri M.N.
S.60A Krishnamani
Senior Advocate
Supreme Court
Before the police call a person to the police station, they
should record their reasoning as to why they feel that the
person is particularly acquainted with the facts of the
case so that he can be relevantly called to the police
station to depose in a case.
It is proposed that when any person is arrested, he shall
be examined by a registered medical practitioner soon
after the arrest is made. It is suggested that the doctor
should be a Government medical practitioner.
It is suggested that, while describing the injuries, he must
also describe colour of injuries, because once he gives
the colour of injury that will determine when the injury
was occurred.
The word registered medical practitioner may be revised
“the registered medical practitioner in Government service”.
After the words “there is any injury”, the words “including
its colour” may be added.
The provision is not realistic. It would be nice if the
medical examination is done on the demand of the arrested
person with the permission of the Magistrate.
The norms set out in the case of D.K. Basu Vs. State of
West Bengal should be enumerated there.
This suggestion is outside the purview of the
Bill.
We may modify as “preferably a registered
medical practitioner in Government Service”.
Does not appear to be necessary in view of the
proposal made to amend section 54 vide clause
8 of the Bill (Section 54(2) refers).
We may modify as “preferably a registered
medical practitioner in Government Service”.
As regards the second suggestion, it may not
be necessary in view of the proposal made to
amend section 54 vide clause 8 of the Bill
(Section 54(2) refers).
Not agreed to.
The Law Commission while making the
recommendations for amendment of Cr.P.C. in
the 177th Report on Law relating to Arrest have
taken into account the judgment in D.K. Basu

97
It is suggested that in case of relation to an offence of
rape, the investigation shall be conducted at the residence
of the victim or any place of her choice.
It is suggested that in addition to parents or social workers,
the words ‘close relatives’ may also be added.
After the words “offence of rape” the “statement of the
victim may be recorded at the residence of the victim or
case. Most of the directions in D.K. Basu case
have been either implemented through the Code
of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005
or in the present Bill i.e. the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
In case, if any directions are still left out, the
same will be taken into account as and when
further amendments are taken.
Agreed.
As regards S.Nos.34 to 40, the following
suggestions are agreed to:–
(i) Instead of the term "investigation"
as provided in Clause 11, the term
“recording of statement” may be
used;
(ii) Regarding place of recording of
statement, place of victim’s choice
may also be provided for;
(iii)The word ‘questioned’ could be
substituted with another suitable
word/formulation;
(iv) Alongwith the presence of parents
of the victim during inquiry, the
presence of near relatives could be
added; and
(v) The proposed provisions may be
made applicable to all women
irrespective of age.
Ditto
33. 11 Shri Jagannath
S.157 Patnaik
34. ” Ditto
35. ” Bar Council of
India

98
12 3 4 5
the place of her choice” may be added and after the
word “her parents”, “or near relatives” be added.
Further after the words “woman Police Officer” the
words “not below the rank of Sub-Inspector” be added.
The term “Social Worker” should be omitted instead of
the word “social worker”, the word “a near women
relation” or a woman neighbour educated or above
50 years of age should be substituted.
The words “as far as practicable” should be deleted.
In rape cases, the victim should be questioned in her
residence or in a place which the victim likes.
In rape cases, the word ‘questioned’ in the proposed
clause should be deleted.
The word ‘victim under 18 years of age’ should be
removed and clause may be replaced with the word of
‘any age’ in this clause.
The suggested amendment is wholly objected to for the
following reasons:-
(a) Possible Misuse of power by police
(b) The inadequacy of the number of Magistrates
would render the procedure unworkable
(c) Self-incriminating evidence may be collected by
police and would make witnesses an accused if
does not fall inline.
36. 11 Bar Council of
S.157 W est Bengal
37. ” Bar Council
of NE States
38. ” Justice Jaspal
Singh
39. ” Ditto
40 ” Ditto
41. 12 Bar Council of
S.161 India
Ditto
Ditto
Ditto
Ditto
Ditto
The suggestions at S.No.42 to 55 are relating
to proposed amendment to section 161, 162
and 164 Cr.P.C. which intend to include
measures for preventing the witness to turn
hostile or get influenced by the accused party.
The statements recorded through electronic
gadgets are not to be treated as conclusive
evidence in itself. It is only an aid to the trial
courts to come to the conclusion where a

99
person makes a statement before audio/video
electronic means, it will be very difficult for
that person to change his/her version at a later
stage. The demeanour of the witness is also
recorded simultaneously. The State Government
could also issue administrative guidelines to
provide that such provisions are not misused.
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
(d) Will expose the witnesses to undue harassment
of prosecution as provided under Section 36 of
the amendment if the witness truthfully resilient
subsequently.
First proviso, if introduced without check and balance
and safeguards, will be grossly abused.
Audio/video recording of statement proposed to be provided
under section 161 Cr.P.C. may be misused by the police.
Provision for recording of the statement by audio/video
electronic means would not improve the position.
The proposed provision that statement made under section
161 Cr.P.C. may be recorded by audio/video recorded
means. It is suggested that this provision can be misused.
The third proviso to Section 161 may workout injustice
to the poor as it is always easy for the police to procure
a statement under section 164B.
Amendment to section 162 of the Principal Act - Whole
of it is opposed. Signing of a statement does not change
the legal character of it, rather if misused,would result in
harassment to the witness. Additional power to the police
is not warranted.
By the amendment under this clause as well as amendment
of sections 161, 164B and 344A, there shall be a Police
Raj. Every citizen will be unsafe.
42. ” Bar Council of
West Bengal
43. ” Justice Jaspal
Singh
44. ” Justice Bhawani
Singh
45. ” Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
46. ” Shri K.
Chandrashekaran
Pillai, Director,
Indian Law
Institute
47 13 Bar Council of
S.162 India
48. 13 Bar Council of
West Bengal

100
12 3 4 5
49. 11 Shri K.
S.157 Chandrashekaran
Pillai, Director,
Indian Law
Institute
50. 13 Justice Bhawani
Singh
51. 14 Justice Bhawani
S. 164 Singh
52. ” Justice Bhawani
Singh
53. ” Ditto
54. ” Bar Council of
India
55. ” Shri N. Jothi
The entire amendments may be withdrawn. The statement
made before any person even if he is a senior police
officer in the course of investigation need not be signed
by the accused.
Evidentiary value of the recorded statement before the
police officer does not change as even after witness is
asked to sign it. Police will also resort to brazen the
misuse of power. It may take signature of a person on
a blank paper and make him to sign the statement.
With regard to video/audio recording, it is suggested that
unless a foolproof system is in place to ensure that the
statement by the witness is made voluntarily, such
provision should not be there.
Insertion of first proviso to Section 164 would not be in
consonance with fair investigation. Existing provision is
enough and salutary for recording of confessions and
statements.
It should be approached with caution because such
witnesses feel tied to their previous statements and
prosecution for perjury is price for freedom to depart
from the earlier version.
An advocate will become a witness if he is presented
during video conferencing then he can not appear as an
advocate. Amendment is totally opposed.
With reference to the proposal that confession or statement
made under section 164 Cr.P.C. may also be recorded by
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
Not agreed to.
Ditto.

101
audio/video electronic means in the presence of the
advocate. He is of the view that the advocate can become
a witness to his own client’s crime which is unfortunate.
The amendment is not acceptable for the same reasons as
in respect of section 161 in clause 12. The amendment is
thoroughly misconceived.
Further by this provision different kind of coercion sought
to be used i.e. power to prosecute witnesses’ perjury. If
it is due to the threats of accused then the real culprit is
the accused not the witness.
Material cases in many cases is so large that large number
of judicial Magistrates/Metropolitan Magistrates would not
be available for taking this work.
This clause would unreasonably arm police with power to
include stock witnesses as material witnesses seeking
conviction of evidence unfairly gathered.
The statement given under the proposed section 164B is
violative of Article 20(3) of the constitution. If the person
whose statement is recorded as witness today, he could
be made an accused tomorrow and he could be
incriminated himself.
In the absence of requirement of the Magistrate appearing
before the court, it is likely that the magistrate may
comply with the request of the police.
56 15 Ditto
57. ” Bar Council of
Andhra Pradesh
58. ” Justice Bhawani
Singh
59. ” Ditto
60. ” Justice Jaspal
Singh
61. ” Shri K.
Chandrashekaran
Pillai, Director,
Indian Law
Institute
Comments same as given against suggestions
at Sr.No.43-55.
Through the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act,
2005, a new section namely, 195A IPC has
been inserted to provide punishment for
threatening any person to give false evidence.
The proposed provision is only for heinous
crimes. Hence, this problem may not arise.
The provision has been proposed to reduce the
possibility of witnesses turning hostile. It is not
expected that any magistrate will comply with
the request of the police.
Not agreed to.
The proposed provision is to arrest the tendency
of witnesses turning hostile. It is not expected
that any magistrate will comply with the request
of the police.

102
12 3 4 5
62. 16 Ditto
S. 167
63. “ Bar Council of
West Bengal
64. “ Justice Bhawani
Singh
65. 19 Justice Jaspal
S195A Singh
66. 21 Ditto
S.242
67. 22 Bar Council of
(Deletion India
of
sections
251
to
259)
68. 22 Bar Council of
West Bengal
69 “ Justice Jaspal
Singh
There can not be police remand for more than 15 days
in a case. The provision as proposed may, therefore, have
to be revised.
Should be omitted.
The amendment may require suitable equipments and
infrastructure at the court as well as the jail.
It is suggested that in place of “a witness or any other
person appear” in. clause 19, may be replaced by the
word ‘any person’ as “any person” could include a witness
also.
It is suggested that the Magistrate shall in advance supply
to the accused a statement of witness recorded during
investigation by the police as well as the Magistrate.
The amendment is also opposed in view of comments in
Section 2(w) and Section 260 under clause 23.
Omission of Chapter XX of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is not justified.
To dispense with summon trials for the purpose of quick
disposal of cases would not be appropriate.
This section is outside of the purview of the
Bill.
Not agreed.
This is outside the purview of the Bill.
Not Agreed to.
Such statement includes statement given before
the police as well as before the Magistrate.
Although Chapter XX of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is proposed to be deleted, the
provisions for summon trials provided therein
are proposed to be incorporated in section 262
Cr.P .C.which provide for summary trial.
Moreover, the Magistrates have the option to
try any summons cases as the warrant cases.
Ditto
Ditto

103
70. 23 Justice Shri K.
Jayachandra
Reddy
71 23 Bar Council of
S.260 India
72. 24 Bar Council of
West Bengal
73. 25 Bar Council
of NW States
74. 26 Bar Council of
India
75. 27 Ditto
S.275
76. 28 Ditto
S.309
The suggestion is with reference to sub-section (2) of
section 260 Cr.P.C.
It is provided that if the Magistrate thinks that it is
improper to try the case summarily, the court or the
Magistrate as the case may be, shall record reasons for
not trying the case summarily. The only course left is
warrant procedure. This should be mentioned  specifically.
Definition of the “summons cases” is not required to be
amended. Hence, the present amendment under section
260 Cr.P.C. is unwarranted.
Signature in the letter of the accused should be counter
signed by advocate of his choice.
Some cogent grounds should have been given for deletion
of clause (b) of section 263.
Amendments are not accepted in view of the objection in
respect of section 161 and l64B Cr.P.C.
Ditto
Except sub-clause (a) all other amendments under clause
(b) are opposed. In other words under section 309 in
sub-section (2) after third proviso and before explanation
1, the amended proviso suggested is not acceptable.
Similarly (c) and (d) are also not acceptable.
Sub-section (a) of proviso is sufficient. No examination
of the witnesses in criminal cases shall be recorded ex-
parte or for that matter the cross-examination cannot be
dispensed with if they are otherwise relevant for the
effective decision of the case.
There will be only two types of trial procedures
viz.
(i) summary trial
(ii) warrant procedure
A case, if it is not tried summarily, it is
understood that the case is to be tried as
warrant case.
The suggestion not agreed to. The proposed
provision appears to be in order.
Not agreed. This is upto the accused who
consult an advocate, if necessary.
The proposed amendment is only consequential
in nature.
We may not agree to the proposal.
The proposed provision is only to ensure that
the witness does not retract after sometime.
The proposed amendment to section 309 is to
prevent adjournment of cases on flimsy
grounds for speedy disposal of cases.
Therefore, we may not agree to the suggestion.
Similar provisions are already available in the
Civil Procedure Code, 1908.

104
12 3 4 5
77. ” Bar Council
of West Bengal
78. ” Bar Council
of NE States
79. 30 Bar Council
S.320 of W est Bengal
80. ” Ditto
81. ” Ditto
82. 30 Shri Jagannath
Patnaik
83. 33 Bar Council of
India
Clauses (b), (c) and (d) of section 309 Cr.P.C. should be
omitted.
Section 309(2)(b) of fourth proviso - the words on
specified ground the court may adjourn the matter for
any other day may be inserted.
Under section 498 regarding compounding an offence the
words “the husband of the woman” should be substituted
as “woman and her husband”
Section 498A IPC may be added under sub-section (2) of
section 320 Cr.P.C. where the offence is compounded
with the permission of the court.
Compounding of offences under section 451 (House
trespass), 497 (Adultery) and 498 (enticing or taking
away the married woman) may not be welcome.
With reference to offences at section 498 IPC, enticing or
taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married
woman, it is proposed to make the offence compoundable
without the permission of the court. It is also suggested
that this offence can be compounded by the woman
concerned in addition to husband of a woman.
The amendment suggested relates to the examination of
the accused who is suspected to be of unsound mind by
the Magistrate. The following proviso to sub-section 1
(A) be added:
Ditto
The proposed provision is very clear.
There may not be any objection if “the woman
so desires” is also included along with the
husband.
This section is outside of the purview of the
Bill.
The purpose of making these offences
compoundable without the permission of the
court is for speedy disposal of cases. These
offences are already compoundble but with
the permission of the court.
Agreed.
Agreed.

105
84. 36 Justice Bhawani
Singh
85. Bar Council of
India
86. 37 Bar Council
of NE States
87 38 Shri
Chandrashekaran
Pillai, Indian
Law Institute
88. 40 Bar Council of
India
89. ” Bar Council of
NE States
90. Mr. Justice
Bhawani Singh
“Provided any party being aggrieved by the report of the
psychologist or clinical psychiatrist for care and treatment
may appeal, to the medical board and the persons constitute
in the medical board be provided”.
Insertion of Section 344A is not necessary and the existing
provision is enough. The amendment would compel the
witnesses to stick to the version recorded rather state the
truth.
Since objections are raised for sections 161, 164 and
164B, this amendment to section 344A may not be
accepted.
Under section 357 of the Cr.P.C., the Central Government
and the State Government should allocate special funds
and deposit the same in the courts.
If the victim is allowed to appeal it will open flood gates
of litigation.
Under Section 437A, the words “such bail bonds shall be
in force for six months” be deleted because there is no
rationale behind such time limit.
Personal appearance should not be made a criteria.
There should be a provision under section 154 Cr.P.C.
that information in respect of cognizable offence can also
be given by any person by fax message or telephonically.
The detailed provisions are made regarding
action to be taken on persons giving false
evidence.
Summary .procedure for trial is proposed only
in respect of retracting of statement made
before a magistrate in respect of heinous crimes
w.r.t. Section 164B only.
Will be looked into while formulating a scheme
in this regard.
The suggestion not agreed.
The proposed provision for six months is to
ensure that the accused does not go at large in
cases.
The proposed provision is to ensure that the
accused does not go at large.
MHA is separately considering a proposal to
amend section 154 Cr.P.C. alongwith a proposal
regarding Victims Compensation Scheme.

106
12 3 4 5
91. ” Prof. N.R.
Madhava Menon
Witness protection is also a major issue. A statutory
provision for the purpose of providing witness protection
may be put in place.
Protection to witnesses is given whenever
required on the directions of the Court. If
elaborate provisions are required, in this regard,
this will be considered separately.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.