PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New DelhiMarch, 2023/Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)
TWO HUNDRED ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT ON(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17 MARCH, (LAID ON THE TABLE OF
       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON HOME AFFAIRS 
 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi March, 2023/Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)     
HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH  REPORT  ON   ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED REPORT ON POLICE - TRAINING, MODERNISREFORMS  (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17 MARCH, 2023 LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 20 MARCH 2023
  Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
 TWO HUNDRED ODERNISATION AND 23)  2023) 
 REPORT NO. 244 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR  TWO HUNDRED ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED THIRTYMODERNIS(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON Rajya Sabha March, 2023/Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available             PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON HOME AFFAIRS HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT   ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT ON POLICE - TRAINING, MODERNISATION AND REFORMS   (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 17th MARCH, 2023)  (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 20th MARCH 2023)     Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi March, 2023/Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)             
Hindi version of this publication is also available          C.S. (H.A.)- Y STANDING COMMITTEE  ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO TRAINING, MARCH, 2023)  MARCH 2023) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYM (iii) – (iv)  
4.  REPORT      1 - 49 
 Chapter   -   I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2 - 10 
 Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
11 - 34 
 Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
35 - 39 
 Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
40 - 49 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE-  
AT A GLANCE 
50 - 59 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
60-62 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Brijlal    - Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
3. Shri N. R. Elango 
4. Dr. Anil Jain 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
9. Shri P. Bhattacharya1  
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha  
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia  
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale2 
18. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Vacant3  
20. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
21. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
22. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
23. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
24. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
28. Shri Ravneet Singh  
29. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
30. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer   
                                                             
1 Shri P. Bhattacharya, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f 12th October, 2022 in place of Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, MP, Rajya 
Sabha. 2 Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 19th October, 2022 in place of Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar, 
MP, Lok Sabha.  
3 Consequent upon disqualification of Shri  Faizal P. P. Mohammed  from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 11th January, 2023  
in terms of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section   8 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1951, he ceases to be a Member of the Committee. 
(i)   

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on 'Police 
- Training, Modernisation and Reforms '. 
2.  The Two Hundred Thirty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha on the 10th February, 2022. After presentation/laying of the Report, the copies 
thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes 
on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the 
Action Taken Notes on the said Report to the Committee on 16th September, 2022 and                         
8th February, 2023.  
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated                  
24th  September 2004.     
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Forty Fourth Report and adopted the 
same at its meeting held on 15th March, 2023. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
15th March, 2023 
24 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
New Delhi 
Brijlal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
BSF Border Security Force 
BIMSTEC Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation  
BPR&D  Bureau of Police Research & Development  
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces  
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CDAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CDR Call Detail Record 
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory 
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & Systems  
CFCFRMS Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud Online Reporting and Management System 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CPOs Central Police Organisations  
DIG Deputy Inspector General of Police 
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
CVOs Chief Vigilance Officers 
DPT District Practical Training  
DGP Director-General of Police 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
DoPO Data on Police Organizations 
DSCI Data Security Council of India 
FIRs First Information Reports 
ERSS Emergency Response Support System  
FSLs Forensic Science Laboratories 
HPC High-Powered Committee  
ICJS Inter-operable Criminal Justice System  
IT Information Technology 
IPS Indian Police Service 
IRS Indian Revenue Service 
JCCTs Joint Cyber Coordination Teams 
LEAs Law Enforcement Agencies  
LWE Left-Wing Extremism 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MCTP Mid-Career Training Programme 
MLAs Members of Legislative Assembly 
MPs Members of Parliament 
NACs Notified Area Councils  
NCFL National Cyber Forensic Laboratory 
NFSU National Forensic Sciences University  
NDPS  Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  
NASSCOM  National Association of Software and Service Companies 
NDCRTC National Digital Crime Resource & Training Centre  
NALSAR The National Academy of Legal Studies and Research 
NEPA North-Eastern Police Academy  
NGO  Non-Government Organisation 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
 
(iii) 

NOCs No Objection Certificates 
NSG National Security Guard 
OSINT Open source intelligence 
OM Office Memorandum  
PEB Police Establishment Board  
POs Probationary Officers  
RRU Rashtriya Raksha University  
SHO Station House Officer 
SVPNPA Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy  
SOPs Standard Operating Procedure 
SPOs State Police Organizations  
SPs Superintendents of Police  
SSPs Senior Superintendents of Police 
TMIS Training Management Information System 
TNA Training Needs Analysis  
UTs Union Territories 
UCs Utilization Certificates  
VVIP Very Very Important Person 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
1 
 
Report 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty 
Seventh Report of the Committee on Police - Training, Modernisation and Reforms. The Two 
Hundred Thirty Seventh Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok 
Sabha, on 10th February, 2022. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Seventh Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 1.4.8, 2.2.19, 2.7.4, 2.7.6, 2.11.3, 3.12.4, 3.17.4, 3.27.3, 4.3.3, 
4.4.4, 4.5.5, 4.10.7, 4.16.4 (of Two Hundred Thirty Seventh Report) 
Total recommendations- 13 Accepted. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted 13 of its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.2.15, 2.2.16, 2.2.17, 2.2.18, 
2.5.2, 2.6.4, 2.6.5, 2.7.5, 2.8.3, 2.8.4, 2.9.6, 2.9.7, 2.10.4, 2.10.5, 2.12.2, 2.13.3, 2.13.4, 
2.14.10, 2.14.12, 3.15.2, 3.15.3, 3.16.8, 3.17.3, 3.19.6, 3.19.7, 3.20.3, 3.20.4, 3.21.12, 
3.21.13, 3.25.2, 3.26.4, 4.6.12, 4.8.4, 4.9.5, 4.12.5, 4.13.9, 4.16.5,4.17.7, 4.18.2 (ibid) 
Total recommendations – 39 Not to be pursued further. 
 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry in 
respect of 39 recommendations and, therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations 
further. 
 
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is 
not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 2.2.20, 3.21.9, 3.21.10, 3.21.11, 
3.24.8, 3.27.4, 4.7.8, 4.17.8 (ibid) 
Total recommendations – 8 Not convincing replies. 
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of 8 of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter III and desires that the Ministry should take further 
necessary action and furnish convincing replies in respect of those recommendations within a 
time frame of three months after the presentation of the Report.  
 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 1.4.4, 2.3.6, 2.4.2, 2.9.8, 3.16.7, 3.17.5, 
3.18.5, 3.22.5, 3.22.6,  3.23.5, 3.24.7, 4.4.5, 4.6.9, 4.6.10,  4.6.11, 4.9.4, 4.11.5, 4.13.8, (ibid) 
Total Recommendations –18 To be pursued further. 
 
In respect of the 18 recommendations placed in Chapter IV, the Committee feels that 
the Ministry has either furnished interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in 
respect of the recommendations categorized in Chapter IV as per the intention and spirit of 
the recommendations of the Committee within three months. 
 
 As per the categorisation indicated above, the para-wise details of the ATNs are being 
discussed in the succeeding Chapters. 
 
 

 
2 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
1.1 Ranking of Police Stations 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.1.1 The Committee appreciates the initiative of ranking of police stations in the country. 
The Committee believes that the annual ranking of police stations work as a constant guide 
for improvements. It also provides a picture of the state of physical infrastructure, resources 
and deficiencies at the level of police stations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the MHA may incentivize the best police stations in terms of funds and resources. It will 
recognize their hard work and create an environment of healthy competition among all police 
stations in the country.  
(Para 1.4.8 of 237th  Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 The Annual Assessment of the Best Police Stations Scheme was undertaken since 
Year- 2017 to identify and recognize the ten best police stations of the country and also the 
best police station in a particular State or Union Territory.  
1.1.3 Report in this regard is released in the DsGP-IsGP Conference every year. There are 
two sets of awards given to police stations. The 3 best police stations selected for that year 
will be awarded ‘Shield’. Further, the top 10 police stations of the country and the top police 
stations of each State/UTs have been given certificates.  
1.1.4 Further, under the umbrella scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces, approved in 
September 2017, a component of “incentives for police reforms” was included in the 
implementation structure of the scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of 
Police”.  It was decided to earmark a certain amount each year for awarding incentives to 
the State Government for the implementation of Police Reforms. To incentivize the 
implementation of police reforms as recommended by various committees, originally a 
provision of keeping up to 10% of the total annual allocation of the scheme was made.  This 
incentive fund has been increased to ‘up to 20%’ from the year 2019-20. 
Further Recommendation  
1.1.5 The Committee notes the reply.  
1.2 Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.2.1  With regard to the training syllabi of the Academies, the Committee is of the firm 
opinion that the training syllabus should be dynamic and in sync with the changing need and 
times. A static syllabus will only make the entire training process redundant and a mere 
formality. The Committee notes that SVPNPA and NEPA do review the content of the 
training curriculum from time to time. However, the Committee recommends that a 
mechanism may be developed to review and update the training curriculum biennially/ 
triennially based on the professional requirement and ground-level assessment of the POs. 
(Para 2.2.19 ibid) 

 
3 
 
Action Taken  
 
 Action Taken Report from SVPNPA:- 
 
1.2.2 Regular review of syllabus and teaching methodology takes place. Academy also has 
high-level Academy Boards comprising senior civil/police officers, eminent educationists etc., 
as its members. The Board is headed by the Union Home Secretary. The Board periodically 
(once in three years) reviews inter-alia the syllabi and training methodology of various 
courses conducted in the Academy. 
 
1.2.3 On the basis of recommendations of the 37th Board meeting and the 39th Board 
meeting of SVPNPA Board, the Academy conducted a comprehensive Training Needs 
Analysis (TNA) in the year 2020. It is proposed to conduct the TNA exercise once every five 
years. 
 
1.2.4 For all the Mid-Career Training Programme (MCTP) Course guiding principle for 
the design of the course is the recommendations of Dr. Trinath Mishra, IPS (Retd.) 
Committee Report. 
 
1.2.5 However, as recommended by Hon’ble Committee that “a mechanism may be 
developed review and update the training curriculum biennially triennially based on the 
professional requirement and ground level assessment of the POs” will be ensured. 
 
1.2.6 These recommendations will be given due importance while designing the next MCTP 
Course. Contemporary topics like the Dark Net, Crypto Currencies, Drones, Big Data 
Analytics & use of Technology for better policing have been made an integral part of the 
Course Design. 
 
 Action Taken Report from NEPA :- 
 
1.2.7 NEPA is making constant efforts to keep abreast with the evolving challenges in the 
field of policing. All modern topics related to policing are incorporated in the syllabus, as 
and when required. In addition, eminent resource personnel from respective fields from all 
over the country, are invited to enlighten the trainees on the trending topics. 
 
1.2.8 In a bid to further improve training, North Eastern Police Academy (NEPA) is 
conducting a Training Needs Analysis, wherein its faculty officers are deputed to member 
states to get a first-hand impression of the training requirements and also obtain suggestions 
from supervisory officers vis-à-vis their specific needs. NEPA will ensure to keep up the 
recommendations of the committee. 
 
Further recommendation  
1.2.9 The Committee notes the commitment of the SVPNPA to develop a mechanism 
to review and update the training curriculum biennially/ triennially based on the 
professional requirement and ground-level assessment of the POs and designing the 
next Mid-Career Training Programme (MCTP) Course as per the recommendation of 
the Committee. The Committee further recommends that the training curriculum for 
the personnel should be developed in a hybrid mode – a mix of online and offline 
modules. 
 
 

 
4 
 
1.3 Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.3.1 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to impart adequate 
training to the police personnel on the procedure during arrests. The training should also 
emphasize that the rights of the detainee are not violated by resorting to manhandling during 
arrests. The police personnel should also be trained to understand  that their role is not just to 
arrest people but also to protect people and deter crime.  
(Para 2.7.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 The Advanced Course on Investigation and Detection of Crime (10 Weeks) includes 
sessions on Arrest and related topics (A part of a module on Law, Police Procedure and 
Report Writing) (4 days). 
1.3.3 The subjects covered are: 
• Arrest – (D.K. Basu Vs. State of West Bengal) Remand prayer 
• Hand cuffing 
• Test Identification (TI) Parade 
• Bail 
• Legal Provision. 
1.3.4 Further, BPR&D is regularly conducting webinar, symposium, conference etc. with 
stakeholders which include officers from State Government. 
Further Recommendation  
1.3.5 The Committee notes the reply.    
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3.6 The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States to sensitize the 
investigating officers to use relevant provisions under the penal laws while registering a case 
and precautions be taken during trial to secure conviction. 
(Para 2.7.6  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.7 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to maintain law and order, including investigation, registration and 
prosecution of crimes, protection of life and property, etc. Police Forces of the States work 
within the existing legal and institutional framework. 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
Further Recommendation  
1.3.8 The Committee notes that due to lack of knowledge of procedure among ground 
level police personnel, unknowingly, loopholes are generated in the process of 
investigation, collection of evidence, filing of charge-sheets which are taken advantage 
by the culprits.  This leads to State prosecution losing a lot of cases in the courts.  This is 
a undeniable fact in respect of all States/UTs.  Hence, the Committee desires that while 
centre may refrain from involving in day to day administrative matters of police   
enforcement of law and order, it ought to device a mechanism by making/amending the 
existing provisions suitably so that the training of police personnel from the level of 
constable to the level of SHO by States/UTs can be standardized so far as procedure on 
inter-state registration of cases and prosecution of crimes is concerned.  The Committee 
believes this could strengthen the law and orders system in the country to prevent 
criminals operating inter-state and taking advantage of loopholes to escape prosecution  
 
1.4 Creation of Dedicated Reserve Training Pool 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.4.1 The Committee observes that most of the time, police stations are understaffed, and 
when the officials are summoned for training, they don’t get relieved on time. As a result, if 
the training slot is for 100 constables, only 50 to 60 percent of the constables are allowed to 
take training. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA may advise States/UTs for 
creation of a reserved training pool at the District level so that if training is proposed to be 
given to 100 constables, then those chosen for training could be replaced with reserve 
constables from the training pool created for the purpose and there is no hesitancy on the part 
of the higher police officers in sending the personnel for training. 
(Para 2.11.3  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India.  It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to fill up the 
vacancies in the police force in their respective States.   The Centre also issues advisories 
from time to time to the States for filling up these vacancies in the States and to bring in the 
requisite reforms in the police administration to meet the lawful expectations of the people. In 
case the vacant posts of police personnel are filled by the States/UTs, the reserved training 
pool will automatically be created in a comprehensive manner.  
Further Recommendation  
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply.  
1.5 Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5.1  The Committee appreciates the component of “incentives for police reforms” under 
the scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police”.  The Committee notes that 
the incentive fund has been increased to up to 20% from the year 2019-20. The Committee 
however opines that the progress in police reforms has been slow and hopes that the 
incentives given to better performing States for taking various measures on police reforms 

 
6 
 
will encourage other States to fast-track the efforts towards modernisation of their police. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may put the information in public domain about the 
States that are leading and lagging in the modernisation process.  This will create a sense of 
competition and put pressure on the States lagging behind to perform better. The Committee 
also observes that the issues behind the under-utilization of funds by the States also need to 
be identified. Therefore, the Committee also recommends that the MHA should consider 
constituting a Committee which can visit the underperforming States and 
assist/advise/persuade them to utilize the funds in a planned manner; otherwise the situation 
in these states may take a long time to show improvements. 
(Para  3.12.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 The information about the States that are leading in utilizing funds and taking 
maximum benefit of the scheme of ‘Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police’ has been 
published in the Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 2020-21.   
1.5.3  In so far as recommendations regarding the visit of officers to identify and resolve 
issues behind the under-utilization of funds by the States is concerned; stipulation is being 
made in the guidelines of the scheme so that the same can be institutionalized. Besides that, 
the Ministry issues reminders to the States and implementation is reviewed regularly through 
Review Meetings. Further, the ‘High Power Committee’, which approves Action Plans under 
the scheme also discusses issues related to the under-utilization of funds with the 
representatives of the State Government and State Police. 
Further Recommendation  
1.5.4 The Committee notes the reply.   
1.6 Use of Technology by State Police 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6.1 The Committee observes that technology like artificial intelligence, big data, etc. can 
effectively help in mapping the crime hotspots and getting a digital footprint of the criminals. 
This can be used to deploy force more effectively thereby reducing/preventing crime. 
Artificial intelligence can be used to draw correlations between the types of crime, time, 
location, match fingerprints, facial images, analyze CCTV footage and recognize vehicle 
number plates, etc. Big data can be used to integrate and store data from multiple sources. 
This will help in developing a scientific approach to policing. The Committee recommends 
that the MHA may encourage and incentivize States to leverage technologies like artificial 
intelligence, big data, etc. for policing. The Committee further recommends that BPR&D 
may be tasked to make a compendium of the latest technologies used by the various State 
police forces and share among them. This will help the States to fight crimes in a coordinated 
manner. 
(Para  3.17.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 This Ministry shares the same view. This Ministry will continue to leverage 
technologies like artificial intelligence, big data analysis, etc., for policing by the State / UT 
Governments under the scheme of ‘Assistance to States and UTs for Modernisation of 
Police’. 

 
7 
 
1.6.3 BPR&D regularly publishes a Compendium of Equipment purchased by various 
police organisations.  As recommended by the Committee, BPR&D has been asked to make a 
compendium of the latest technologies used by the various State police forces and share 
among them. 
Further Recommendation  
1.6.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
1.7 Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7.1  The Committee notes that Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) is a Pan-
India single number (112) based emergency response system for citizens in emergencies.  
The Committee recommends that MHA may advise States to create a state-of-the-art facility, 
recruit adequate staff and sensitize them to handle calls. Regular feedback may also be taken 
from the complainants on the service of ERSS. This will help in improving the performance 
of police and building trust with people. Efforts should be made to reduce the response time 
to extend help to the person in distress. 
(Para 3.27.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 The ‘112’ Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) has been made operational 
across the country in 35 States/UTs in coordination with the respective States/UTs. 
Advisories have been issued to the States/UTs regularly to make the system more enabled for 
providing assistance in the shortest response time possible. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
1.7.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.8 Model Police Act, 2006 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8.1 The Committee is concerned to note that the Model Police Act was forwarded to all 
the States in 2006 and even after 15 years, so far only 17 States have either enacted the 
Model Police Act or amended their existing Act. This shows laxity on the part of the 
remaining States. The Committee is of the view that adoption/ implementation of the Act by 
all States will help in creating a uniform police structure across the country. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the MHA may take feedback from such States to understand 
their perspective in the matter so as to advise them accordingly, for the adoption/ 
implementation of the Model Police Act, 2006.  
(Para 4.3.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to enact the Model Police Act, 2006 or to enact it with suitable 

 
8 
 
modifications. The advisory in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs vide letter 
dated 02.05.2022. 
Further recommendation  
1.8.3 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
1.9 Dual System Vs Police Commissionerate System 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9.1 The Committee notes that some States in the country have created multiple police 
Commisionerates in their States, while some States having sizeable populations do not have 
any police Commisionerate. The Committee is of the view that the police Commissionerate 
system leads to faster decision-making to solve urban-centric issues. With the growing 
number of cities with a million-plus population, the Commissionerate system would be a 
better option to manage for management of law and order problems and complex issues. 
The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to consider establishing 
police Commissionerate system in cities having more than 10 lakh population as 
recommended by Mooshahary Committee. 
(Para 4.4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 The advisory in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs vide letter dated 
13.04.2022. 
Further Recommendation  
1.9.3 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
1.10 Village Policing 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.10.1 The Committee opines that the village policing system needs to be strengthened in the 
country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may coordinate with 
States/UTs to make arrangements for providing training to the members of the village 
policing system about their role and responsibilities to help the police in the maintenance of 
law and order in the rural area. The Committee also recommends that the BPR&D may 
undertake a study by collecting State-wise data on the village policing system in the country 
in order to make a proper assessment of the prevalence and performance of the village 
policing in the country. The Committee recommends that the MHA may encourage the 
State/UTs and incentivize them for setting up village policing system as it would reduce the 
burden of the local police stations at semi-urban, Notified Area Councils (NACs) and towns 
in policing, vigilance and crime prevention. 
(Para  4.5.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2 Research & Correctional Administration Division of BPR&D is preparing ‘Terms of 
Reference’ for advertisement for inviting research proposals on the topic. 

 
9 
 
Further recommendation  
1.10.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
1.11 Police Establishment Board (PEB) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11.1  The Committee notes that as per available information, few States have established 
Police Establishment Boards, and recommends that MHA may advise the remaining States to 
create Police Establishment Boards for the transfer or posting of the IPS officers as well as 
officials posted at Zone/Range/District level in a judicious and impartial manner.  
(Para 4.10.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2 The advisory has been issued to all the States/UTs relating to Police Establishment 
Board (PEB) vide letter dated 20.05.2022. 
Further recommendation  
1.11.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
1.12 Revisiting the laws 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.12.1     The Committee gathers that the MHA has constituted a Committee to review the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860, Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
The Committee recommends that the MHA may discuss the matter with all the stakeholders 
including the States, keeping in view of the best global practices in policing and 
constitutional rights and safeguards of the citizens. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the recommendations made by the Committee pertaining to these laws. 
(Para 4.16.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, in its 
146th Report dated 23.06.2010, had recommended that there is a need for a comprehensive 
review of the Criminal Justice System of the country.  Earlier the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee in its 111th and 128th Reports had also stressed the need to reform and 
rationalize the criminal law of the country by introducing comprehensive legislation in 
Parliament rather than bringing about piecemeal amendments in respective Acts.  The 
Government agrees with the recommendations of the Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs regarding the need to reform and rationalize the 
criminal laws and introduction of comprehensive legislation in the Parliament with a view of 
provide affordable and speedy justice to all, create people-centric legal structure, the 
Government has initiated the process for comprehensive amendments to the criminal laws in 
consultation with all Stakeholders.  The Ministry of Home Affairs has also sought suggestions 
from Governors, Chief Ministers of States, Lieutenant Governors (LGs) and Administrators 
of Union Territories, Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, Hon’ble Chief Justice of various High 
Courts, Bar Council of India, Bar Council of various States, various Universities/Law 
Institutes and all Members of Parliament regarding comprehensive amendments in criminal 
laws.  The Government is committed to bringing out comprehensive legislation taking into 

 
10 
 
account the recommendations of the Committee and the suggestions received from all the 
Stakeholders. 
Further recommendation  
1.12.3 The Committee notes the reply.   
  
  

 
11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the 
matter in view of the Government’s reply 
 
2.1 Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.1.1 From the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee understands that 
among the above-mentioned three Institutes, BPR&D occupies a key position, as it plays a 
vital role in the field of research. The Committee recommends that the BPR&D must make 
regular assessments of the need for more training institutes in the country so that the MHA 
can advise States to increase their training capacity adequately, to train all their police 
personnel for making them more professionally efficient.  
(Para 2.2.15 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.1.2 Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) is the nodal Central Agency for 
police training in the Country. 
2.1.3 BPR&D is carrying out regular assessment of the need of training Institutes in the 
country.  At present BPR&D is conducting training for police personnel of the 
States/UTs/CPOs and Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) personnel in its five Central 
Detective Training Institutes (CDTIs) and Central Academy for Police Training (CAPT), 
Bhopal. 
Further recommendation  
2.1.4 The Committee notes the reply.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.5 The Committee takes note of the various initiatives undertaken by the Training 
Division of BPR&D. While the Institute undertakes research for the requirements of the 
police, the need to analyze the source, pattern, social base and reasons for the crimes is also 
highly essential. Hence, the Committee recommends that the MHA may entrust upon the 
BPR&D, the responsibility of making such assessments as well so that it will help the 
BPR&D in taking suitable steps while formulating the training programmes for the personnel. 
This will help in dealing with the evolving trends of crime. 
(Para 2.2.16 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.1.6 The Bureau and its outlying units consult the client States before finalizing the 
training Curriculum.  Further, Training Needs Analysis (TNA) is carried out in consultation 
with experts and in-house faculty. 
Further recommendation  
2.1.7 The Committee notes the reply.     
 

 
12 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.8 The Committee observed that the BPR&D’s ‘Data on Police Organizations’ is released 
with a lag of one/more than a year. As of now, data pertaining to the year 2019 are available 
vide its publication date marked as 1st January, 2020. The Committee feels that in the digital 
age and faster mode of communication, the compilation of data should not be a time-
consuming process. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take up with BPR&D to 
fast-track the compilation of Data on Police Organization and endeavour to reduce the time 
lag to 6 months in place of 1 year so that the reports released by the BPR&D could be of 
relevant use. 
(Para 2.2.17  ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.1.9 BPR&D complies the Data on Police Organizations (DoPO) based on the 
information obtained from States/UT Police authorities. Often, it required several 
reiterations of reminder to get the data from States/UTs.  Further, the data is collected in the 
raw format.  After receipt, the data is scrutinized, summarized and tabulated.  The 
discrepancies observed during scrutiny are referred back for rectification.   Thereafter, the 
data is analysed/synthesized into tables to reflect all-India position.  At this stage also 
discrepancies are found which require the States/UTs to review/rectify the information 
provided by them.  The matter is pursued with the concerned authorities repeatedly at high 
level.  While all out efforts are made by BPR&D, however, there is a delay in getting 
information from States/UTs. Therefore, BPR&D is unable to compile DoPO in a shorter 
time period.  
Further recommendation  
2.1.10 The Committee notes the reply.     
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.11 The Committee appreciates the Training Needs Analysis (TNA) of the SVPNPA to 
take feedback from DGPs, ex-DGP, etc., to improve the training curriculum. However, the 
Committee also notes with concern the corruption complaints against some IPS Officers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the faculty members of the SVPNPA should chalk 
out a programme during the lean period of their training calendar, to visit the Districts to 
assess the performance of the probationary officers (POs) at the ground level. In view of the 
Committee, this would provide a practical assessment of the shortcomings and lacunae which 
could be eliminated through further improvement in the training modules. 
(Para  2.2.18 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.1.12  Action Taken Report from Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel National Police Academy 
(SVPNPA), Hyderabad:- 
 
a.   Training Needs Analysis: 
The Academy has been revising the training content and methodology periodically 
keeping in view of the changing field requirements. As part of this exercise, the Academy 
conducted a comprehensive Training Needs Analysis (TNA) in the year 2020 with the 
objective to understand the gap in domain knowledge, skills and attitudes imparted during 
training to the IPS recruits at the Academy vis-à-vis the requirements in the field. 
 

 
13 
 
In this massive exercise, the Academy collected about 12000 responses from eight 
states (Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Kerala, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, and Telangana) by using 
customized questionnaires, not only from uniformed officers and personnel of all ranks 
(approx. 700 from each state), but also from the allied departments and citizens across the 
cross-section of society (about 400 from each state), from the IPS officers of previous ten 
batches (61-70 RR batch) and the trainer SPs/SSPs of IPS Probationers of the last five 
batches (66-70 RR batch). All these have been analyzed to identify the gaps in basic training. 
In addition, the responses of the National Security Advisor, Union Home Secretary, Senior 
Security Advisor, Director Intelligence Bureau, Director CBI, Secretary R&AW, Director 
General BPR&D, DGs of CAPFs (CRPF, BSF, CISF, NSG) and DGs of various state police 
formations (Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab and 
Telangana) were also incorporated. 
 
Committees consisting of senior police officers and academicians were constituted on 
Indoor training, Outdoor training and Teaching methodologies for discussing the insights 
obtained from the Training Need Analysis to identify actionable points and suggest changes 
to be brought about in the Basic Course training. Subsequently, presentations were made 
before the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). MHA has permitted the Academy to implement 
the findings of the TNA exercise for the Basic Course training of 73 RR Batch (2020 batch of 
IPS). 
 
b. Academy’s supervision during the District Practical Training: 
A system of appointing a faculty member as counselor to each of the IPS probationers 
is in place at the Academy. The faculty counselor will be in touch with the IPS Probationer 
during the phase 1 training at the National Police Academy, District Practical Training 
(DPT) at the corresponding cadre state of the probationer and during the phase training at 
the National Police Academy. 
 
Further, it is to submit that, the faculty coordinators remain in close contact with the 
probationer throughout his/her training and also remain in touch with both the probationer 
and Training SP through video conferencing. As suggested by the Parliamentary committee 
counselors have been visiting the probationers in the field and also getting feedback so as to 
improve training. 
 
c. Mentor scheme:    In addition to the above the National Police Academy started the Mentor 
system from 2020 onwards. 
 
All the states have appointed mentors to guide the officer trainees during the period of 
their District Practical Training and beyond. 
 
The idea behind the mentorship is that in the initial phases of getting used to the life 
of a police officer, the officer trainees face a lot of professional & personal dilemmas which 
need to be addressed for imparting the right values & attitudes for a career of integrity, 
professionalism and contribution to the society. 
 
Every state would have some officers, who have proven themselves in the field and 
are known for their professionalism and integrity. If some of these officers, in the rank of SP/ 
SSP / DIG, are appointed as the mentors exclusively (apart from trainer SPs) for the officer 
trainees, then grooming them during the DPT, and even thereafter, would progress in the 
right direction and these Mentors might be able to shape them in their own mould. This 
scheme has been operationalised from 73 RR. 
 
 

 
14 
 
d.  Ethical Dilemmas: 
The Academy follows a sandwich model of training where in phase 1 training for 46 
weeks is imparted at the Academy, followed by 29 weeks of district practical training at the 
respective cadre state. After the district practical training, the trainee will report back to the 
Academy for 12 week phase 2 training. Phase 2 training is the final part of the basic course 
training. In the phase 2 training, there is a special module conducted on clearing the ethical 
dilemmas faced by the IPS Probationers during the field training. All aspects including 
integrity, honesty, rule of law, compassion, welfare etc. are discussed in this module. 
 
Further recommendation  
2.1.13 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.2 Police University 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.2.1 The Committee notes that the Sardar Patel University of Police Security and Criminal 
Justice at Jodhpur, Rajasthan is the only University of its kind with a focus on teaching and 
research in the field of Police, Criminal Justice, Social Sciences, Public Safety and Security 
and other related fields. The Committee lauds the endeavour of the Rajasthan Government in 
this regard. The Committee, recommends that the MHA may take up with the State 
Governments to open more police universities in their respective States, or more than one 
State could team up to open such a University in a region. These universities can then take up 
research on regional issues related to crime, criminal justice, public safety and security which 
would benefit the police in addressing the issues in a more comprehensive manner.  
(Para  2.5.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 The Raksha Shakti University, established by the State Government of Gujarat in 
2009 was the first Police University in India.  The university has since been upgraded to the 
Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU) through an Act of Parliament as a national police 
university and institution of national importance.  RRU has become operational on 01 
October, 2020.  This is a teaching, research and affiliating university which can open 
campuses across India and off-shores also.  All States/UTs may consider affiliating their 
Colleges/Institutes with the RRU. 
 
Further Recommendation  
2.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that all States/UTs may consider 
affiliating their Colleges/Institutes with the Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU) which 
is a Police University established at the national level.  The Committee has emphasized 
the need and importance of establishing universities at regional and State levels.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Center may pursue with all the States/UTs 
to consider affiliating their Colleges/Institutes with the RRU.   
 
2.3 The Behavior of Police Personnel 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3.1 The Committee is pleased to note that the experts on gender issues, criminal 
investigation and trial, etc., are roped in to frequently interact with the police probationers 

 
15 
 
and share their experiences. However, the Committee also notes with anguish that the public 
image of police throughout the country is more on the negative side. Police are often seen as 
insensitive towards the common man and vulnerable sections. While there is no denying the 
fact that various reasons could be attributed to such behaviour on the part of the Police, 
emphasis on the right training in this regard is one of the ways to develop such attributes in 
the Police Personnel. The Committee is of the considered view that the shift from an 
entitlement-based approach to a rights-based approach is needed for positive change in the 
attitudes of police personnel as well. The Committee, therefore, recommends that training 
institutes should ensure that inculcating soft skills in Police Personnel must always be the 
priority and focal point of their training modules. 
(Para 2.6.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 To enhance the effectiveness of the Police and to make it citizen-centric and people 
friendly, the BPR&D and its outlying units impart training course specifically designed to 
develop and hone soft skills among police officers and personnel. 
Further Recommendation  
2.3.3 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3.4 The Committee would like to emphasize that in a democratic country, people’s 
representatives have been accorded higher positions vis-a-vis Government Officers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise all States/UTs to sensitize 
Government officials of senior ranks to strictly adhere to the protocols associated with the 
Warrant of Precedence while interacting with the MPs/MLAs. 
(Para 2.6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.5 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to implement appropriate measures in this regard. Police Forces of the 
States work within the existing legal and institutional framework. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs circulated Model Police Act, 2006 to all State Governments which has provisions of 
role, functions, duties and responsibilities of police by taking into account the context of 
public order and internal security challenges. 
Further Recommendation] 
2.3.6 The Committee notes the reply  
2.4 Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.1 The Committee is of the view that understanding and awareness of the laws is 
important for police because the laws keep on getting amended.  As laws have an important 
role in the investigation and prosecution, therefore, it is paramount that correct provisions of 
laws are applied while registering a case. This will help in improving the conviction rate. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that SVPNPA, NEPA and State police academies 

 
16 
 
should devise some training curriculum so as to periodically update police personnel on the 
changes in laws and amendments thereto. The academies may also collaborate with law 
universities/colleges to disseminate legal knowledge and processes among police personnel, 
so as to avoid procedural lapses. 
(Para 2.7.5  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 Action Taken Report from SVPNPA :- 
(a)  Basic course: 
 
i. Training in criminal law is imparted in an integrated manner at the Academy. Further, 
the classroom inputs are followed by practical sessions and field visits to appreciate the 
connect between classroom teaching with field requirements. 
ii. SOPs have been prepared for investigation of various types of offences and shared with 
all the trainees. 
iii. Training contents are updated with the latest amendments and case laws. 
iv. Case studies based on the latest judgments are discussed in the classroom sessions and 
practical sessions. 
v. Probationers are encouraged through law society by conducting law quizzes, publishing 
articles in NPA journals etc. 
vi. SVPNPA is exploring the scope for partnering with NALSAR (Hyderabad) & National 
Judicial Academy for strengthening the teaching in Law. 
 
2.4.3 Action Taken Report from NEPA :- 
The latest legal provisions and their correct interpretations and applications are a high 
priority for NEPA, and as such, topics on the latest amendments of criminal and other laws 
are included in various courses. 
Further Recommendation  
2.4.4 The Committee notes with satisfaction that various methods such as updation of 
training contents, discussion on case studies based on latest judgments, conducting law 
quizzes, publishing in NPA journal, etc. are being initiated by the SVPNPA to keep the 
probationers updated about the amendments in law and latest judgments.  The 
Committee also appreciates the efforts of the SVPNPA to explore the possibility of 
involving NALSAR (Hyderabad) & National Judicial Academy to strengthen the 
teaching of law.    
2.4.5 The Committee hopes that efforts are being made at NEPA to keep the study 
material for courses updated.  The Committee feels that SVPNA and NEPA may share 
the teaching methodologies with each other so that the best suitable methods may be 
identified for inclusion in their courses. SVPNA and NEPA should also engage with 
State police academies, through workshops and seminars, so that the training 
curriculum of these academies is up-to-date and they can periodically sensitize police 
personnel on the changes in laws and amendments. 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
2.5 Training for Handling of Crimes In Tribal Areas 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.1 The Committee believes that a separate training module is needed for the police 
personnel to tackle crimes in tribal areas. The Committee recommends that the SVPNPA and 
NEPA may collaborate with State training institutes to include the study of the cultural gap 
among the tribes, and include their aspirations and tradition as a part of the training 
curriculum of the police personnel.  The training manual of the States may also be suitably 
amended so that the police officers are made aware of local traditions and customs 
particularly of the tribals and other vulnerable groups.  
(Para 2.8.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 
Action Taken Report from SVPNPA :- 
 
2.5.2 Since the half-year course calendar for the year 2022 has already been prepared, a 
separate training module to tackle crimes in tribal areas will be planned from the second half 
of this year onwards. 
 
Action Taken Report from NEPA :- 
2.5.3 This aspect is covered under the TNA programme of NEPA, wherein its officers visit 
the member states’ respective academies. 
Further Recommendation  
2.5.4 The Committee notes that SVPNPA is contemplating planning a separate 
training module to train police personnel to tackle crimes in tribal areas.  The 
Committee feels that the SVPNPA and NEPA while formulating training modules 
should also consult the training academies/institutes of the States having tribal areas so 
that the specific needs of these States may be incorporated in the proposed training 
modules.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.5 The Committee also recommends that police personnel posted in the tribal belt should 
have regular interaction with the tribal leaders, NGO activists, non-State representatives like 
the lawyers, university professors along with scholars having specialization on tribal issues 
for better handling of the crimes in tribal areas. 
(Para 2.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Action Taken Report from SVPNPA :- 
 
2.5.6 Developing a strong foundation of the local language of the cadre and its culture is a 
very important insight (received) in the comprehensive exercise of Training Needs Analysis. 
In pursuance of this, the subject of “cadre language and cadre studies” has been introduced 
in the basic course curriculum of the IPS Probationers. 
 
2.5.7 Sensitivity to local culture and ethos is an important part of Cadre Studies. 
 

 
18 
 
 
Further recommendation  
 
2.5.8 The Committee notes that a new course has been introduced in the basic course 
curriculum by SVPNPA to familiarize the police personnel with the local language and 
culture.  The Committee believes that apart from this, the involvement of tribal leaders, 
NGO activists, lawyers, university professors and scholars having specialization on 
tribal issues would be useful to acquaint the police personnel with the tribal issues to 
tackle crimes in tribal areas.    
 
2.6 Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.1 The Committee expresses its concern on the increasing rate of cyber crimes in the 
country. As per the NCRB data, cyber crime cases have increased from 27248 in 2018 to 
50035 in 2020. The Committee observes that these crimes are mainly related to financial 
transactions. The criminals not only target the innocent and vulnerable, especially elderly 
people, and dupe them of their savings but also well-known persons and celebrities. The 
Committee is of the view that specialized training is required to deal with the increasing 
cyber crimes in the country. The Committee recommends that the SVPNPA, NEPA should 
coordinate with State training academies to train police personnel with requisite knowledge 
of cyber laws, cyber crime investigation, digital forensics and upgrade them from time to 
time on new technological tools to deal with cyber crimes. The training academies may be 
advised to recruit cyber experts as trainers on cyber technologies. 
(Para 2.9.6  ibid) 
Action Taken 
Action Taken Report from SVPNPA :- 
 
2.6.2 SVP National Police Academy is the premier police training academy in the country 
mandated to train IPS officers for their basic course and mid-career/senior courses. 
2.6.3 SVP National Police Academy, with a vision for tackling growing cyber-crime, set up 
National Digital Crime Resource and Training Centre (NDCRTC) in the year 2015 under its 
IT wing.  The initial technical support and guidance were provided by CDAC (Hyderabad).  
The centre aims for Capacity building of Law Enforcement Agencies in Cyber Crime 
Investigation.  This Centre is mandated to train officers from State Police, CPOs and other 
LEAs of the Central Government, Digital Forensic Experts of CFSL and State FSL, Judges 
and Prosecutors.  The main objective of this Centre is to train all stakeholders in the field of 
Cyber Crime Investigation and in creating a pool of Master Trainers in this field in all wings 
of the Criminal Justice System across the Country in association with different agencies of 
State as well as Central Government working in this field. 
2.6.4 NDCRTC in the past 6 years of its existence has conducted more than 200 training 
courses for police officers, judicial officers, prosecutors and officers from other services like 
revenue, forest and customs.  It also trained foreign police officers from friendly nations like 
Bhutan, Maldives, Mauritius, Nepal, Sierra Leone and other BIMSTEC countries.  NDCRTC 
conducts training not only at the Academy campus in Hyderabad, but also travels across the 
country to various States to train officers of State/Central/International Law enforcement 
agencies.  During such courses, the NDCRTC team interacts with the participants and 

 
19 
 
identifies the key problems fact by the investigating officers in the field while handling 
various cases related to the field of Cybercrime investigation. 
2.6.5 All these problems are adequately incorporated and the training modules are 
designed in such a manner as to cover and address these practical issues found on the 
ground.  The courses are always kept dynamic and relevant to every changing field level 
challenges.   NDCRTS also helps investigation officers in solving crimes by providing 
guidance and suggestions on technical aspects during the investigation. 
2.6.6 This experience gained by the NDCRTC team aids in improving the course content 
thus making it more appropriate to cutting-edge police officers. 
2.6.7 NDCRTC has organized various courses related to Cyber Crime Investigation, Cyber 
Forensics, Cyber Security to the benefit of various law enforcement agencies both at the 
National Police Academy and in other State/Central Police Academies.  The centre offers 
both physical and online courses for the benefit of the participants. 
2.6.8 The experts of NDCRTC have travelled across the length and breadth of the country 
and organized these courses at the doorstep of state police establishments and central 
organization.  NDCRTC successfully trained the trainers and the personnel at all ranks in 
these agencies, thereby contributing greatly to the capacity building of these units in tackling 
Cybercrimes. 
2.6.9 During last year the academy conducted the following course on Cyber Crime; 
i. Cyber Crime and Cyber Law for Judicial Officers and Prosecutors in years 2021 and 
2022 in which a total of 86 officers participated. 
ii.  Dark Web and Crypto Currency Investigation in which 45 officers attended. 
2.6.10 The modules on Cyber Crimes have also been included to upgrade them from 
technological tools to deal with cyber crimes in the following courses: 
i.  Induction Training Programme for newly appointed CVOs 
ii. Training of 71st and 72nd batch of IRS 
iii. OSINT and Social Media Analysis 
iv. Advance Training in vigilance investigation for CVOs 
Action Taken Report from NEPA :- 
 
2.6.11 NEPA conducts the following webinars and offline courses in collaboration with 
CDAC (Kolkata), DSCI, NASSCOM etc. to provide exposure to the developing technologies: 
 
(a)  Awareness Level Smart Device Forensic Training Programme. 
(b)  Advanced Level Smart Device Forensic Training Programme. 
(c)  Course on Investigation of Financial Fraud and Corporate Offences. 
(d)  Course on Digital Evidence and Digital Forensic Tools. 
(e)  Mobile Forensics and CDR analysis. 
(f)  Understanding Dark Web and its challenges for investigators. 
(g)  Cyber Crimes etc. 

 
20 
 
Further recommendation  
2.6.12 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.13 The Committee understands that the States are facing constraints of manpower and 
resources in managing cyber crime investigations. It recommends that the MHA should 
consider creating volunteer help groups of IT Experts from civil society who can contribute 
in devising methods to track cyber thieves and bringing them to justice. The State/UT police 
should create a cyber crime help desk for immediate reporting of the cyber crimes leading to 
an early investigation by them. Timely intervention could lead to the prevention of such 
crimes as well as relief to the victims. 
(Para 2.9.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.6.14 “Police” and “Public Order” are State subjects, as per the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. The States/UTs are primarily responsible for the prevention, detection, 
investigation, and prosecution of crimes, institutional set-up, raising awareness among the 
public about cyber crimes and capacity building of their Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) 
including deployment of adequate manpower to deal with cyber crimes. The LEAs take legal 
action as per the provisions of the law against the offenders. The Ministry of Home Affairs 
supplements the efforts of the States/UTs, through advisories and financial support under 
various schemes, to tackle cyber crimes. 
 
2.6.15 The MHA has rolled out ‘Cyber Crime Volunteer Framework’ as a part of cyber 
hygiene promotion to bring together citizens to contribute to the fight against cyber crime 
and to assist State/UT LEAs in their endeavour to curb cyber crimes as technical experts, and 
for reporting of unlawful content, as per the provisions of the law. Volunteers are registered 
by following the due process (required to furnish ID proof, address proof, photograph etc.) 
and their services are being utilized by the respective State/UT Police agencies, as per their 
requirement. The content reported by the volunteer is to be verified and validated by the 
State/UT LEAs before taking appropriate action as per the existing provisions of law. There 
is no discretion provided in the hands of a cyber volunteer. 
 
2.6.16 The MHA has launched the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal which provides 
for reporting of all types of cyber crimes, with a focus on cyber crime against women and 
children. The complaints reported, through this portal, are automatically routed to the 
respective LEAs for taking further steps, as per law and the laid down procedure & protocol. 
The State/UT LEAs are sensitized from time to time to attend to the reported cyber crime 
incidents in a time-bound manner. In addition, a module, ‘Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud 
Online Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS)’ has also been operationalized in 
2021, for quick reporting of financial cyber frauds and for stopping the flow of funds, 
siphoned off by fraudsters. A Toll-free Helpline Number ‘1930’ has been operationalized to 
assist citizens, in their own languages, in lodging online cyber crime incidents and for quick 
reporting of financial cyber frauds on the CFCFRMS module. The calls made on the Toll-free 
Helpline number ‘1930’ land on the Helpdesk/Cyber Cell dedicated in the respective 
States/UTs. 
 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
Further recommendation  
 
2.6.17 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
 
2.7 Online Training 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.1  The Committee gathers that online training infrastructure in police 
organizations/training institutes is not well developed across the country. The Committee 
notes that often, the personnel are not spared by the concerned offices due to shortage of 
manpower. Increasing the online training programmes would reduce the requirement of 
relieving officials from active duty for training purposes. This will ensure that the officials 
identified for training do not miss out on their trainings. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may allocate a designated amount under their grants to the States 
and also extend necessary resources to them for developing a robust online training 
infrastructure, which will considerably lower the cost of delivery of training to the police 
personnel in the long run. The Centre could encourage the States by providing certain 
incentives for their online training initiatives. 
(Para 2.10.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to develop 
the police training infrastructure. Ministry of Home Affairs included a component of 
“incentives for police reforms” in the implementation structure of the scheme of “Assistance 
to States & UTs for Modernisation of Police”. It has been decided to keep certain amount of 
funds each year for providing incentive/grants to State Government for implementation of 
Police Reforms.  To incentivize the implementation of police reforms including training 
infrastructure as recommended by the various committees, originally a provision of keeping 
up to 10% of the total annual allocation of the scheme was made.  This incentive component 
has been increased to ‘up to 20%’ of the total allocation from the year 2019-20.  
2.7.3 Further, BPR&D and its outlying units have been conducting training courses/ 
webinars, etc. online.   BPR&D has also created a portal for the Training Management 
Information System (TMIS) for real time use and management of training activities.  The 
portal will be available for all the stakeholder for use and will be hosted in a NIC server. 
BPR&D has also created another portal for the e-Ustad, providing online e-Learning 
facilities to various stakeholders.  At present, 30 courses on 20 subjects are available on 
portal. BPR&D has requested all States/ UTs to encourage their officers and staff to register 
on the e-Ustad portal. 
Further Recommendation  
2.7.4 The Committee  notes the reply  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.5  The Committee also recommends that the national and State police academies should 
collaborate and share best practices with each other through online interactions. Such an 
initiative would give scope for the different State police to understand and acquire experience 
and skillsets through experience sharing. 

 
22 
 
(Para 2.10.5  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.7.6 BPR&D is regularly conducting webinar, symposiums, workshops, conference in 
collaboration with stakeholders and sharing best practices. 
2.7.7 During the courses, sessions are designed to be more interactive amongst the 
participating officers, with experience sharing and best practices in their respective States. 
Further Recommendation  
2.7.8 The Committee notes the reply 
 
2.8 Training on Weaponry 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.1 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise the State training academies to 
impart proper training to the police personnel on the use of the weapons given to them. The 
training should cover the use of ballistics, prohibited and non-prohibited weapons. 
(Para 2.12.2  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India.  It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to train their 
police personnel keeping in view the present scenario and challenges including training on 
proper use of the weapons given to them.   The Centre also issues advisories to the States on 
various police reforms issues to bring in the requisite reforms in the police administration to 
meet the lawful expectations of the people.  
Further Recommendation  
2.8.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.9 Common Training Module 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9.1 The Committee notes that a proposal has been mooted to the BPR&D for 
establishment of a police training net to share the resources of Central and State police 
academies. The Committee recommends that a common training module may be prepared by 
BPR&D and shared among the States/UTs. This will create a common minimum standard of 
police training in the country.  Common online library resources of Central and State police 
training academies may also be created to make them available all over the country. 
(Para 2.13.3  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.9.2 BPR&D has already launched e-Ustad as an online training portal for training of 
police personnel. 
 

 
23 
 
Further Recommendation  
2.9.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9.4  The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the States/UTs for 
the creation of an institutional framework for sharing of resources and best practices for 
police training amongst the States. The mapping of training facilities available in different 
States should be done so that a State in need can use training facilities wherever surplus is 
noticed. 
(Para 2.13.4  ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken 
2.9.5 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India.  With an aim to create an institutional framework, BPR&D published 
its first edition of Directory of Indian Police Training Institutions (DIPTI) in the year 2019-
20.  Second edition shall be published shortly. 
Further Recommendation  
2.9.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.10 Training to Meet Specific Challenges 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.10.1 The Committee takes note of the different types of challenges that are faced by 
different States. It is of the opinion that none of the issues viz naxalism, infiltration, terrorism, 
organized crimes, drug and human trafficking, etc., have now remained State-specific. In fact, 
they have become regional, affecting two or more neighbouring States. To contain them, the 
CAPFs are also roped in by the Centre to aid the State police forces. The Committee observes 
that the Centre should embark upon joint training programmes of both the CAPFs and State 
Police in order to tackle these issues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that specific 
training centre should be opened in these areas where personnel of both the forces could 
undertake trainings. The MHA may explore this arrangement at the earliest with funds 
dedicated to establish such training institutions. 
(Para 2.14.10  ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 CAPFs have been imparting training to State Police personnel in their training 
centres on requirement/request basis. Moreover, seats in specialized courses are also being 
offered to the State Police Forces through BPR&D. CAPFs personnel are also being 
provided familiarization training by various State Police before the induction of troops in 
LWE and J&K Theatre.  
 
2.10.3 Also, the new training module for joint training at various CAPF training institutions 
is being considered based on capacity and requirement assessment. 
 

 
24 
 
2.10.4 ‘Training need analysis’ for the training of CAPFs, AR and NSG personnel is being 
undertaken through IIM, Rohtak. 
 
2.10.5 It is also stated that necessary instructions have been issued to respective CAPFs to 
provide training to State Police personnel in their Basic Training Institute based on training 
capacity. 
 
Further Recommendation 
2.10.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
2.10.7 The Committee notes the reply of the State Governments of Rajasthan and Punjab that 
there is no communication gap between the CAPF and the State police forces working in 
bordering areas and regular meetings are held at the district and senior level. The Committee 
opines that the people living in border areas are well versed with the terrain and other 
geographical conditions. Therefore, they can be of immense help in providing intelligence 
inputs and assist police and border guarding forces during emergencies. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise State police forces and border-guarding 
CAPFs to train and liaison with people living in the border areas for gathering intelligence 
inputs so as to check drug trafficking, infiltration and illicit use of drones, etc. 
(Para 2.14.12  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.10.8 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. Police Forces of the States work within the existing legal and 
institutional framework in the matter.  The Ministry of Home Affairs is taking continuous 
efforts to develop better coordination between State police and CAPFs in bordering areas. 
The CAPFs also take valuable information from people living in the border areas to check 
drug trafficking, infiltration etc.   
Further Recommendation  
2.10.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.11 Evaluation of Scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police” 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.11.1 The Committee notes that the modernisation grants given to States are lapsable and 
therefore, recommends that MHA may release the funds to States in the first or second 
quarter so that the States have adequate time to spend the funds. The MHA may also work 
out ways to remove administrative delays and bottlenecks that cause delays in the release of 
funds. 
(Para 3.15.2  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.2 It is submitted that the Ministry releases funds to the State Government as soon as it 
becomes eligible for the same. The Ministry desires to release the funds to States in the first 
quarter of the financial year. There are no administrative delays or bottlenecks in the process 

 
25 
 
of release of funds. However, for financial discipline, a procedure for the release of funds has 
been stipulated by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and States will 
continue to be released funds based on the utilization of earlier released funds. The delay in 
the release of funds occurs only due to the non-furnishing of UCs by the States. 
Further Recommendation  
2.11.3 The Committee notes the reply that delay in the release of funds occurs due to 
non-submission of UCs by the States Governments.  It believes that the issue of non-
submission of UCs  can be pursued and resolved through the High Power Committee.   
Recommendation/Observation 
2.11.4 The Committee further recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of 
Finance to add some more States having strategic international borders in category-A so that 
additional funds under the MPF scheme are made available to them. The Ministry may also 
consider to re-include the items of ‘mobility and ‘construction of police infrastructure 
including housing’ under the ‘Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police’ for all 
States/UTs. This will help in increasing the number of vehicles for operational needs and also 
improving the housing satisfaction level of police personnel.  
(Para 3.15.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.5 In so far as the recommendation of including some more States in the category-A, 
wherein the funding pattern is 90% central share and 10% State share, is concerned, this 
categorization for all centrally sponsored schemes was finalized by the Ministry of Finance 
after acceptance of recommendations of Sub-Group of Chief Ministers constituted in March, 
2015. As such, the inclusion of more States in Category-A cannot be considered in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  
2.11.6 The Government has approved the continuance of the scheme of ‘Assistance to States 
for Modernisation of Police’ in January, 2022. Union Territories have been included under 
the scheme.  Another modification in the scheme is that all the States have been allowed to 
utilize funds of the scheme for the construction of ‘Police Station buildings’ as well. 
However, vehicles are allowed only to specific areas such as Jammu & Kashmir, insurgency-
affected North Eastern States and Left Wing Extremism affected districts. State Governments 
may allocate their own funds for the purchase of vehicles. It is also noteworthy that for the 
purposes of this sub-scheme, vehicles (for special purpose) such as riot control vehicles, and 
bullet proof vehicles, are treated as equipment and High Powered Committee (‘HPC’) 
permits such equipment as proposed by the States. So far as operational vehicles and 
construction of houses (quarters) are concerned, the State Governments are expected to 
allocate sufficient resources to procure the vehicles and construction of houses for their State 
Police Forces. 
Further Recommendation  
2.11.7 The Committee notes that the issue of categorization of States for the Scheme 
‘Assistance to State for Modernisation of Police does not fall under the purview of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  However, the Committee observes that the issue of making 
additional grants to States having strategic importance, particularly due to their 
proximity to international borders may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  
 

 
26 
 
2.12 Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, Etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.12.1 The Committee has been given to understand by the States that limited 
manufacturing of non-lethal weaponry in the country is a cause for their non-availability 
with the States desirous to obtain them.  Hence, it recommends that the MHA may initiate 
setting up of adequate manufacturing units of non-lethal weaponry in the country so as to 
address the issue of shortages in this regard. It recommends that the MHA may coordinate 
with States to increase investment in the purchase of non-lethal weaponry, latest anti-riot 
equipments and standardize the uniform of police personnel with lightweight, easy to wear 
body protection gears to minimize injury/casualty during performing law and order duties. 
(Para 3.16.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. Police Forces of the States work within the existing legal and 
institutional framework in the matter.  The Ministry of Home Affairs issues license for 
manufacture of non-lethal arms only on receipt of a proposal from the manufacturer.   
Further Recommendation  
2.12.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.13 Use of Technology by State Police 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13.1 The Committee appreciates the various technological measures taken by the 
States/UTs including installation of CCTVs, ERSS-112, fingerprint verification, voice and 
facial recognition, DNA fingerprinting, CDR analysis, body-worn camera, mobile forensic 
vans,  citizen portals, etc. These technologies will certainly create a transparent mechanism to 
identify and monitor crime trends and patterns. Given a scientific approach to the collection 
of evidence and investigation, they can help in taking proactive measures to prevent crime. 
By providing digital access to the police, citizens can avail services from the comfort of their 
homes. The citizens can register and track their complaints, and provide feedback without 
visiting the police station. 
(Para 3.17.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.13.2 This Ministry shares the same view. This Ministry will continue to provide financial 
assistance to State Police for the various technological measures taken by the State 
Governments under the scheme of ‘Assistance to States and UTs for Modernisation of 
Police’. 
2.13.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has been supplementing the efforts of the State 
Government for greater use of technology by the Police in States/UTs for enabling citizen 
services online. All States/ UTs have launched their Citizen Portals under the Crime and 
Criminal Tracking Networks System (CCTNS), and more than 8.77 crore service requests 
have been handled. 

 
27 
 
Further recommendation  
2.13.4 The Committee notes the reply.  
2.14 Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.14.1  The Committee notes that the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems 
(CCTNS) has been made operational in all States/Union Territories and FIRs are being 
registered 100% electronically in 16,074 Police Stations. The Committee recommends that 
the MHA may advise States/UTs to integrate CCTNS data with that of courts, prisons, 
prosecution, forensics and fingerprints as part of the Inter-operable Criminal Justice System 
(ICJS). This real-time integration will help in reducing duplication of work and errors, speed 
up the trial of cases significantly and increase the efficiency of the police. 
(Para 3.19.6  ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has issued a detailed advisory to States/UTs on the 
integration of CCTNS with the database in courts, prisons, prosecution and forensics IT 
system through the Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS). The implementation of 
CCTNS and ICJS integration is regularly monitored by National Crime Records Bureau 
(NCRB). 
Further Recommendation  
2.14.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.14.4   The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to digitize the 
issuance of services like passport verification reports, arms license verification reports and 
character certificates so that multiple visits of the citizens to the police stations and diversion 
of police personnel for such routine administrative work is avoided. These police personnel 
can be utilized in handling investigations and maintenance of law and order which are the 
core functions of the police. 
(Para 3.19.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.5 The Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) is integrated 
through the Inter-operable Criminal Justice System with the Arms License Informatics 
System (ALIS), National Cyber-Crime Reporting Portal (NCRP), Immigration Visa and 
Foreigners Registration Tracking System (IVFRT) and the Vahan and Sarathi. This has 
enabled availability of relevant information to the Police and vice-a-versa for faster services 
to the citizens. 
Further Recommendation  
2.14.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28 
 
2.15 E-FIR 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.15.1   The Committee notes that the e-FIR facility is currently available in Delhi, Odisha, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for registering cases only for property and vehicle thefts where 
details of the accused are not known. It observes that sufficient time has elapsed since the 
advisory was issued in 2018, for the States/UTs to act upon the same and operationalize the 
e-FIR module. The Committee is of the considered view that online registration would save 
people from the hassle of running to police stations to lodge their complaints. 
(Para 3.20.3 ibid) 
2.15.2  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA should coordinate with State 
Police to initiate the facility of e-FIR in the remaining States/UTs. The Committee also 
recommends that the MHA may work on modalities and advise States/UTs for extending the 
facility of e-FIR for other non-heinous crimes as well. 
(Para 3.20.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.15.3 ‘Police’ and ‘Public order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India. The States/Union Territories are competent to provide the facility of e-
FIR in their respective jurisdiction.  
 
2.15.4 However, in order to facilitate them, the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) has 
made available an e-FIR module to the States/Union Territories with the advice to customize 
and use the same as per their requirements.  MHA has also issued an advisory to all 
States/UTs in the matter. 
 
2.15.5 Apart from this, all States/ Union Territories have launched their State Citizen 
Portals providing citizen-centric police services including online filing of complaints, 
obtaining the status of complaints, obtaining copies of FIRs, viewing details of arrested 
persons/ wanted criminals, viewing details of the missing person/ unidentified dead bodies, 
viewing details of stolen/ recovered vehicles and other property, download of forms, request 
for antecedent verification and request for issue of various NOCs from police. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
2.15.6 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
2.16 Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.16.1 To strengthen the investigation of inter-State crimes, the Committee recommends that 
MHA may advise States/UTs that when investigating officers visit outside their jurisdictional 
State for investigation of a cyber crime, they should be provided with optimum support from 
the law enforcement agencies of other States and UTs, as required.  
(Para 3.21.12 ibid) 
 

 
29 
 
Action Taken 
2.16.2 The Central Government has established the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination 
Centre (I4C) to provide a framework and eco-system for Local Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) 
to deal with cyber crimes in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.  Seven Joint Cyber 
crime Coordination Teams (JCCTs) have been constituted to address the issue of 
jurisdictional complexity, based upon cyber crime hotspots/areas, by the boarding of all the 
States/UTs to provide a robust coordination framework to the LEAs. Joint Cyber 
Coordination Teams (JCCT) have shown encouraging results on account of sharing of 
information, data, coordination etc. amongst Police authorities. Details of JCCT are as 
under: 
 
1. Mewat (Rajasthan, UP, Delhi and Haryana) 
2. Jamtara (Jharkhand, West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and UP) 
3. Ahmedabad (Gujarat, MP, Rajasthan, UT of D&D and DNH) 
4. Hyderabad (Telangana, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Goa) 
5. Chandigarh (UT of Chandigarh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, 
UT of Jammu & Kashmir and UT of Ladakh) 
6. Vishakhapatnam (Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Odisha, UT of Puducherry, 
UT of A&N Islands, Lakshadweep) 
7. Guwahati (Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Tripura, Sikkim) 
Further recommendation  
2.16.3 The Committee notes that 7 Joint Cyber Crime Coordination Teams (JCCTs) 
have been constituted to provide a robust coordination framework to Local 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and also to address the jurisdictional complexity.  The 
Committee hopes that these JCCTs will facilitate the investigating officers visiting 
outside their jurisdictional State for investigation of cyber crimes. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.16.4 The Committee notes that some States are using cyber experts for the detection and 
investigation of cyber crimes. Therefore, along with traditional police recruitments, there is a 
need to induct technical experts into the police force. The Committee recommends that the 
MHA may encourage States/UTs to recruit qualified cyber experts/IT professionals to assist 
police in detecting, monitoring, preventing and investigating cyber crimes. 
(Para 3.21.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.16.5 It is informed that “Police” and “Public Order” being State subjects, States/UTs are 
responsible for capacity building of their LEAs, including recruitment and deployment of 
qualified professionals / human resources, to handle cyber crimes. Further, the State 
Governments or State Police Organizations (SPOs) are solely responsible for the regulation 
& management of their service/cadre / organizational setups/creation of separate 
cadre/streams to handle the challenges & eventualities. However, the MHA has taken several 
steps to enhance the capacity building of the States/UTs (Local Enforcement Agencies) LEAs 
to handle the cyber crime cases which are enumerated in ATR on Para No.2.9.8. 
Further recommendation  
2.16.6 The Committee notes the reply.  

 
30 
 
2.17 Stress Management of Police Personnel 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17.1   The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the State Governments for stress 
management of the police personnel. The Committee recommends that MHA may take up 
with BPR&D and national and State training academies to create stress management modules 
both offline and online to help the police personnel from time to time to de-stress through 
yoga, exercises,  counseling and treatment, etc. The States may also establish counseling/ 
wellness centers for the police personnel to maintain their psychological well-being and 
perform their duties more efficiently.  
(Para 3.25.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.17.2 BPR&D is regularly conducting training programme on “Stress Management & 
Personality Development for Police Officers (Ethics, Leadership, Soft skills, etc.)” and “Self-
Development and Conflict Management/ Capacity building for Women Police Officers 
(Work-life) balance, leadership, professional skills, etc.”, which also included classes on the 
importance of keeping a healthy work-life balance, etc. 
Further Recommendation   
2.17.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.18 Inter-State Coordination Mechanism 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.18.1  The Committee opines that a nationally coordinated response by the police and the 
national law enforcement agencies, including the intelligence agencies, is required to deal 
with inter-State crimes. Proper coordination and an effective support mechanism for sharing 
information amongst different agencies and Government departments are necessary for 
conducting operations. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may take up 
with concerned Ministries and States/UTs for strengthening of internal communication 
between different agencies by establishing standard mechanisms for securing the seamless 
flow of information particularly to tackle the menace of terrorism, drug and human 
trafficking, organized crime, etc. An inter-State forum may be established for sharing 
intelligence inputs and to deliberate upon plans for coordinated action among States in areas 
of policing. 
(Para 3.26.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.18.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is continuously taking up with concerned Ministries and 
States/UTs for strengthening of internal communication between different agencies for 
securing the seamless flow of information particularly to tackle the menace of terrorism, drug 
and human trafficking, organized crime, etc. The matter is discussed in various inter-State 
forum to deliberate upon plans for coordination among States in areas of policing. 
Further Recommendation 
2.18.3 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
31 
 
2.19 Separation of Investigation from law and order  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.19.1  The Committee strongly believes that forensic laboratories play a significant role in 
the scientific collection of evidence. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA 
may take up with States to further strengthen the forensic laboratories in the country. 
Efforts should be made to establish at least one forensic lab at regional/divisional level so 
that the evidence is examined quickly and investigation is not delayed. 
(Para 4.6.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.19.2 As per available information, Forensic Science Laboratories (FSL) have been set up 
in 32 States/UTs. In the remaining 4 Union Territories of Chandigarh, Daman Diu Dadra 
& Nagar Havel, Lakshadweep and Ladakh, the UT police concerned utilize the Forensic 
Sciences facilities available in their neighbouring States or in the Central Forensic 
Sciences Laboratories. There are 80 Regional FSLs in the States/UTs.  The Government 
has approved a scheme for providing one Mobile Forensic Vehicle in every district. This 
would supplement the State facilities. 
Further recommendation  
2.19.3 The Committee notes that the Minsitry has approved a scheme for providing 
Mobile Forensic Vehicle in every district in the country.  It is of the view that the 
scheme should be adequately funded and implemented within a time frame for 
providing strength and teeth to the existing investigation procedures in the States. 
 
2.20 Escorting the Under-Trial Prisoners 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.20.1 The Committee notes that the State police has a multifarious role to perform but has a 
shortage of staff. Further, as pointed out by Mooshahary Committee, arrests should be 
resorted to only in cases of heinous/ specified category of crimes and a reduction in the 
number of arrests will impact the issue of manpower escorting under-trial prisoners. 
Therefore, the States should use the manpower judiciously. The Committee recommends that 
the MHA may advise the States to take up with their respective courts and prisons to consider 
holding virtual trials of the prisoners, -particularly those who are in high-risk groups - 
through video conferencing. It will help in dedicating less police force for escorting under-
trial prisoners to courts and also save resources.  
(Para 4.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.20.2 The Video Conferencing facility has been enabled between 3240 court complexes and 
1272 corresponding jails. An advisory dated 16.4.2018 was issued by MHA to all the 
States/UTs for de-radicalization in prisons vide which the prison authorities were advised 
that video conferencing facilities should be used in prisons for hard-core elements to bring 
down their interaction with others. Another advisory dated 20.4.2021 was issued to all the 
States/UTs for the prevention and control of Covid-19 in prisons and correctional homes. 
States/UTs were advised that movement of jail inmates outside the jail may be restricted and 
that video conferencing facility be used for production in Courts to the extent possible. 
States/UTs were also advised to engage with appropriate authorities of Courts, State Legal 

 
32 
 
Services Authority and Legal Service Clinics for various measures to reduce the movement of 
prisoners. 
Further recommendation  
2.20.3 The Committee notes the reply.   
2.21 Directorate of Prosecution 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.21.1 The Committee notes that the Malimath Committee has not made a recommendation 
for the Assistant Public Prosecutor to be attached to the police stations or the SP. But, the 
Committee is of the view that there is a lack of legal advice available to the investigating 
officers. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry 
of Law & Justice and the States for restructuring of prosecution directorates to closely align 
the prosecutors/ legal experts with the investigators. It will help them in legal guidance 
during the investigation, collection of evidence, filing of charge sheets and securing 
conviction. 
(Para 4.9.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.21.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to make the police force efficient and capable and its functioning more 
effective and transparent. Police Forces of the States work within the existing legal and 
institutional framework in the matter. 
Further recommendation  
2.21.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.22 The Housing of Police Personnel 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.22.1 The Committee is disappointed to note the poor housing satisfaction levels of the 
State police personnel in the country. The Committee further notes that in specific theatres of 
insurgency affected, the North-Eastern States and LWE affected districts, construction 
including police housing was revived after approval to the umbrella scheme of Modernisation 
of Police Forces in September, 2017.  The Committee recommends that MHA may actively 
consider the allocation of funds to all States/UTs for housing under the 'Assistance to States 
for Modernisation of Police’. The States may also be advised to take steps for improving the 
housing satisfaction level of police personnel in a phased manner. For this, the Committee 
recommends that the Centre may establish a mechanism for providing adequate assistance to 
States for this specific purpose and persuade them to implement the housing projects for the 
police personnel emphatically and monitor it through quarterly reviews. 
(Para 4.12.5  ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.22.2 It is submitted that “Police” being a State subject, providing accommodation to their 
staff is the responsibility of the State Governments. They have to take appropriate action with 

 
33 
 
regard to enhancing the housing satisfaction levels of the State police personnel in the 
country. 
2.22.3 In this connection, it is noteworthy that the Ministry of Home Affairs issued an 
Advisory to all States on 24.10.2017 suggesting that one of the components/options to States 
and cities was affordable housing in Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. The State 
Government may adopt the model to meet the housing requirement of police personnel. It was 
further informed that in Delhi, this model involved the redevelopment of the area/existing 
government housing colonies exemplified in the redevelopment of New Moti Bagh/ Kidwai 
Nagar/ Pragati Maidan. Under this model, redevelopment of Government properties has 
been identified as one of the key strategies to overcome the housing shortage as well as to 
monetize vacant land lying with government agencies. The strategy involves the optimum 
utilization of existing land parcels by applying a higher Floor Area Ratio (FAR).  This model 
ensures that no funding support is required from the government for the redevelopment of 
these properties. This is done by utilizing the available land as a resource and raising the 
funds required for meeting the project expenses through leasing of commercial office space 
constructed on a part of this land. There will be a win-win situation for every stakeholder. 
Further recommendation  
2.22.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.23 Independent Police Complaint Authority 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.23.1  The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States that the internal 
grievance redressal cell of police should work in a time-bound manner so that the grievances 
of aggrieved police personnel are addressed in time.  
(Para 4.13.9 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.23.2 BPR&D has been requested vide O.M. dated 12.04.2022 to conduct a study as 
recommended by the Committee and the outcome may be furnished to this Ministry at the 
earliest. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
2.23.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.24 Revisiting the laws  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.24.1  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may consider to take 
up with the concerned Ministry/ Department to review the NDPS Act, 1985, in the light of 
the concern raised by the Committee. 
(Para 4.16.5 ibid) 
 
 

 
34 
 
Action Taken 
2.24.2 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance i.e. the concerned Ministry 
with the subject matter of NDPS Act, 1985, with the request that the recommendation of the 
Committee may be considered for necessary action vide O.M. dated 12.04.2022. 
Further recommendation  
2.24.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
2.25 Police-Community Relations 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.25.1  The Committee strongly believes that policing system should be transparent, 
independent, accountable and people-friendly. The Committee opines that community 
policing involves a cooperative effort between police and the communities where both can 
work together to solve the crime and crime-related problems.  Further, police and public 
partnerships are also key in enabling a more proactive and agile approach to combating 
crime.  
(Para 4.17.7  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.25.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the States /UTs to make efforts on 
various police reforms measures including police-community relations. The State 
Governments are implementing various community policing activities in their States. The 
Centre also issues advisories to the States to bring in the requisite reforms in the Police 
administration to meet the expectations of the people. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
2.25.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
2.26 Challenges in Police Reforms 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.26.1 The Committee expresses its concern that a multitude of factors are impeding the pace 
of police reforms in the country. It believes that with sustained efforts in pursuit of police 
reforms, MHA in collaboration with States/UTs will overcome these challenges. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA may keep endeavoring towards its goal 
steadily and bring out much-needed reforms in the police force. 
(Para 4.18.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.26.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs noted the concern of the Committee.  As “Police” is a 
State subject, this Ministry is continuously making various efforts to assist/supplement the 
State Governments to implement police reforms measures.  
Further recommendation 
2.26.3 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
35 
 
Chapter-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
 
3.1 Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1.1  The Committee is of the view that the pysche of criminal minds has undergone a sea 
change, with the evolution of modern technology. Cases of newer ways of using technology 
for committing crimes particularly, financial fraud are rising day by day. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the training institutions like SVPNPA and NEPA may take up 
with States training academies to conduct training/sensitization programmes on artificial 
intelligence, robotics, drone technology, forensic and ballistic sciences, so that police 
personnel become adept in the detection, investigation and prevention of such crimes in a 
professional way. 
(Para 2.2.20 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.1.2 Action Taken Report from SVPNPA :- 
 
(a)  For the Basic Course of IPS Probationers: 
In the basic course curriculum, the following topics are being covered; 
 
i. Forensic Science and digital forensics 
ii. Financial frauds and money laundering 
iii. Drone technologies 
iv. Ballistics 
v. Cryptocurrency and block chain 
vi. Internet of Things 
vii. Social media fraud 
 
It has been an endeavour of the National Police Academy to impart training and skill 
development in all the latest fields of policing.  
 
In order to tackle the growing crimes of modern technology, SVP NPA is organizing various 
in-service training programs related to Forensic and ballistic sciences, Economic Offence, 
Cyber Crime Investigation, Cyber Forensics, Cyber for Police officers, Judges, Prosecutors, 
IRS, Forest Officers etc. 
 
3.1.3 Action Taken Report from NEPA :- 
 
NEPA conducts the following webinars and offline courses in collaboration with CDAC 
(Kolkata), DSCI, NASSCOM etc. to provide exposure to the developing technologies; 
 
(a) Awareness Level Smart Device Forensic Training Programme. 
(b) Advanced Level Smart Device Forensic Training Programme. 
(c)  Course on Investigation of Financial Fraud and Corporate Offences. 
(d)  Course on Digital Evidence and Digital Forensic Tools. 
(e)  Mobile Forensics and CDR analysis. 
(f)Understanding Dark Web and its challenges for investigators. 
(g)  Cyber Crimes etc. 

 
36 
 
Further recommendation  
3.1.4 The Committee had recommended that SVPNPA and NEPA may persuade/help 
the State Training Academies to train and sensitize police personnel of the States/UTs in 
artificial intelligence, robotics, drone technology, forensic and ballistic sciences so that 
their police personnel could gain competence to detect, investigate and prevent such 
crimes in a professional way. The MHA may consider creating a platform amongst 
National and State police academies to share their training modules and practices. This 
will help in creating a uniform level of training system for the police of various States all 
across the country. 
3.2 Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.1  The Committee expresses its deep concerns over the rising rate of cyber crimes in the 
country. As per the information provided to the Committee, it is seen that some of the States 
like Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa, Assam do not have a single cyber crime cell, while in Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, only one/two cyber crime cells have been set up. It 
observes that each day, cyber-criminals are using newer methods and new modus-operandi to 
commit cyber crimes. Therefore, it is important for the police to stay updated on new modus-
operandi and technology trends adopted by criminals. 
(Para 3.21.9  ibid) 
 
3.2.2  The Committee recommends that MHA may advise States to set up cyber cells in all 
the districts. The States should map the cyber crime hotspots which will help in quick 
detection of crimes and taking proactive measures to prevent cyber crimes. 
(Para 3.21.10 ibid) 
 
3.2.3 The Committee also recommends to upgrade the existing cyber cells by setting up dark 
web monitoring cells and social media monitoring cells to tackle different types of cyber 
crimes. 
(Para 3.21.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
3.2.4 Cyber space is a borderless, complex and dynamic environment. The complexity of 
digitalization allows criminals to take advantage in committing cyber crimes like financial 
fraud, ransomware, malware attacks, identity theft, data theft, privacy breach, etc. The 
increase in the number of internet users, clubbed with rapid digital service adoption and low 
cyber literacy has led to an increase in cyber crimes incidents across the country.   Evolving 
technology like, the Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Drones, etc., may 
bring new challenges to cyber space. 
 
3.2.5 “Police” and “Public Order” are State subjects, as per the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. States/UTs are primarily responsible for the prevention, detection, 
investigation, prosecution of crimes and capacity building of their Local enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs) including, setting up of district cyber cell, dark web monitoring cell, social 
media monitoring cell, training of LEA personnel etc., to deal with cyber crime. The Central 
Government supplements the initiatives of the State/UT Governments through advisories and 
financial assistance under various schemes for their capacity building. The MHA has issued 
an advisory to all the State/UT Governments for setting up State and District Cyber Crime 
Cells, in each State/UT for the handling of all types of cyber crimes. Accordingly, all 

 
37 
 
States/UTs, including Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa & Assam, have also set up a dedicated Cyber 
Crime Cell as Nodal Point to handle cyber crimes. 
3.2.6 The MHA has established ‘Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C)’ to 
provide a framework and eco-system for the LEAs to deal with cyber crimes in a 
comprehensive and coordinated manner. 
 
Further recommendation  
3.2.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that dedicated Cyber Cells have 
been set up in all the State/UT Governments including Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa and 
Assam which did not have a single cyber crime cell earlier.  The Committee further 
notes that the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) has been set up by the 
Ministry to deal with cyber crimes in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.   
  
3.2.8 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may encourage State 
Governments to identify cyber hotspots in their State and maintain data profile on the 
cyber crimes being committed in those hotspot and the measures taken to contain those 
crimes. This data in this regard may be collected by the ‘Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C)’ and shared with other States for framing of policies by 
them to tackle such types of cyber crimes.  
 
3.3 Women Representation on Police 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.3.1 The Committee notes that MHA has advised the States/UTs that each police station 
should have at least 3 women sub-inspectors and 10 women police constables so that a 
women's help desk is manned round the clock.  The Committee recommends that BPR&D 
may be tasked to assess the performance of the women's help desks. The MHA may also 
advise States/UTs to establish at least one all-women police station in each district.  
(Para 3.24.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to make efforts to improve matters relating to women including the women 
help desk.  This Ministry had been issuing advisories to the States/UTs from time to time in 
this regard. The advisory in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs relating in this 
regard vide letter dated 21.04.2022. 
Further recommendation  
3.3.3 The Committee is of the opinion that although the subject comes under the 
domain of the State /UTs,  BPR&D may be tasked by the Ministry to assess the 
effectiveness of women’s help desk at various police stations to have a comprehensive 
view on the matter. This will help the MHA to issue further advisories to the States, 
accordingly.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken on its 
recommendation to establish one all-women police Station in each district.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation in para 3.24.8 of the 237th Report. 
 

 
38 
 
3.4 Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.4.1 The Committee takes note of the 'Mo Sarkar' initiative of Odisha, under which, every 
day, feedback is being sought from selected complainants. The Committee recommends that 
the MHA may advise the States to develop a feedback mechanism like that of Odisha to 
assess and improve the performance of the police.  
(Para 3.27.4  ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 The recommendation has been noted. Several such best practices being followed in 
various States/UTs are collated and shared by the National Crime Record Bureau with all the 
States/UTs. 
Further recommendation  
3.4.3 The Committee notes the reply that best practices being followed in various 
States/UTs are collated and shared by the NCRB with all the States/UTs.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of any assessment made by the NCRB on the 
effectiveness of these practices.    
 
 
3.5 Outsourcing of Police Functions 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5.1 The Committee notes that the police in some of the States are outsourcing personnel 
and leveraging technology to reduce the burden on police. The Committee is of the view that 
for efficient policing, there is a need for the police force to restrict themselves to core 
functions of investigation of cases and maintenance of law & order.  The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may task BPR&D to conduct a study to determine such functions 
of the police that can be outsourced with requisite training. The MHA can then advise States 
based on the outcome of the study. These measures will help reduce the workload of the 
police and improve their efficiency. This will save manpower and promote police-
community partnerships by involving non-police communities. 
(Para 4.7.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to make efforts to restrict themselves to core functions of investigation and 
maintenance of law & order. The Ministry of Home Affairs has already issued advisory to all 
the States/UTs relating to outsourcing of peripheral and non-policing activities vide letter 
dated 06.08.2019. 
Further recommendation  
3.5.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry had issued an advisory to all the 
States/UTs relating to the outsourcing of peripheral and non-policing activities in 2019.  
The Committee believes that proper study of the function of the police forces would help 

 
39 
 
ascertain those functions that can be outsourced.  The police should concentrate on its 
core functions. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation in para 4.7.8 of 
the 237th Report that the Ministry may task BPR&D to conduct a study to determine 
such functions of the police that can be outsourced with requisite training.  
 
3.6 Police-Community Relations 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6.1  The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the States to improve the relation of 
police with the community and recommends that the MHA may take up with States to 
showcase the positive initiatives undertaken by the various State police to build a friendly 
image among people. The Committee also recommends that MHA may create a forum for the 
exchange of best practices of police-people interaction among the States. 
(Para 4.17.8  ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 All the States/UTs have been asked to upload good work/good stories/best practices of 
the police on their website. The States/UTs are continuously uploading the same on the 
website which helps to make a good perception of the police. 
Further recommendation 
3.6.3 The Committee believes that despite the boom of internet connectivity in the 
country, there might be a sizeable population in various States/UTs which may have 
very limited access to the internet due to various reasons.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the police force may adopt various strategies viz. publicizing its 
achievements in the meetings of the community/village/district-level committees at 
regular intervals for increasing the police-people interaction, organizing awareness 
weeks/Jan Sabha etc.  The focus should be on a nationwide capacity-building campaign, 
with emphasis on developing and inculcating high professional and ethical standards as 
well as attitudinal and social skills in the personnel.  
 
  

 
40 
 
Chapter-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the Government have 
not been received 
 
4.1 State/UT Wise Status of Recommendations of Mooshahary Committee  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1.1 The Committee notes that 12 States/UTs have not furnished any information on the 
implementation of the 49 Recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee, despite 
advisories/reminders from MHA. The Committee recommends that MHA may take up with 
these States/UTs to furnish their status within a time frame. The Committee desires to be 
apprised about the status of implementation of these recommendations in all States/UTs. 
 
(Para 1.4.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to implement these recommendations. Police reforms are an ongoing 
process.  
 
4.1.3 The matter regarding the implementation of the 49 recommendations of the 
Mooshahary Committee has been taken up with all the States/UTs vide letter dated 
12.04.2022. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
4.1.4 The Committee notes that the matter was taken up with all the States/UTs in 
April, 2022. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee by the 
States/UTs which have not furnished any information in this regard. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation in para 1.4.4 of the 237th Report that the MHA should 
take up with the remaining 12 States/UTs to furnish the status of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee.  
4.2 Training at State Level 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.2.1 From the information provided by the States, the Committee understands that the 
States have their own training institutes that are imparting training to the State police 
personnel. The Committee also notes that as on 1st January, 2020, there are 203 police 
training institutes in the country. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take up 
with States/UTs to scale up the training capacity of all training institutions in the country to 
enhance their infrastructure with virtual classrooms, cyber labs and also to develop a few 
training centres as 'Centre of Excellence' for certain specific subjects relating to the police 
system. This will also facilitate training opportunities to the maximum number of police 
personnel in the States. The MHA may also allocate adequate funds and resources for the 
same. The Committee also recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to create 
training facilities at the district level for annual/periodic refresher training of police 
personnel. 
(Para 2.3.6 ibid) 

 
41 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 Based on the information available in the Data on Police Organizations (DoPO) 
published by the BPR&D, a letter was written by Home Secretary to the Chief 
Secretaries/Administrators of all States/UTs, inter-alia, pointing out that the average 
expenditure incurred by States on ‘police training’ is a dismal 1% or less.  It was highlighted 
that a trained, sensitized and well equipped police force is a must for effective law and order 
enforcement.  The States were advised to take measures for building up capacities and 
capabilities of their police force.  It was also reiterated that the States should review the 
training capacities in their respective States/UTs and consider affiliating with the National 
Forensic Science University (NFSU) and Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU) and to use their 
expertise in building up capacities of their police personnel. 
 
4.2.3 In a separate meeting with the Heads of Central Police Training Institutes held in 
19.07.2022, Hon’ble Union Home Minister had emphasized the need to sync police training 
with the ‘Mission Karmayogi’ by adopting a holistic approach of training of police 
personnel. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
4.2.4 The Committee observes that the average expenditure incurred by States/UTs on 
police training is abysmally low.   The States/UTs would have to allocate sufficient funds 
to be able to cater to training needs of their police force.  They may also be encouraged 
to affiliate with the NFSU & RRU and use their expertise in building up capabilities of 
their police personnel.   
 
 
4.3 Linkage with Universities 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.3.1 The Committee recommends that the MHA may advise States to link a cluster of 
police stations to a particular university or a college.  This will lead to a collaboration with 
scholars, particularly in the departments of sociology, philosophy, and political science to 
develop soft skills and bring behavioural change in the police personnel. Further, the 
academicians and scholars who are specialists in gender and criminal issues should be invited 
to be a part of the training syllabus. 
(Para 2.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has established NFSU and RRU as Institutions of 
National Importance.  Both the universities have become operational with effect from 01st 
October, 2020.  The Union Home Secretary has written to the Chief Secretary/Administrator 
of all the States/UTs that these universities have been set up to address a long standing 
requirement for a national level teaching and research facilities in the areas of policing, 
criminology and forensic sciences and all other areas related to internal security.  Both the 
Universities are teaching, research and affiliating universities.  All States/UTs have been 
advised to affiliate their colleges/institutions with these universities. 
 
Further Recommendation  
4.3.3 The Committee notes the reply. 

 
42 
 
 
4.4 Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.4.1 The Committee, hence, recommends that the MHA may allocate adequate funds and 
extend necessary resources for the establishment of cyber training labs and 
strengthening/upgrading of existing cyber training infrastructure in all the States/UTs. 
(Para 2.9.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 Though “Police” and “Public Order” are State subjects, MHA has taken several 
steps to enhance the capacity building of the States/UTs LEAs to handle the cyber crime 
cases, which inter-alia, include the following:- 
 Financial assistance provided under the ‘Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and 
Children (CCPWC)’ Scheme to the States/UTs for setting up of cyber forensic-cum-
training laboratories, hiring of junior consultants and training of law enforcement 
agencies personnel, public prosecutors and judicial officers. So far, 28 States/UTs have 
operationalized the Cyber Forensic-cum-Training Laboratories. 
 The MHA has prepared 3/5/10 days training programs for law enforcement agencies, 
Public Prosecutors and Judicial Officers for improving cyber crime awareness, in 
consultation with the stakeholders and States/UTs are mandated to organize training 
programs. So far, more than 19900 Officials, which include 17345 Police personnel, 
1054 Judicial Officers and 1532 Public Prosecutors have been trained. 
 The National Cyber Forensic Laboratory (NCFL), a ‘State of the Art’ facility has been 
set up to train & assist the State/UT Investigation Officers. The NCFL has been made 
functional and its facilities are being extended to the States/UTs. Services in more than 
4,600 cases have been provided to the State LEAs in cyber forensics investigations of 
cases. 
 The Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) platform under the 14C called ‘CyTrain’ 
portal has been developed. CyTrain portal helps in the capacity building of Police 
Officers/Judicial Officers through online courses on critical aspects of cyber crime 
investigation, forensics, prosecution etc. along with certification. More than 12,200 
Police Officers from States/UTs are registered and more than 300 Certificates issued 
through the portal. 
 State of the art “e-Cyber Lab” has been established with more than 25 latest Digital 
Forensics tools from the industry and more than 50 open-source cyber crime detection 
and forensics tools and integrated with the CyTrain portal for providing virtual 
experience on experimenting with the latest modus operandi on cyber crime. 
 Workshops for Law Enforcement Authorities on the functioning of the National Cyber 
Crime Reporting Portal (www.cybercime.gov.in) are organized by the NCRB to provide 
hands-on training to the participants for taking appropriate action on complaints 
reported through the Portal. 
 More than 2000 police Officials working in cyber cells across the country have been 
trained on Crypto currency, forensics, investigation etc. 
4.4.3 The Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS) has been assigned to set up 
NCFL at Hyderabad for evidentiary purpose. Establishment of this laboratory will provide 
the necessary forensic support to the LEAs in preserving the evidence and its analysis in line 
with the provisions of the IT Act and Evidence Act and will reduce turnaround time. 
 
 

 
43 
 
Further recommendation  
4.4.4 The Committee notes that the National Cyber Forensic Laboratory (NCFL) has 
been set up to train & assist the State/UT Investigation Officers. The Committee also 
notes that another NCFL at Hyderabad will be established by the Directorate of 
Forensic Science Services (DFSS) for the evidentiary purpose to provide forensic 
support to LEAs in various States/UTs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
4.5 Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.5.1 The Committee is of the view that modern policing requires strong communication 
support, state-of-the-art  modern weapons, and a high degree of mobility for quick 
response.The Committee notes with anguish that 257 police stations do not have vehicles, 
638 police stations do not have telephones and 143 police stations are not having 
wireless/mobiles in the country. In the 21st century India, there are police stations without 
telephones or proper wireless connectivity especially in many sensitive states like Arunachal 
Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab, particularly in view of the fact that some of these States had 
been rewarded with better performance incentives in the year 2018-19. Further, a very 
sensitive border Union Territory like Jammu & Kashmir also has a sizeable number of police 
stations which does not have telephones and wireless sets. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may advise such States to immediately equip their police stations 
with adequate vehicles and communication devices else it may lead to disincentivization of 
modernisation grants from the Centre. For the UTs, MHA may ensure that the needful is done 
at the earliest. 
(Para 3.16.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.5.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the State / UT 
Governments, with the request to take appropriate action to immediately equip their police 
stations with adequate vehicles and communication devices. 
Further recommendation  
4.5.3 The Committee notes the reply that States/UT Governments have been advised 
to take appropriate action on the recommendation of the Committee to equip the police 
stations with adequate infrastructure immediately.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the States in this regard. 
 
4.6 Use of Technology by State Police 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.6.1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up 
with States/UTs to deploy drones/ unmanned aerial vehicles for VVIP security, surveillance 
of crime hotspots, crowd control/ riot management, disaster management, etc. 
(Para 3.17.5 ibid) 
 
 

 
44 
 
Action Taken 
4.6.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has issued advisories to all the States/UTs for the said 
purpose vide letter dated 25.05.2022. 
Further Recommendation  
4.6.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of action taken by all the 
States/UTs on the advisory issued to them.  The Committee feels that the latest 
technology such as surveillance by drones/unmanned aerial vehicles etc. should be used 
proactively as it can provide an edge in ensuring security and maintenance of law and 
order.   
 
4.7 Installation of CCTV Cameras in Police Stations 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.7.1 The Committee notes that some of the States/UTs have started installing  CCTV 
cameras in police stations to comply with the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. It 
appreciates that Tamil Nadu Police has installed IP CCTV cameras which enables a senior 
police official to keep an eye on the activities inside the police station. It observes that such a 
measure is a good step towards protecting the rights and legal remedies of the citizens while 
they are in the police station to file their complaints, FIRs, etc., and ensuring that there is no 
harassment on the part of police staff. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
take up with the States/UTs for installing at least one or two IP cameras at a strategic location 
in all police stations. The Committee also recommends that States/UTs may conduct a 
periodic audit of all the CCTVs installed in police stations and replace/upgrade them, 
wherever required.  The Committee further recommends that the MHA take up with the 
Ministry of Law & Justice to advise States/UTs to initiate talks with their respective courts 
for installation of CCTVs at court premises, for round-the-clock monitoring of court 
buildings.  
(Para 3.18.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.7.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the State / UT 
Governments, with the request to take appropriate action to install at least one or two IP 
cameras at a strategic location in all police stations and conduct a periodic audit of all the 
CCTVs installed in police stations and replace/upgrade them wherever required. The 
Ministry of Law and Justice has also been requested to advise States/UTs to initiate talks 
with their respective District courts for the installation of CCTVs at court premises for 
round-the-clock monitoring of court buildings. 
Further Recommendation  
4.7.3 The Committee notes that States/UTs have been requested to install IP cameras 
at strategic locations in all the Police Stations and to conduct a periodic audit of all the 
installed CCTVs.  The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Law and Justice 
has been approached to advise States/UTs for installing CCTVs at District Courts.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of action taken by the States/UTs 
Governments in this regard.  
 
 

 
45 
 
4.8 Efforts to Tackle Drone Attacks 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.8.1 The Committee expresses its grave concern on the use of different types of drones for 
committing crimes, transporting drugs, arms and ammunition, etc., which is a threat to the 
internal security of the country. The Committee notes that the MHA has issued guidelines for 
flying permission in red, green and yellow zones. The Committee recommends that the MHA 
along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation may advise States to sensitize ground-level police 
personnel on the drone regulations. This may include the civilian use of drones which will 
help in detecting rogue drones. 
(Para 3.22.5 ibid) 
4.8.2 The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with concerned 
Ministries/ Agencies to create a central pool of anti-drone technology at the earliest and give 
its access to all States/UTs to deal with the menace of illicit use of drones. For this purpose, 
the participation of the private sector may be explored. The MHA may coordinate with 
concerned Ministries/Agencies and States/UTs to create an SOP for the steps to be taken by 
the State police in case of a drone attack. 
(Para 3.22.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.8.3 Ministry of Home Affairs has already issued an SOP to all the States/UTs vide O.M. 
dated 10.05.2019. National Counter Rogue Drone Policy and Guidelines (NCRDPG) are 
being finalized. 
 
4.8.4 The draft National Counter Rogue Drone Policy and Guidelines (NCRDPG) are 
being finalized which visualizes the threat concerns mentioned in this para and suitable 
provisions are proposed in respect of these issues. 
 
 
Further recommendation  
  
4.8.5 The Committee notes that the Government is in the process of finalizing the 
National Counter Rogue Drone Policy and Guidelines (NCRDPG).  The Committee 
believes that adequate provisions will be integrated into these guidelines to counter the 
challenges to internal security due to use of drones to carry out illicit activities, such as 
smuggling of drugs, guns, ammunition, etc. The Committee may be informed about 
these guidelines after finalization. 
 
4.9 Vacancies in the State Police Forces 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.9.1  The Committee notes the vacancy of 5,31,737 as against the sanctioned strength of 
26,23,225 in State police forces, is almost  21 % shortfall. It is not a desirable figure given the 
crime and security scenario in the country. The Committee is of the considered view that 
shortage of staff has a direct bearing on the efficiency of the police. The workload of the 
existing staff increases forcing them to do work overtime, most of the time in stressful and 
trying circumstances. This not only leads to the increased stress level of police venting out at 
times on common people but also compromises the overall performance of police in the 
discharge of their duties. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may advise 
States/UTs to conduct Police recruitment drives in a mission mode and remove the 

 
46 
 
administrative bottlenecks for the recruitment of police personnel at different ranks in a time-
bound manner.  
(Para 3.23.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.9.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to fill up the vacant posts in their respective police force. This Ministry had 
been issuing advisories to the States/UTs from time to time in this regard. An advisory in this 
regard has been issued to all the States/UTs relating to filling up vacancies in the police 
force vide letter dated 13.04.2022. 
Further recommendation  
4.9.3 The Committee has been informed that an advisory has been issued to all the 
States/UTs for filling up vacancies.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
constructive steps taken by the various States Governments/UTs to fill the vacant posts.  
 
4.10 Women Representation on Police 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.10.1 The Committee is anguished to note that women are abysmally under-represented in 
the police force as they constitute only 10.30% of the police force. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may advise States/UTs to create a roadmap for making the 
representation of women police to 33% of the total strength a reality. Further, the 
appointment of women in police may be done by creating additional posts rather than 
converting the vacant posts of male constables. It will also help in improving the police-
population ratio in the country. Besides increasing the percentage of women in police,  taking 
a cue from the defense forces where women are being assigned combative roles, the MHA 
may also advise the States/UTs to give them important challenging duties central to the 
police, and not just duties of inconsequence.  
(Para 3.24.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.10.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to make efforts to increase women’s representation in the police force.  
This Ministry had been issuing advisories to the States/UTs from time to time in this regard. 
The advisory in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs relating in this regard vide 
letter dated 13.04.2022. 
Further recommendation  
4.10.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry regularly advises States/UTs to make 
efforts to increase women’s representation in Police forces and an advisory in this 
regard was also issued in April, 2022.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives taken up by the State Governments/UTs to increase the representation of 
women in the police force. 
 
 

 
47 
 
4.11 Dual System Vs Police Commissionerate System 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.11.1 The Committee also recommends that BPR&D may conduct a comparative study on 
the effectiveness of police commisioneratev vis-à-vis dual system (District Magistrate & 
Superintendent of Police). It will encourage more States to establish police commissionerate 
system in their cities. 
(Para 4.4.5  ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.11.2 The recommendation has been conveyed to BPRR&D to conduct a comparative 
study on the effectiveness of police commisionerate vis-à-vis dual system (District 
Magistrate & Superintendent of Police).  
Further Recommendation  
4.11.3 The Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome of the said study 
by BPRR&D. 
 
4.12 Separation of Investigation from law and order  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.12.1 The Committee notes that only a few States have separated the investigation from the 
law and order duties of their police. The Committee is of the view that separation of 
investigation from law and order is important to maintain the accountability of the police and 
increase their autonomy in investigating crimes. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
the MHA may advise the remaining States to create separate investigations and law and order 
wings in the police. It will lead to specialization and professionalism in the police 
department, speed up the investigation and secure the conviction of offenders. 
(Para 4.6.9 ibid) 
4.12.2   To address the shortage of staff in creating separate wings for investigation and law 
& order, the Committee recommends that the personnel of the rank of ASIs & head 
constables can be utilized for investigation of minor offences of simple nature after adequate 
training. 
(Para 4.6.10 ibid) 
 
4.12.3   The Committee notes that one of the reasons of low conviction rate is the lapses in 
the investigation. Therefore, it is important that regular monitoring and supervision of the 
investigation of cases should be done by senior officers. The Committee recommends that the 
MHA may advise States for the field visit of the senior police officers of the rank of 
SP/IG/DIG for on-the-spot assessment of investigation of cases. The SP/DSP should submit 
monthly PRs (Progress Reports) on important cases and the performance of I/Os. 
Accordingly, suitable rewards/punishment should also be given to I/Os. The Committee also 
recommends to upgrade the skills of the I/Os through periodic training and engaging experts 
as and when necessary. 
(Para 4.6.11 ibid) 
 
 

 
48 
 
Action Taken 
4.12.4 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to take necessary action regarding the separation of investigation from law 
and order. The advisory in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs vide letter dated 
27.04.2022. 
Further Recommendation  
4.12.5 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should follow 
up with the State Governments/UTs on the action taken in response to the advisory 
issued by it.   
4.13 Directorate of Prosecution 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.13.1 The Committee is of the view that the key factor in the success of prosecution is 
proper coordination between the prosecutor and the investigator. Therefore, the prosecution 
set-up in the States needs to be strengthened. The Committee notes that many States/UTs 
have not established the Directorate of Prosecution. The Committee recommends that the 
MHA may advise these States for establishing the Directorate of Prosecution within a time 
frame. 
(Para 4.9.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.13.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to make the police force efficient and capable and its functioning more 
effective and transparent. Police Forces of the States work within the existing legal and 
institutional framework in the matter. 
Further recommendation  
4.13.3 The Committee notes the reply that establishment of Directorate of Prosecution 
is the responsiblity of State Governments/UT Administration and State police forces 
work within the existing legal and institutional framework.  The Committee, however, 
believes that MHA may advise the States/UTs who are yet to establish Directorate of 
Prosecution, to set up the same in their States for better coordination between 
prosecutor and investigator. 
4.14 Promotional Avenues of Constables 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.14.1 The Committee notes that according to MHA, the State Governments are responsible 
to ensure the career progression of their police personnel. However, the promotional aspect is 
a very important aspect of police reform on which the Union Government is in contact with 
the State Government. The Committee further notes that the system of promotion of 
constables is different in the States and observes that most of the States do not follow 
incentive linked promotion schemes or any kind of extraordinary performance-linked 
promotion schemes. The Committee recommends that MHA may encourage States to 

 
49 
 
improve the promotional avenues of the constables through regular departmental exams and 
incentive-linked promotion schemes to keep them motivated. 
(Para 4.11.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
4.14.2 “Police” is a State subject falling in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. It is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/Union 
Territories (UTs) to ensure the career progression of their police personnel. The advisory in 
this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs vide letter dated 02.05.2022. 
Further recommendation  
4.14.3 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should follow 
up with the State Governments/UTs on the action taken in response to the advisory 
issued by it in this regard.   
4.15 Independent Police Complaint Authority 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.15.1  The Committee notes that 31 States/UTs have constituted Police Complaints 
Authorities at the State and District levels for looking into complaints against police officers. 
The Committee is of the view that the Police Complaint Authority should be established 
outside the police force. Therefore, The Committee recommends that the MHA along with 
the Ministry of Law & Justice may take up with States to ensure that the Police Complaint 
Authority should comprise of retired High Court Judges, retired senior civil servant/ police 
officers, eminent jurists along with the representation of women. The Committee also 
recommends that BPR&D may conduct a study to assess the effectiveness of the Independent 
Police Complaint Authority in States to check whether the complaints against police 
personnel have gone up or reduced. The study may also include the types of complaints 
against police personnel and action taken thereon.  
(Para 4.13.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.15.2 BPR&D has been requested vide O.M. dated 12.04.2022 to conduct a study as 
recommended by the Committee and the outcome may be furnished to this Ministry at the 
earliest. 
 
Further recommendation  
 
4.15.3 The Committee notes that BPR&D has been approached to conduct a study to 
assess the effectiveness of the Police Complaint Authority in the States and for 
submission of the outcome of the proposed study. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
  

 
50 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
[244th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the 237th Report on Police - Training, Modernization And Reforms] 
 
Ranking of Police Stations 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.1.5)  
Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 The Committee notes the commitment of the SVPNPA to develop a mechanism 
to review and update the training curriculum biennially/ triennially based on the 
professional requirement and ground-level assessment of the POs and designing the 
next Mid-Career Training Programme (MCTP) Course as per the recommendation of 
the Committee. The Committee further recommends that the training curriculum for 
the personnel should be developed in a hybrid mode – a mix of online and offline 
modules. 
(Para 1.2.9)  
Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
(Para 1.3.5)  
 The Committee notes that due to lack of knowledge of procedure among ground 
level police personnel, unknowingly, loopholes are generated in the process of 
investigation, collection of evidence, filing of charge-sheets which are taken advantage 
by the culprits.  This leads to State prosecution losing a lot of cases in the courts.  This is 
a undeniable fact in respect of all States/UTs.  Hence, the Committee desires that while 
centre may refrain from involving in day to day administrative matters of police   
enforcement of law and order, it ought to device a mechanism by making/amending the 
existing provisions suitably so that the training of police personnel from the level of 
constable to the level of SHO by States/UTs can be standardized so far as procedure on 
inter-state registration of cases and prosecution of crimes is concerned.  The Committee 
believes this could strengthen the law and orders system in the country to prevent 
criminals operating inter-state and taking advantage of loopholes to escape prosecution  
(Para 1.3.8)  
 
Creation of Dedicated Reserve Training Pool 
  The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 1.4.3)  
Scheme for Modernisation of State Police Forces 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
(Para 1.5.4)  
 

 
51 
 
Use of Technology by State Police 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.6.4)  
 
Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.7.3)  
 
Model Police Act, 2006 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 1.8.3)  
 
Dual System Vs Police Commissionerate System 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 1.9.3)  
 
Village Policing 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 1.10.3)  
Police Establishment Board (PEB) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.11.3)  
 
Revisiting the laws 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
 (Para 1.12.3)  
Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.1.4)  
 The Committee notes the reply.     
(Para 2.1.7)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply.     
(Para 2.1.10)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.1.13)  

 
52 
 
 
Police University 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that all States/UTs may consider 
affiliating their Colleges/Institutes with the Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU) which 
is a Police University established at the national level.  The Committee has emphasized 
the need and importance of establishing universities at regional and State levels.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Center may pursue with all the States/UTs 
to consider affiliating their Colleges/Institutes with the RRU.   
(Para 2.2.3)  
 
The Behavior of Police Personnel 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.3.3)  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.3.6)  
Training on Arrest and Interrogation Techniques 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that various methods such as updation of 
training contents, discussion on case studies based on latest judgments, conducting law 
quizzes, publishing in NPA journal, etc. are being initiated by the SVPNPA to keep the 
probationers updated about the amendments in law and latest judgments.  The 
Committee also appreciates the efforts of the SVPNPA to explore the possibility of 
involving NALSAR (Hyderabad) & National Judicial Academy to strengthen the 
teaching of law.  
(Para 2.4.4)  
 The Committee hopes that efforts are being made at NEPA to keep the study 
material for courses updated.  The Committee feels that SVPNA and NEPA may share 
the teaching methodologies with each other so that the best suitable methods may be 
identified for inclusion in their courses. SVPNA and NEPA should also engage with 
State police academies, through workshops and seminars, so that the training 
curriculum of these academies is up-to-date and they can periodically sensitize police 
personnel on the changes in laws and amendments. 
(Para 2.4.5)  
Training for Handling of Crimes In Tribal Areas 
 The Committee notes that SVPNPA is contemplating planning a separate 
training module to train police personnel to tackle crimes in tribal areas.  The 
Committee feels that the SVPNPA and NEPA while formulating training modules 
should also consult the training academies/institutes of the States having tribal areas so 
that the specific needs of these States may be incorporated in the proposed training 
modules.  
(Para 2.5.4)  
 
 The Committee notes that a new course has been introduced in the basic course 
curriculum by SVPNPA to familiarize the police personnel with the local language and 
culture.  The Committee believes that apart from this, the involvement of tribal leaders, 
NGO activists, lawyers, university professors and scholars having specialization on 

 
53 
 
tribal issues would be useful to acquaint the police personnel with the tribal issues to 
tackle crimes in tribal areas.    
(Para 2.5.8)  
 
Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.6.12)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.6.17)  
 
Online Training 
 The Committee  notes the reply  
(Para 2.7.4 )  
 
 The Committee notes the reply 
(Para 2.7.8)  
 
Training on Weaponry 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.8.3)  
 
Common Training Module 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
 (Para 2.9.3)  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.9.6)  
 
 
Training to Meet Specific Challenges 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.10.6)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.10.9)  
 
Evaluation of Scheme of “Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police” 
 The Committee notes the reply that delay in the release of funds occurs due to 
non-submission of UCs by the States Governments.  It believes that the issue of non-
submission of UCs  can be pursued and resolved through the High Power Committee.   
(Para 2.11.3)  
  

 
54 
 
 The Committee notes that the issue of categorization of States for the Scheme 
‘Assistance to State for Modernisation of Police does not fall under the purview of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  However, the Committee observes that the issue of making 
additional grants to States having strategic importance, particularly due to their 
proximity to international borders may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 2.11.7)  
 
Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, Etc. 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.12.3)  
 
Use of Technology by State Police 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.13.4)  
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.14.3)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.14.6)  
 
E-FIR 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
(Para 2.15.6)  
 
 
Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
  The Committee notes that 7 Joint Cyber Crime Coordination Teams (JCCTs) 
have been constituted to provide a robust coordination framework to Local 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and also to address the jurisdictional complexity.  The 
Committee hopes that these JCCTs will facilitate the investigating officers visiting 
outside their jurisdictional State for investigation of cyber crimes. 
(Para 2.16.3)  
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
(Para 2.16.6)  
Stress Management of Police Personnel 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.17.3)  

 
55 
 
 
 
Inter-State Coordination Mechanism 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.18.3)  
Separation of Investigation from law and order  
 The Committee notes that the Minsitry has approved a scheme for providing 
Mobile Forensic Vehicle in every district in the country.  It is of the view that the 
scheme should be adequately funded and implemented within a time frame for 
providing strength and teeth to the existing investigation procedures in the States. 
(Para 2.19.3)  
Escorting the Under-Trial Prisoners 
 The Committee notes the reply.   
(Para 2.20.3)  
Directorate of Prosecution 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.21.3)  
The Housing of Police Personnel 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.22.4)  
 
Independent Police Complaint Authority 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
(Para 2.23.3)  
Revisiting the laws  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.24.3) 
Police-Community Relations 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 2.25.3)  
 
 
Challenges in Police Reforms 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
 (Para 2.26.3)  

 
56 
 
 
 
Training Mandate of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 The Committee had recommended that SVPNPA and NEPA may persuade/help 
the State Training Academies to train and sensitize police personnel of the States/UTs in 
artificial intelligence, robotics, drone technology, forensic and ballistic sciences so that 
their police personnel could gain competence to detect, investigate and prevent such 
crimes in a professional way. The MHA may consider creating a platform amongst 
National and State police academies to share their training modules and practices. This 
will help in creating a uniform level of training system for the police of various States all 
across the country. 
(Para 3.1.4)  
Investigation of Cyber Crimes 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that dedicated Cyber Cells have 
been set up in all the State/UT Governments including Punjab, Rajasthan, Goa and 
Assam which did not have a single cyber crime cell earlier.  The Committee further 
notes that the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) has been set up by the 
Ministry to deal with cyber crimes in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.   
(Para 3.2.7)  
 
  
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may encourage State 
Governments to identify cyber hotspots in their State and maintain data profile on the 
cyber crimes being committed in those hotspot and the measures taken to contain those 
crimes. This data in this regard may be collected by the ‘Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C)’ and shared with other States for framing of policies by 
them to tackle such types of cyber crimes.  
(Para 3.2.8)  
 
Women Representation on Police 
 The Committee is of the opinion that although the subject comes under the 
domain of the State /UTs,  BPR&D may be tasked by the Ministry to assess the 
effectiveness of women’s help desk at various police stations to have a comprehensive 
view on the matter. This will help the MHA to issue further advisories to the States, 
accordingly.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken on its 
recommendation to establish one all-women police Station in each district.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation in para 3.24.8 of the 237th Report. 
(Para 3.3.3)  
 
Emergency Response Support System (ERSS) 
 The Committee notes the reply that best practices being followed in various 
States/UTs are collated and shared by the NCRB with all the States/UTs.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of any assessment made by the NCRB on the 
effectiveness of these practices.    
(Para 3.4.3)  

 
57 
 
Outsourcing of Police Functions 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry had issued an advisory to all the 
States/UTs relating to the outsourcing of peripheral and non-policing activities in 2019.  
The Committee believes that proper study of the function of the police forces would help 
ascertain those functions that can be outsourced.  The police should concentrate on its 
core functions. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation in para 4.7.8 of 
the 237th Report that the Ministry may task BPR&D to conduct a study to determine 
such functions of the police that can be outsourced with requisite training.  
(Para 3.5.3)  
 
Police-Community Relations 
 The Committee believes that despite the boom of internet connectivity in the 
country, there might be a sizeable population in various States/UTs which may have 
very limited access to the internet due to various reasons.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the police force may adopt various strategies viz. publicizing its 
achievements in the meetings of the community/village/district-level committees at 
regular intervals for increasing the police-people interaction, organizing awareness 
weeks/Jan Sabha etc.  The focus should be on a nationwide capacity-building campaign, 
with emphasis on developing and inculcating high professional and ethical standards as 
well as attitudinal and social skills in the personnel.  
(Para 3.6.3)  
 
State/UT Wise Status of Recommendations of Mooshahary Committee  
 
 The Committee notes that the matter was taken up with all the States/UTs in 
April, 2022. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee by the 
States/UTs which have not furnished any information in this regard. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation in para 1.4.4 of the 237th Report that the MHA should 
take up with the remaining 12 States/UTs to furnish the status of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Mooshahary Committee.  
(Para 4.1.4)  
 
Training at State Level 
 The Committee observes that the average expenditure incurred by States/UTs on 
police training is abysmally low.   The States/UTs would have to allocate sufficient funds 
to be able to cater to training needs of their police force.  They may also be encouraged 
to affiliate with the NFSU & RRU and use their expertise in building up capabilities of 
their police personnel.  
(Para 4.2.4)  
 
Linkage with Universities 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 4.3.3)  
 
 
 

 
58 
 
 
Training to deal with Cyber Crime 
 The Committee notes that the National Cyber Forensic Laboratory (NCFL) has 
been set up to train & assist the State/UT Investigation Officers. The Committee also 
notes that another NCFL at Hyderabad will be established by the Directorate of 
Forensic Science Services (DFSS) for the evidentiary purpose to provide forensic 
support to LEAs in various States/UTs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.4.4)  
 
Standardization of Equipments, Weaponry, Vehicles, etc. 
 The Committee notes the reply that States/UT Governments have been advised 
to take appropriate action on the recommendation of the Committee to equip the police 
stations with adequate infrastructure immediately.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the States in this regard. 
(Para 4.5.3)  
 
Use of Technology by State Police 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of action taken by all the 
States/UTs on the advisory issued to them.  The Committee feels that the latest 
technology such as surveillance by drones/unmanned aerial vehicles etc. should be used 
proactively as it can provide an edge in ensuring security and maintenance of law and 
order.   
(Para 4.6.3)  
 
Installation of CCTV Cameras in Police Stations 
 The Committee notes that States/UTs have been requested to install IP cameras 
at strategic locations in all the Police Stations and to conduct a periodic audit of all the 
installed CCTVs.  The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Law and Justice 
has been approached to advise States/UTs for installing CCTVs at District Courts.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of action taken by the States/UTs 
Governments in this regard.  
(Para 4.7.3)  
 
Efforts to Tackle Drone Attacks 
 The Committee notes that the Government is in the process of finalizing the 
National Counter Rogue Drone Policy and Guidelines (NCRDPG).  The Committee 
believes that adequate provisions will be integrated into these guidelines to counter the 
challenges to internal security due to use of drones to carry out illicit activities, such as 
smuggling of drugs, guns, ammunition, etc. The Committee may be informed about 
these guidelines after finalization. 
(Para 4.8.5)  
 
Vacancies in the State Police Forces 
 The Committee has been informed that an advisory has been issued to all the 
States/UTs for filling up vacancies.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
constructive steps taken by the various States Governments/UTs to fill the vacant posts.  

 
59 
 
(Para 4.9.3)  
 
Women Representation on Police 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry regularly advises States/UTs to make 
efforts to increase women’s representation in Police forces and an advisory in this 
regard was also issued in April, 2022.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives taken up by the State Governments/UTs to increase the representation of 
women in the police force. 
(Para 4.10.3)  
 
Dual System Vs Police Commissionerate System 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome of the said study 
by BPRR&D. 
(Para 4.11.3)  
Separation of Investigation from law and order  
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should follow 
up with the State Governments/UTs on the action taken in response to the advisory 
issued by it.   
(Para 4.12.5)  
Directorate of Prosecution 
 The Committee notes the reply that establishment of Directorate of Prosecution 
is the responsiblity of State Governments/UT Administration and State police forces 
work within the existing legal and institutional framework.  The Committee, however, 
believes that MHA may advise the States/UTs who are yet to establish Directorate of 
Prosecution, to set up the same in their States for better coordination between 
prosecutor and investigator. 
(Para 4.13.3)  
Promotional Avenues of Constables 
  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should follow 
up with the State Governments/UTs on the action taken in response to the advisory 
issued by it in this regard.   
 (Para 4.14.3)  
Independent Police Complaint Authority 
 The Committee notes that BPR&D has been approached to conduct a study to 
assess the effectiveness of the Police Complaint Authority in the States and for 
submission of the outcome of the proposed study. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
(Para 4.15.3)  
 
***** 
 
 
 

 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

 
61 
 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 AM on Wednesday, the 15th March, 2023 in 
Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brijlal  - Chairman  
2. Shri N. R. Elango 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Derek O’Brien 
5. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
6. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
7. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
10. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
11. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
 
Shri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of  India 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them 
about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following three 
draft Reports of the Committee:- 
(i) xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
(ii) xxx   xxx    xxx 
 

 
62 
 
(iii) 244th Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred 
Thirty Seventh Report on 'Police - Training, Modernisation and 
Reforms '. 
 
3. xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
4. xxx   xxx    xxx 
5. The Committee considered the draft 244th Report and adopted it. 
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any 
typographical/factual errors and, if necessary, further vetting in view of the 
suggestions received from Members and also to nominate Members for 
presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha so that further 
necessary action can be initiated on the said Reports. 
 
7. xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
8. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee 
was kept.  
 
9. The  meeting then adjourned at 10.17 AM 
 
***** 
 