 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)  
 
REPORT NO.  
191  
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE 
HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH  DECEMBER , 2015) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7TH  DECEMBER, 2015) 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available         
 
C.S. (H.A.)-      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED  
EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
                                     
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2015) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7TH   DECEMBER, 2015) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka) 

ACRONYMS 
 
NEC NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL 
BRO  BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION 
DONER DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
NEDFI NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORPORATION  
NERLP NORTH EASTERN REGION LIVELIHOOD PROJECT  
NERAMAC NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETI NG 
CORPORATION 
NEHHDC NORTH EASTERN HANDLOOMS & HANDICRAFTS 
NER NORTH EASTERN REGION 
NLCPR NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES 
BTC BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL  
BE BUDGET ESTIMATE 
RE REVISED ESTIMATE 
NHAI NATIONAL HIGHWAY AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
NMFP NATIONAL MISSION ON FOOD PROCESSING  
NEIIPP NORTH EASTERN INDUSTRIAL AND INVESTMENT 
PROMOTION POLICY 
MSE MICRO AND SMALL ENTERPRISES  
CDG COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT GROUPS 
PIP PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
SHGs SELF HELP GROUPS 
MORTH MINISTER OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
AAI AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
DoE DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
MSMEs MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISE (MSMES) 
HRD HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
NESRIP NORTH EAST STATES ROAD INVESTMENT PROGRAM  
CSR CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  
NGO NON GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATION 
MoU MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 
DIPP DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY & PROMOTION 
NHCCL  NATIONAL HIGHWAYS CONNECTIVITY COMPANY LIMITED  
EFC EXPENDITURE FINANCE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S  
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  REPORT      1 - 39 
 Chapter-  I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2 -  4 
 Chapter- II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee  does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
5  -  11 
 Chapter-        III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
12  -  26 
 Chapter-        IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which fina l reply of the 
Government have not been received  
27   -  34 
4.  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
 
35  -  39 
5.  *RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 _____________________________________ 
*to be appended at the printing stage 

                                              Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st  September, 2015) 
 
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   - Chairman  
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vijay Goel 
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
6. Shri Derek O'Brien 
7. Shri Baishnab Parida 
8. Shri D. Raja 
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan  
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15. Shri Ramen Deka 
16. *Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar 
21. Shri Harish Meena 
22. Shri P. Nagarajan  
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
24. Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
25. Shri Dilip Patel 
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil 
29. Shri Bishnupada Ray 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Smt. Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
 Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director 
 
* Shri Prataprao Jadhav, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e .f. 9 th  September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shif ting of  Shri Chandrakant Khaire, 
MP, Lok Sabha  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9 th  September, 2015 
 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Ninety First Report on Act ion Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the One H undred and Eighty Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region. 
 
2. The One Hundred and Eighty Sixth 
 Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to  the Rajya Sabha on 23 th  April and laid on 
the Table of the Lok Sabha on 24th  April, 2015. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof 
were sent to the Ministry of Development of North E astern Region requesting them to furnish 
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Co mmittee contained in the Report. The 
Ministry furnished the Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 23 rd  June,  2015. 
 
3. The Minister of Development of North Eastern Reg ion laid the statement on the status of 
implementation of the recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on the 
Table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on 5
th  and 6 th  August, 2015, respectively, pursuant to the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated 24th September 2004.  
 
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred N inety First Report and adopted the 
same at its meeting held on 2
nd  December, 2015. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committe e are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
 
P. Bhattacharya  
NEW DELHI                                  Chairman  
2
nd  December,  2015                                 De partment –related Parliamentary 
       Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

Report 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the action taken by the Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and 
Eighty Sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry.  The One 
Hundred and Eighty Sixth Report was presented to Ra jya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, 
on the 23 rd /24 th  April 2015. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry  of DoNER in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred & Eigh ty Sixth Report have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
Chapter I:  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.5.5, 2.15.7 and 2.18.3 (of  One Hundred and Eighty Sixth Report)   
Total recommendations- 3  
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its thirty one 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II:  The recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para No s. 2.2.5, 2.2.8, 2.6.4, 2.6.6, 2.7.7, 
2.12.4, 2.16.6, 3.1.4 and 3.3.2  (ibid) Total recommendations- 9
  
 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations fu rnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III:  The recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch the Committee is 
not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Par a Nos.  2.3.9, 2.4.3, 2.6.7, 2.8.8, 2.9.5, 
2.10.4, 2.10.5, 2.11.6, 2.13.6, 2.14.5, 2.15.9, 2.1 6.5, 2.19.3, 2.20.3, 2.21.3, 3.3.3, 3.6.2 and 
3.7.3 (ibid) Total recommendations- 18  
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-im plementation of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desire s that the Ministry should furnish 
convincing action taken steps  in respect of those recommendations.  
 
Chapter IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 2.3.8,  2.3.10, 2.8.5, 2.8.6, 2.8.10, 2.10.6, 
2.11.4, 2.14.3, 2.15.5, 2.17.3, 3.2.5, 3.2.6, 3.2.7 , 3.2.8, 3.4.2 and 3.5.4 (ibid) Total- 16 
Recommendations 
 
 
In respect of nine recommendations in Chapter-IV, t he Ministry has either 
furnished interim reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee 
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect 
of the recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in  keeping with the spirit of the 
recommendation. 
 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in th e succeeding chapters.  
 

CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
1.1 NON PLAN LOANS TO NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND  HANDLOOMS 
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NEHHDC) 
 
Recommendation  
  
1.1.1 The Committee notes that some progress is bei ng made for implementation of the revival 
plan of NEHHDC but is disappointed that the complet e revival of NEHHDC has yet not taken 
place.  NEHHDC is a crucial organization for provid ing support to livelihood of numerous 
artisans, weavers and small scale producers and ent repreneurs.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that the revival of NEHHDC must be compl eted at the earliest and towards this end, 
the sanctioned amount in the form of equity must be  released to the Corporation as early as 
possible. 
(Para 2.5.5 of 186 th  Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its meeting held on 21 
st  February, 2013, 
approved the Revival plan of NEHHDC as under: - 
i) Infusion of fresh equity of Rs. 6.5 crore (Rs. 4.00  crore in first year and Rs. 2.5 crore in 
second year) 
ii) Infusion of Rs. 2.00 crore in the form of equity fo r implementing VRS for 20 employees, 
which is a pre-condition for operationalisation of the revival plan. 
iii) Conversion of Government of India of Rs. 36.02 cror e and outstanding interest of Rs. 
47.04 crore as on 31.12.2011, into equity and simul taneous write off of equity against 
accumulated losses incurred by the Corporation 
1.1.3 All the above steps have been taken by the Go vernment over the last two years.  The 
balance amount of equity of Rs. 2.5 crore was sanctioned on 26.03.2015.  The fund received under 
the Revival Plan has been kept in the escrow accoun t opened by NEHHDC for the purpose. The 
expenditure on implementation Revival Plan was comm enced by NEHHDC in 2014-15.  The 
following steps have also been taken for Revival of the NEHHDC: 
 
1. Closure of Loss making Units : Two loss making Showrooms at New Delhi and 
Bangalore were closed down in September 2013. This has resulted in savings of Rs.40.00 
Lac per annum to the Corporation. 
2. Change in existing Consignment Sales Policy:  Modified Consignment Sales Policy in 
Emporia introduced at Shillong, Guwahati and Kolkata emporia. 
3. Sourcing and Procurement of Handicrafts & Handlo oms : Higher volume of 
procurement made from various states of the North Eastern Region. 
4. Development of Clusters for strengthening supply chain: 
a) Five clusters at Barpeta, Tezpur, Silchar, Agart ala and Imphal identified for 
development by organizing awareness camps, training and procurements etc. 
b) MoU signed with the Tripura Bamboo Mission (TMB) to strengthen supply chain. 
5. Thrust on Institutional Sales:  
Emporia and Sales Promotion Offices have been given  targets for Institutional Sales 
(Rs.2.00 crore) for the year 2015-16 
 
6. Product Line Standardization:  

a) Set up a Design Bank at Guwahati for the benefit s of the artisans and weavers of 
the North Eastern Region. 
b) Set up a production Centre at Craft Promotion Ce ntre, Guwahati for production 
of cane and bamboo based furniture items 
c) Set up a Common Facility Centre at Guwahati for processing bamboo and for 
production of bamboo sticks, sticks and splits etc. 
d) Set up a Handlooms Production cum Training Centre at Guwahati for production 
of value added handlooms items and for imparting training to women weavers. 
e) Set up a Handicrafts Museum at Guwahati showcasi ng the handicrafts and 
textiles of the North Eastern Region for the benefi ts of the artisans and weavers 
community.  
7. Renovation of Showrooms:  
Showrooms at Shillong, Guwahati, Kolkata and Chenna i has been renovated which has 
resulted in improved sales compared to earlier years. 
8. Computerization of the activities in the Corporation :  
Inventory Management, Bar-coding facilities install ed in Emporia at Shillong, Guwahati 
and Kolkata and necessary training to staff on application of software conducted. 
9. E-Commerce:  
a) A new Web Portal 
www.nehhdc.in  launched for e-marketing. Details of products 
and services will be up loaded and the portal will be made functional within three 
months.  
b) MoU signed with Snapdeal for facilitating e- commerce. 
c) Tie up with Indiamart.com made for bulk sale. 
10.  Strategic Partnering with Tribal Cooperative Marke ting Development Federation of 
India Limited (TRIFED), Central Cottage Industries Emporium (CCIC) and Handicrafts 
and Handlooms Exports Corporation of India Limited (HHECI): MOU signed with 
TRIFED,CCIC and HHECI for increase in retail sales base. 
11. MOU with other State Corporations: MOU with Tamil Nadu State Handlooms 
Weavers Co-operative Society Ltd (Co-optex), Tamil Nadu Handicrafts Development 
Corporation signed to increase the retail sales bas e. More marketing collaborations with 
other State Corporations are in progress.  
12.  Achievements: As a result of the above steps, the following resul ts have been 
achieved:  
a) Showroom sales in the three showrooms at Shillon g, Guwahati and  Kolkata has 
increased by 45% in the year 2014-15 as compared to the sales in the year 2013-14. 
b) Institutional Sales achieved was at Rs.46.18 Lac during the year during 2014-15. 
c) Two new showrooms are being opened at New Delhi and Guwahati (second 
emporium). 
d) Training to Executives and staff members on E-Ma rketing and Office 
Management /procedures. 
 
1.2 NER LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP) - EAP  
 
Recommendation  
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes the close coordination an d strong linkages between NERLP and 
other livelihood schemes in rural areas of NER. The  Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should keep up this scheme and try to expand it fur ther to create self-sustainable institutions and 
ensure ample livelihood opportunities for the rural poor.  
(Para 2.15.7 ibid) 
 

Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 NERLP has been coordinating with other simila r livelihood projects such as NRLM for 
replication of best practices.  The Governance Comm ittee of NERLP which includes M/o Rural 
Development (NRLM), DEA, NITI Aayog and World Bank have been reviewing as well as 
reiterating the importance of conducting workshops and field visits at regular intervals so as to 
continue handholding approach not only during the p roject period but also to have exit plan 
strategy with other livelihood programmes. This wil l help sustain the established institutions such 
as SHGs, CDGs, etc. and to prevent the rural poor to relapse into poverty.   
1.2.3 During 2015-16, developmental activities will  be taken up to further strengthen the SHGs 
through organizational and financial management tra inings and also create more livelihood 
opportunities through promotion of activity based l ivelihoods, vocational & skill trainings and 
specific sub-sectoral interventions.  
 
1.3 CONSULTANCY, MONITORING, THIRD PARTY EVALUATION  CHARGES 
ETC. UNDER NLCPR SCHEME 
 
Recommendation  
 
1.3.1 The Committee has noted in the Financial Revi ew given in Outcome Budget 2014-15 of the 
Ministry under section 5.1 that the Ministry has fa iled to utilize the allocated funds of BE under 
this plan scheme. Therefore, it is skeptic as to ho w the Ministry will be able to utilize funds to the  
tune of Rs 5 crore. The Committee recommends that t he plans of the Ministry to design and 
develop a software package for strengthening the mo nitoring mechanism must be fast-tracked and 
proper utilization of funds be done. During the cur rent year, physical targets should be fully 
achieved and there should be no short fall in physical and financial targets. 
(Para 2.18.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 All possible efforts are being made by the Mi nistry of Development of North Eastern 
Region to achieve optimal output.  

CHPATER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY 
 
2.1 TOTAL REVENUE AND CAPITAL OUTLAY - SHORT FALL I N ALLOCATION  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.1.1 The Committee is concerned about the huge sho rtfall of Rs. 714.71 crore in the approved 
budgetary allocation as compared to projected deman ds and wonders as to how the Ministry will 
make up for this huge deficit. It recommends that t he Ministry of DoNER should take up this 
matter with the Ministry of Finance to get an enhan ced allocation at the RE stage so that all the 
planned expenditure and committed liabilities are fulfilled.  
(Para 2.2.5 of 186 
th  Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 The observations/recommendations of the Commi ttee have been noted.  As advised by the 
Committee, the request for allocation of additional resources would be taken up appropriately. 
 
2.2 TOTAL REVENUE AND CAPITAL OUTLAY - FUND UTILISA TION  
 
Recommendation  
2.2.1 The Committee is disappointed to note the ina bility of the Ministry to utilize the funds 
completely which were reduced at RE stage for vario us plans schemes like NLCPR, NESRIP etc. 
This shortfall in financial targets is unacceptable  in these critical schemes as it casts a shadow 
over the absorption capacity of the implementing ag encies of the programmes. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of  DoNER must impress upon all the concerned 
line Ministries/Departments/Agencies to take urgent  steps for enhancing their capacity to utilize 
allocated funds completely.  
(Para 2.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 The budget for North Eastern State Road Inves tment Programme (NESRIP) was not 
reduced at RE stage.  In fact, it was enhanced by R s.80.00 crore at the RE stage bringing the total 
budgeted amount for FY2014-15 to Rs.125.00 crore.  The whole amount was released by Ministry 
of DoNER to the States during the year itself. 
2.2.3 The variation in budgetary allocation for the  two schemes under reference is as under:- 
(Rs. Crore) 
 BE RE 
NLCPR 950.0  704.5  
NESRIP 45.0  125.0  
 
2.2.4 The overall budget of Ministry of DoNER for t he year 2014-15 got reduced from 
Rs.2306.00 crore to Rs.1800.00 crore at RE stage. T he recommendations of the Committee have 
been disseminated to all concerned.   
 
Further Observation 
 

2.2.5 The Committee would like to know the concrete  steps taken by all the line Ministries 
in the way of enhancing their capacity for utilization of funds to achieve the targeted results. 
 
2.3 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MAR KETING 
CORPORATION (NERAMAC) - REVIVAL PLAN 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1  The Committee is not convinced with the contention of the Ministry that the cut of nearly 
50 percent at RE stage was done with a view to curt ail the trend of incremental financial losses 
especially in view of the increased demand and allo cation in BE 2015-16. In view of the 
Committee this trend was being followed since many years and all of a sudden, this plea is being 
advanced. However, the Committee feels that the wor king capital loan being given to NERAMAC 
carries unduly high interest and penal interest rat es. Therefore, the committee recommends that 
either the Ministry should facilitate NERAMAC and e nable it to access cheaper funds from the 
market or the Ministry must provide loans to it at relaxed rate of interest and favorable terms and 
conditions. The Committee desires that the revival plan of the Corporation should be expedited. It 
is very strange that entities in private sector in the same field are flourishing while entity in 
Government sector is making continuous losses since  many years even to such a level that its 
working capital has wiped out. 
(Para 2.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 During 2013-14, NERAMAC could draw Rs. 1.00 c rore only out of a budgetary provision 
made for Rs. 2.00 crore as working capital loan. The utility of working capital loan to NERAMAC 
during 2014-15 was carefully scrutinized by the com petent authority in Ministry of DoNER. 
NERAMAC authorities could not satisfactorily presen t essential information on critical resource 
management functions of NERAMAC either in the form of a sound action plan for utilization of 
working capital loan over the financial year or a s ector-wise application module for such loans 
funds and the recovery cycles of the working capita l during the entire financial year (2014-15).  
Therefore, it appeared to the authorities in Minist ry of DoNER after careful consideration of 
circumstances, that there was hardly any scope for proper utilization of an additional spell of 
working capital loan with an efficient outcome for NERAMAC.   
 
2.3.3 As regards provision of cheaper funds to NERA MAC, the net worth of the organization 
and its loan repaying capacity are critical conside rations.  However, NERAMAC has been found 
to have made provision for interest payment on work ing capital loan sanctioned to it till date but 
has not deposited any amount with Ministry of DoNER  either as accrued interest or recovery of 
principal amount of the loan.  Further spell of the  working capital loan at concessional rate or 
waiver of accrued interest till date depends on future course of the decisions on NERAMAC, to be 
taken by the Central Government.  
 
2.3.4 The revival plan for NERAMAC has to be such t hat the organization can run on 
commercial principles in future and flourish with i ts own momentum. There is a need to consider 
the market demand and factors such as forces of com petitions being thrown open in both regional 
and national markets. Therefore, before formulating  plans and revival package, there is a need to 
carefully anticipate the market forces and factors beforehand through a techno-economic study in 
the present context of the growing NER markets and in the backdrop of increased incidence of 
private sector participation under an upcoming free market environment.    
 

2.4 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MAR KETING 
CORPORATION (NERAMAC) - e-AUCTION CENTRES 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.4.1 The Committee feels that the Corporation’s ef forts are focused in the right direction but 
the pace needs to be hastened. The Committee recomm ends that the proposed e-auction centers 
must be established at the earliest to ensure bette r and timely returns for the producers. Also, the 
Ministry must ensure that such e-auction centres mu st be spread throughout the region and a 
centralized e-auction may be devised to ensure a wider market for the growers. 
(Para 2.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 NERAMAC as marketing facilitator for agro-hor ticulture producers from NER seems to 
remain relevant as long as the agro-based productio n structure in the region is less organized and 
agricultural productions operate at low or uneconom ic level. Action are under way to establish e-
auction centre for large Cardamom followed by crops like ginger, turmeric, pineapple, orange, bay 
leaves, black pepper, hill grass etc. in the coming  years. C-DAC (Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing) is finalising the software and by end of 2015, the e-auction centre of large 
cardamom is likely to commence. 
 
2.5 LOANS TO NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORP ORATION 
LIMITED (NEDFI)  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.5.1 The Committee notes the progress of NEDFi tow ards becoming a self-sustainable 
Corporation and also its efforts to promote economi cally and socially weaker sections of society 
in NER. Regarding the identification of beneficiari es for NEDFi’s support, the Committee feels 
that while voluntary enquiries are a valid basis, h owever, those not knowing about the 
Corporation and its services may not be able to app roach it always. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that NEDFi should intensify its efforts towards increasing the scope and coverage of 
its activities t reach more number of entrepreneurs in need of affordable finance.  
(Para 2.7.7 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 North Eastern Development Finance Corporation  (NEDFi) incorporated in the year 1995-
96, with a view to finance creation, expansion and modernization of industrial enterprises and 
infrastructure projects in the region. With its fif teen (15) Branch Offices and five (5) 
Representative Offices in all the North East States , the Corporation is playing an important role in 
entrepreneurship and infrastructure development in the region.  
 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)  
 
2.5.3 The loan products of the Corporation are stru ctured mainly towards development of the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) segment which is a key driver of economic 
growth and capital formation in the NE Region. For development of the Micro and Small 
Enterprises (MSE) sector, the Corporation has taken initiative to identify and nurture potential first 
generation local entrepreneurs and provide finance on easy terms to them to set up viable 
industrial projects.  
 

Micro Finance 
 
2.5.4 To support 
micro  and small borrowers including small farmers, NEDFi  provides wholesale 
micro credit to Microfinance Institutes (MFIs) of t he North Eastern Region for on lending to low 
income people under its Microfinance Scheme for carrying out various types of income generation 
activities in farm and non-farm sectors.  
 
Capacity Building Support to NGOs/MFIs 
 
2.5.5 In Microfinance, Capacity Building is a conti nuous exercise. Time to time, new guidelines 
and policies come up, MFIs recruit new people, vent ure into new area and add new product and 
services. To cope up with these changes and develop ments, the functionaries and staff need to 
upgrade their knowledge. NEDFi also tries to help t hese MFIs by providing trainings and 
guidelines.  
 
Business Development Initiatives  
 
2.5.6 The Corporation has taken initiatives to reac h out to the young generation by organizing 
business/ entrepreneur meets in all NE states, with  the objective of helping and encouraging 
entrepreneurs of the Region.  
 
Business Facilitations Centre (BFC) 
 
2.5.7 Through Business Facilitation Centres (BFCs) the corporation is facilitating 
entrepreneurship development and new enterprise cre ation and organising a series of business 
meets/ counseling camps and capacity building progr ammes in all the NE states. The focus is to 
primarily tap and nurture the entrepreneurship skil ls of the 1st generation entrepreneurs of the 
Region. 
 
Facilitating Market Support 
 
2.5.8 Marketing Support provided to artisans of han dloom and handicraft sector including water 
hyacinth craft through facilitating participation o f entrepreneurs in various Exhibitions in the 
region as well as outside North East India. 
 
2.5.9 The Corporation is undertaking various initia tives during the FY 2015-16. Some of these 
initiatives are given below. 
1. Network expansion and Branch strengthening. 
2. Opening of more Representative Offices. 
3. Organise Business meets/ seminars. 
4. Regular meetings with stakeholders. 
5. Meetings with Govt. machinery. 
6. Dissemination of information. 
7. Publicity of 100 MSME project profile. 
8. CSR Activities.  
 
2.6 ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation  
 

2.6.1 The Committee hopes that with the higher fund s allocation and expansion of activities 
under this scheme, a favourable image of NER would be created by removing negative perceptions 
and stereotypes of North-East Region and its people , which is a must for mainstreaming of the 
region and facilitating its wholesome development. The Committee recommends that the mega 
event being organized in Delhi must be replicated i n other major metros all over the country and 
must become an annual affair to open up NER to developmental opportunities from everywhere.  
(Para 2.12.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 During the current fiscal, the budget allocat ion for the Scheme of Advertising & Publicity 
is Rs. 10.50 crore as against Revised Estimates of Rs. 5.50 crore during 2014-15. The NEC has 
already organized a ‘Song & Dance Festival’ of the North East this year, to project the rich 
cultural heritage of the North Eastern Region at th e national level.  Further, a North East Festival 
is proposed to be held later this year. 
 
2.7 SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE UP GRADATION 
IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.7.1 The Committee notes that this Scheme is const antly suffering from poor fund utilization 
ratio which has been less than 50% in the last two years. The Committee recommends that pace of 
work must be increased to ensure speedy resolution of special problems of border areas for which 
this scheme was envisaged. The Committee also reite rates its recommendation that the Ministry 
must impress upon the States that they must submit rational and precise projections of fund 
requirements.  
(Para 2.16.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 The views of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted.  
 
2.8 WITHHOLDING OR DIVERSION OF FUNDS BY THE STATE GOVERNMENTS  
 
Recommendation  
 
2.8.1 The Committee wonders why the Ministry and NE C are in the dark regarding fund 
diversion instances when it has been explicitly hig hlighted by the supreme audit institution of 
India, CAG, in its report. The Committee is unable to understand such a disconnection between 
the NEC and the ground reality. The Committee feels  that the Ministry of DoNER and NEC must 
adopt a vigilant role to ensure intended utilizatio n of funds for the designated purpose. The 
Committee strongly recommends that continuous scrutiny of fund disbursal must be done to ensure 
that no funds are diverted or leaked. Also the Mini stry and NEC must urgently look into all the 
instances of fund diversion, inadmissible expenditu re incurred under NLCPR head and other such 
anomalies related to financial mismanagement and ta ke strict action against the concerned 
agencies. 
(Para 3.1.4 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 The observations of the Hon’ble Committee hav e been noted. Release of funds by NEC 
mandates the State Governments to transfer the fund  to the implementing agency within 30 days 
of receipt or within the financial year whichever i s earlier. As advised by the Hon’ble Committee, 

NEC would take up the suggestion regarding incorpor ation of penal provision for delay in release 
of funds by the State Governments to the implementing agencies in the next Plenary Session of the 
NEC.  The aspect of appreciation of good performance would also be taken up therein.   
 
2.9 TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR 
 
Recommendation  
 
2.9.1 NEIIPP is an important policy that led to a m inor beginning of industrial development in 
North East. The Committee notes that it provides va rious subsidies and exemptions to promote 
investment and industrial development in NER.A prop er accountability mechanism should have 
ensured a regular cost-benefit analysis and impact assessment of the policy every year.  However, 
after 2010 no such evaluation was done till 2014.  The Committee recommends that evaluation 
study of NEIIPP must be done every two years and the Ministry must apprise the Committee of the 
results regularly. 
(Para 3.3.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.9.2 As per the DIPP a third party evaluation stud y of  Package of Incentive under North East 
Industrial Investment Promotion Policy (NEIIPP), 2007 for development of industries in the States 
of NER (including Sikkim ) was undertaken by an ind ependent agency i.e. Centre for Market 
Research & Social Development (CFMRSD) at the behes t of DIPP. CFMRSD has submitted its 
final evaluation study report vide letter dated 16.03.2015. 
 
2.9.3 Following are highlights of the key findings of the report: 
(i) The main hindrances for slow pace of industrialization as identified by the study report 
inter-alia include absence of dedicated and regular  power supply, transport bottleneck, 
lack of communication facility, prevailing law and order situation, shortage of 
technical and skilled manpower, lack of credit flow  from Bank/financial institutions, 
geographical isolation, etc.  
(ii) A positive investment climate has developed after c ommencement of NEIIPP-2007 
policy. A total of 151929 gainful employments have been generated in the NER since 
the commencement of NEIIPP-2007.  
(iii) Out of total 323 units provided subsidy under NEIIP P-2007, 95% industries represents 
manufacturing and 5% industries represents service sector.  
(iv) There had been lopsided disbursement of subsidy. As sam and Meghalaya availed the 
maximum benefits of the policy whereas States like Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland have 
availed little or no benefit. Large scale industrie s have received a lion share in the 
disbursement.    
(v) Compatibility exists in NEIIPP-2007 and National Ma nufacturing Policy as both 
complement each other as far as industrialization issue is concerned.   
 
(vi) Post-NEIIPP 2007, 23212 MSME units registered out of which 301 have so far availed 
subsidy benefits. In order to realize the real indu strial growth of the region, NEIIPP 
2007 may be modified to exclude service sectors and  focus on manufacturing may be 
given through MSME. 
(vii) NEIIPP is poised to demonstrate huge impact on the industrial development of NER by 
the end of 10 years of operation as envisaged. 
 
2.9.4 Highlights of the recommendations / Suggestio ns given in the report are: 
 

(i) Of the total disbursement as subsidy, 46.6% has gon e to large industries whereas 
53.4% has gone to MSME units. Focus may be given on promotion of MSME.  
(ii) The Government may plan out a cap on subsidy for th e large scale industries to 
enlarge the scope of the policy to reach more number of beneficiaries in MSME sector. 
While large units may continue to be within ambit o f NEIIPP-2007, Comprehensive 
Insurance Subsidy, Central Capital Investment Subsi dy, Interest Subsidy on working 
capital loan, may be limited to investment of Rs. 10 crore on plant and machinery. 
(iii) Slow pace of industrial development in NER is mainl y attributable to lack of 
infrastructure and therefore emphasis may be given on development of infrastructure 
like roads, electricity and water since number of i nitiatives have been taken by DIPP 
for systematic improvement and for clarity in the p olicy guidelines, which are to be 
implemented by the respected state governments. 
(iv) In order to attract more industrial investment, the  state government may create 
provisions for relaxation in inner-line passes, pro tected area permit & restricted areas 
permit.  
(viii)  NEIIPP 2007 should continue and it may be may be aligned with NMP  
(v) Service sector promotion such as IT industries, Cal l Centres, Medical Transcription 
units, BPOs etc. and industries and ventures in tou rism sector should be left to 
respective ministries like the Ministry of IT and Ministry of Tourism. 
(vi) Training should be provided to the Industry Official. 
(vii) Focus may be given to transfer benefits to industri al units in the States of Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim as these States have least benefitted under the policy. 
(viii) Activities may be planned for awareness generation within and outside the States 
about the policy to attract more number of industries in the region. 
(ix) State Governments may be requested for adopting the MIS on e-enablement of subsidy 
schemes developed by DIPP. 
(x) Various committees formed under DIPP guideline for effective implementation and 
monitoring of the policy needs to be strengthened and supported further at State level. 
(xi) In order to ensure a continuous   engagement proces s and possible mid-term 
corrections, DIPP and State Government(s) may conduct periodic review /appraisals to 
take stock of implementation issues and address potential problem areas.  

CHPATER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED OR IS NOT SATISFIED WITH THE REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY 
 
3.1 NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.1.1 The Committee is dismayed with the tentative division of allocated funds in different 
sectors by NEC and is unhappy to see very low alloc ation being made to critically and potentially 
important sectors like health, industries and touri sm. The Committee strongly feels that while it is 
important to give higher allocation to critical sec tors like transport and communication, HRD 
etc., socially and economically important sectors c annot be afforded to be neglected. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that NEC and Minis try of DoNER should revisit the 
appropriation of allocation to different sectors an d evolve a more equitable and comprehensive 
method of sectoral division of funds so that no imp ortant sector gets neglected and a wholesome 
development is achieved.  
(Para 2.3.9 of 186 
th  Report)  
Action Taken  
 
3.1.2 Committee’s observations have been noted. The re has been a declining trend in the five 
year plan allocations to NEC when compared with the  approved outlay. During the 10th and 11th 
Five Year Plan, the shortfall of actual allocation against the approved outlay was 28.24% and 
56.07% respectively. For the 12th Five Year Plan (1 st four years) the shortfall of actual allocation 
against approved outlay is 53.80%. As on 30.94.2015 , the throw forward of NEC road projects 
which enjoy the lion share of NEC’s budget to the e xtent of 48% is about Rs. 1140.54 crore. 
Agriculture & Allied Sector further takes away abou t 12.49% of NEC’s budget for funding 
livelihood projects under North Eastern Region Comm unity Resource Management Project 
(NERCORMP) - II and III. Given the priority accorde d for completion of road projects and 
livelihood projects other sectors, share the remain ing balance of NEC budget. This situation has 
limited the ability of the NEC to take up new proje cts during the 12th Five Year Plan with 
38.29%, 19.59%, 12%   being spent for new projects during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 
respectively. In order to enable a more equitable d istribution of funds to all sectors for ensuring 
that no sectors are neglected and wholesome development is achieved, the budgetary allocation for 
NEC needs to be increased. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
 
3.1.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure on ob serving the declining trend in the Five 
Year Plan allocation to NEC which has limited NEC's  capacity to take up new projects. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry must frame guidel ines for appropriate earmarking of a 
certain part of funds, at least 40% every year for new projects. It must also be cautious in its 
project selection mechanism so as to avoid taking u p projects having huge throw forward 
costs and must ensure timely project implementation . The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry of DoNER  may take up the matter of shortfall of actual 
allocation with the Ministry of Finance and demand higher allocations in future under this 
head. 
 
 

3.2 CONSTRUCTION / IMPROVEMENT OF ROADS OF ECONOMIC  
IMPORTANCE  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.2.1 The Committee is disappointed to note that th e Mahadev-Tolloi-Pfutsero road is yet to be 
completed even when the project has been handed ove r to BRO. The delay in project completion 
has also led to substantial increase in the project  cost. The Committee strongly recommends that 
the latest deadline of March, 2016 for completion o f this project must be strictly adhered to and 
the Ministry must now begin identification of other such projects which can be implemented under 
the head. 
(Para 2.4.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 The North Eastern Council agrees with the obs ervations of the Committee on the 
Mahadev-Tolloi-Pfutsero road which is yet to be completed. Secretary NEC visited the project site 
with Adviser (T&C) on 16th April, 2015 and during the inspection, the BRO authority assured that 
the project will be completed before March, 2016. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
 
3.2.3 The Ministry’s reply was silent on the Commit tee’s recommendation that 
identification of other projects under the Head ‘Co nstruction/Improvement of Roads of 
Economic Importance’ must now begin. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that 
the Ministry must now begin identification of other such projects under this head.  
 
3.3 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MAR KETING 
CORPORATION (NERAMAC) 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.3.1 Food processing units are necessary for value  addition to agricultural produce; prevent 
post-harvest losses and providing better remunerati on to farmers. The Committee is perturbed to 
note that various processing units are lying defunc t and suffering from various ailments. The 
Committee recommends that NERAMAC should guide its efforts to revive these processing units 
by providing assistance for better equipments, technical know-how and affordable finance. 
(Para 2.6.7 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 The suggestions of the Committee have been no ted. The seasonal nature of the food 
processing units under NERAMAC makes their operatio ns unviable. Further development of farm 
techniques is likely to enable multiple production cycles for fruits and vegetables; large scale 
processing facilities with effective cost reduction  techniques, warehousing, marketing (domestic 
and abroad) innovative agro-based food items like l ow calorie/fortified items, presence of 
supporting logistics etc would follow. In the absen ce of these important ingredients / support 
system conducive to the development of food processing capacity of NERAMAC to a viable scale, 
it cannot be expected to deliver even if heavy dose s of investment are made in plant and 
machineries.  Therefore, a holistic plan would be r equired based on carefully thought out business 
principles and practices, which is being explored by Ministry of DoNER. 
 
Further Recommendation 

 
3.3.3 The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of DoNER should not 
shrug off its responsibility to ensure revival of f ood processing units on the pretext of 
seasonal nature of food items. The Committee is of the view that a holistic and integrated 
plan is required to ensure sustainable operations.    The Committee in this regard suggests 
that in the short run, to counter seasonal nature o f the food items, the Ministry can establish 
cold storage centre and warehouses.  Moreover, mult iple production cycles can be promoted 
through measures like higher Minimum Support Prices  and assured minimum procurement 
with the cooperation of Food Corporation of India. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the concrete holistic plan including time schedule devised to revive these processing units.  
 
3.4 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORT H EASTERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.4.1 North East India is a region which has been s tarved of development primarily due to lack 
of critical infrastructure. The Committee has time and again stressed on increasing pace of 
infrastructure creation in the Region. The latest s tatus of infrastructure projects submitted by the 
Ministry of DoNER has left the Committee disappoint ed. A huge number of projects, more than 
one-third of the total numbers of project, worth Rs . 6177.54 crores are found to be delayed. Even 
among the delayed projects more than a third have b een delayed by more than four years. Such a 
lengthy delay, whatever the reasons may be, is inco mprehensible and unacceptable. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must urgentl y fast track the delayed projects on priority 
basis by resolving the pertinent issues and submit a status report of action taken for expediting 
such projects to this Committee. The Committee also  recommends that the work for Greenfield 
airport at Holongi near Itanagar must also be start ed at the earliest so that it could be completed 
in time. 
(Para 2.8.8 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.4.2 Status of all the ongoing projects is periodi cally reviewed at various levels for fast tracking 
their execution and completion. The issue relating to land acquisition and environment clearances 
are under process in respect of Greenfield Airport at Holingi.  Close monitoring of the same is 
being done. 
 
Further recommendation 
 
3.4.3 The Committee strongly recommends that the mo nitoring mechanism should be more 
robust and the Ministry should look into all the pr ojects facing a delay of more than two 
years and prepare a detailed action plan containing  concrete measures to fast track delayed 
projects with a practical yet strict timeline for a chieving completion of all such projects 
without further time overruns.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5 NON LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR) – CENTRAL 
 

Recommendation  
 
3.5.1 The Committee notes that Tuirial Hydro-Electr ic project which was approved in 2010 is 
half way now, as against the proposed share of the Ministry of DoNER of Rs. 300 crore, nearly 
half amount of Rs. 169.91 crore has been released. The Committee feels that with this pace, 
completion of the project may take about 5 years more. The Committee therefore recommends that 
steps should be taken for early completion of the power project. 
(Para 2.9.5 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been no ted.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.3 The Committee is not convinced with the vague  reply of the Ministry and would 
prefer a detailed action plan as to how the pace of  the projects is proposed to be accelerated 
and whether Ministry has set up a dedicated time line for completion of the projects 
 
 
3.6 SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCI L 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.6.1 In this connection, the Committee expresses i ts anguish over the repeated instances of non- 
submission of requisite documents by the Government  of Assam. The Committee during 
examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) noted t he same status that under the BTC Package 
of Rs. 500 crore, 42 projects at approved cost of R s. 476.27 crore had been sanctioned against 
which Rs. 453.34 crore were released by the Ministr y. The Committee also noted at that time that 
the Government of Assam had submitted Utilization C ertificates for only Rs. 398.07 crore. The 
Committee therefore vide its 170th Report recommend ed that the balance Utilization Certificates 
may be submitted at the earliest by the State Gover nment concerned and the remaining projects 
should be completed at the earliest. While examinin g Action Taken notes, the Committee was 
given to  understand that the Principal Secretary, BTC, Government of Assam during his visit to 
the Ministry on 06.05.2012 informed that the UCs al ong with CCs under BTC Package of Rs. 500 
crore will be submitted to the Ministry within that financial year ( 175th Report of the Committee). 
The Committee expresses its displeasure in the stro ngest terms that the Government of Assam has 
not fulfilled its assurance of UCs leave aside CCs.  The Committee therefore strongly recommends 
that the matter should be taken at higher level for early settlement of long pending issue. 
(Para 2.10.4 ibid)  
Recommendation  
 
3.6.2 Another thing that came to the notice of the Committee that the money from the Central 
fund meant for BTC package used to be lying with th e State  Government of Assam. The 
Committee took a serious view of this and felt that  in federal set up like India when the Central 
Government sanctions the fund, the State Government  has no business to retain the fund for a 
longer period The Committee at that time desired th at the Central Government may review the 
entire package and take up the matter with the Stat e Government to ensure that such thing does 
not recur in future. In case the State Government d oes not release the fund for the purpose for 
which they are sanctioned, future release of the fund to the State Government may be held up until 
the State Government takes necessary action. Respon ding to the observations of the Committee, 
the Ministry of DoNER informed that Government of A ssam was apprised of the serious concern 

of the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding d elay in transfer of funds of BTC and 
requested to devise a mechanism so as to assure uni nterrupted flow of funds to BTC. The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government of Assam alongwith details 
of release made by the release made by the Government of Assam during the last two years. 
(Para 2.10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
(Para Nos. 2.10.4 and 2.10.5)  
 
3.6.3 The matter has been taken up with the Governm ent of Assam who have intimated that 
under BTC Package an amount of Rs.131.80 crore has been released by the Ministry, out of which 
the Government of Assam has already released an amo unt of Rs. 109.95 crore. Hence, the balance 
amount of Rs. 21.85 crore is to be released by the Government of Assam to BTC. Government of 
Assam have stated that an amount of  Rs.21.85 crore , being 1 
st  installment in respect of 3 projects 
could not be released to BTC due to non-receipt of clarifications from the concerned 
Administrative Department for the Bodoland Territor ial Council viz. the Welfare of Plain Tribes 
& Backward Classes (WPT&BC) Department. The funds a re held up as BTC is required to 
complete certain formalities as required by the Gov ernment of Assam.  The matter is being 
pursued with Government of Assam.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.4 The Committee feels that this is a classic ca se of bureaucratic red-tapism.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must impress  upon the State Government for 
early release of the funds.         
 
3.7 NORTH EAST STATES ROAD INVESTMENT PROGRAMME (NE SRIP)-EAP  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.7.1 The Committee is disappointed with the poor u tilization of funds coupled with poor 
achievement of physical targets in almost all the States under this head which is merely 47.28%. It 
fails to understand as to why the M/o DONER demande d additional Rs 80 crore at RE stage in 
2014-15 over and above the BE amount of Rs 45 crore  if it lacked the capacity to utilize the funds. 
Timely construction of roads and related projects i s necessary for improving accessibility and 
enabling developmental activities. The Committee re commends that the Ministry must impress 
upon the States that they should be cautious in sub mitting rational and precise projections of fund 
requirement. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry must ensure that the set targets are 
continually met and must take every necessary measure to that end. 
(Para 2.11.6 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 Based on the projected requirements of the st ates, the budget for NESRIP was enhanced by 
Rs. 80.00 crore in the RE stage bringing the total budgeted amount for FY 2014-15  to Rs. 125.00 
crore. The whole amount was released to the Project  Implementing States from the DoNER’s 
budget by the end of March, 2015. Thus 100% of financial target has been achieved. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.3 The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to work out a robust mechanism to 
monitor the pace of work in the States before relea sing the projected funds, as it would be of 

no use to allow the States to keep the funds with t hem when there is no matching progress in 
the targeted work. 
 
3.8 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.8.1 The Committee is very disappointed by the poo r results under this scheme as compared to 
the previous years.  The number of youth trained an d placed has fallen dramatically from more 
than 2000 in 2013-14 to less than 700 in 2014-15.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
must intensify its activities to ensure satisfactor y placement of skilled NE youths to make the 
scheme attractive to them.  It also recommends that  the Ministry must include training and 
certification courses related to sectors which are booming and having higher employment 
opportunities like IT & ITES, BPOs, Mobile and laptop repair training, website design etc. 
(Para 2.13.6 ibid)  
Action Taken   
 
3.8.2 The decline in the number of youth trained du ring 2014-15 is mainly due to the shift in 
focus to long term courses of 6 months to 1 year du ration which have been found to be better in 
achieving placement targets and higher remuneration for the trainees. The Ministry has laid special 
emphasis on imparting quality trainings through rep uted institution so to ensure maximum 
placement and ruminative salary to the trainees. Th e updated information pertaining to number of 
NE youth trained and placed for the years 2012-13, 2013-15 and 2014-15:  
 
Year Expenditure (Rs. 
in crore) No. of youth trained 
 No. of placement 
2012-13 12.51  1229  984  
2013-14 17.27  2610  2088  
2014-15 15.99  1070  853  
 
3.8.3 The Ministry is exploring to identify reputed  training providers in the area of IT&ITES, 
BPOs, Mobile and laptop repair training, website de sign etc who could assure placement of 
trainees at remunerative salary levels. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.4 The Committee is not happy with the decline i n expenditure in 2014-15 as compared 
to 2013-14 even if the focus is now on long term co urses which may have affected the results. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should i nfuse more funds into this scheme 
and work for its expansion so as to provide better and higher number of employment 
opportunities to NE youth.        
 
3.9 OTHER PROGRAMMES  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.9.1 The Committee is not happy with the state of affairs obtaining in respect of improving air 
connectivity in NE region. Intra air connectivity i n NER is also a big issue and improvement of 
airport is still continuing since 11th Five Year Pl an. Hangar facilities at Imphal, Dibrugarh and 

Itanagar are yet to be provided; DPRs are ready and  the taking up of work is subject to the 
availability of funds. The Committee is also aware of the fact that airports in the region do not 
have night landing facilities. On the top of it, Go vernment profess utmost priority to North East, 
but the allocations to the Ministry gives impression otherwise when it is noticed that plan outlay of 
the Ministry was cut from BE of Rs. 2306 crore to RE of Rs. 1800 crore (21.9%) by the Ministry of 
Finance and against projected demand of Rs. 52.00 c rore by NEC for inter-alia improving air 
connectivity, insufficient allocation of Rs. 23.00 has been made in-spite of outstanding liabilities 
of more than Rs. 80.00 crore. The Committee therefo re recommends that sufficient funds be 
immediately provided for improving air connectivity  and other incidental facilities in the NE 
region. 
(Para 2.14.5 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 The NEC has taken note of the comments of the  Committee on the state of affairs in 
respect of improving air connectivity in the NER vi s-à-vis allocation of funds. The NEC agrees to 
the recommendation of the Committee that sufficient  funds be immediately provided for 
improving air connectivity and other incidental facilities in the NE region.  
 
3.9.3 Hangar facilities have recently been provided  at Guwahati airport and the response of the 
airlines for its utilization is awaited. The NEC an d Ministry of DoNER had already taken up with 
Ministry of Civil Aviation for positioning of aircr aft deployed by Alliance Air Ltd. under the 
Viability Gap Funding of NEC. Based on operationali sation of the Hangers facilities at Guwahati, 
similar facilities based on actual requirement will be considered in the other airports of the Region. 
 
3.9.4 All the airports of the Region except Barapan i (Shillong) and Aizawl airports have the 
night landing facilities. However, no airline has e xpressed the willingness to use the Night 
Landing facilities at these airports, as it is evid ent from the Schedule of Flights in the Region 
approved by the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.5 The Committee, during its visit to North East ern Region visited the Guwahati airport 
and had a first-hand experience of newly constructe d but yet unutilised hangar. The 
Committee was given to understand that the reasons for no airlines utilizing the hangar 
facility was the high maintenance cost of hangar wh ich airlines do not want to bear. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER must try  to coordinate with various airlines 
and try to formulate a scheme, in coordination with  the Ministry of Civil Aviation, for 
viability gap funding of maintenance and operationa l costs of hangar facility and further 
incentivise the private airlines to utilize the said facility.  
 
3.10 NER LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP) - EAP 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.10.1 The Committee has noted serious shortfall in  achievement of targets under NERLP in 
almost every parameter especially in the case of ec onomic empowerment and partnership 
development. The physical progress in social empowe rment is also not encouraging. NERLP is an 
important project for main streaming of remote rura l areas through livelihood generation for 
rural poor. It is also an important component for a chieving inclusive growth which by the current 
performance would remain a distant goal.  The Commi ttee recommends that project monitoring 

needs to be more focussed and strengthened under NE RLP. Also accountability mechanism needs 
to be further strengthened to ensure that set targets are regularly met.  
(Para 2.15.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 NERLP became effective in March, 2012 for a period of five years.  However, a regular 
Project Director joined only in July, 2013 and the full staff strength thereafter.  Hence, the project  
parameter as envisaged in the Project Implementatio n Plan (PIP) could not be achieved within the 
stipulated time frame. After the project staff is p ut in place and the project has begun to pick up 
momentum, the budget allocation has been a meager R s.30 crore, which compelled M/o DoNER 
to seek additional fund from Finance Ministry (Rs.6 0 crore received at RE stage for FY 2014-15). 
For FY 2015-16, an unrealistic budget of Rs. 15 cro re only has been allocated which will not 
allow any developmental activities except to meet s alaries and administrative expenses for seven 
months only.  M/DoNER has taken up with M/o Finance  to immediately allocate additional fund 
so that the project will not be stalled.  
 
3.10.3 As can be seen in the Action Taken: to Para 2.15.5 above, the budget allocation for 
Economic Empowerment and Partnership Development is  Rs.111.5 crore and Rs.3.4 crore 
respectively.  The activities under these component s will be taken up in a big way as new 
interventions for realizing the objective of the project.  Under the Social Empowerment, formation 
of SHGs has been saturated in three states of Mizor am, Nagaland and Sikkim while Tripura is still 
under process. An amount of Rs.31.65 crore has been earmarked for revolving fund and livelihood 
fund for 2015-16.  
 
3.10.4 The project is being reviewed/monitored at v arious levels, such as the Executive 
Committee at regional level, the Governance Committ ee at national level. The Project Director, 
RPMU also holds monthly review meetings with all se ctoral Regional Project Managers and 
Assistant Project Managers and all District Project  Managers quarterly. Apart from that, the 
project regularly collects information on physical and financial progress from project 
districts/blocks/villages every month and documents  through monthly progress reports (MPRs). 
Annual Reports and Quarterly Newsletter are also pu blished by the project. All the MPR, Annual 
Reports and Quarterly Newsletter are uploaded in th e website of the project. The process to 
develop an MIS for real time collection of data is underway which is likely to get operationalized 
by the end of 2 
nd  quarter of the 2015-16.  
 
3.10.5 The Governance Committee held a meeting on 1 8.5.2015 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, DoNER in which the Committee has agreed to restructure NERLP for accommodating 
additional components as well as extend the project  period and to increase coordination between 
NERLP and SRLM through periodic meetings, workshops  and interactions to share their 
experiences apart from other pressing issues. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.10.6 The Committee recommends that the Ministry, pursuant to receiving of additional 
funds, if any, at RE stage, must intensify its efforts for implementation of NERLP and leave 
no stone unturned in achieving the set targets.     
 
3.11 SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE U PGRADATION 
IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 

Recommendation  
 
3.11.1 The Committee notes that the current monitor ing mechanism of the Ministry is heavily 
dependent on the State Governments. While regular c oordination and correspondence are 
necessary, they are not enough to ensure remove the  inherent bottlenecks. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must explor e innovative ways and explore advanced 
technical solutions to strengthen monitoring mechan ism so that the project implementation does 
not become a victim of slack monitoring mechanism.  
(Para 2.16.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 For expeditious implementation of projects, monitoring mechanism is in place through 
which reviews and field inspections are carried out .  The projects are monitored on a regular basis 
regarding their physical and financial achievements  through the Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) 
which are submitted by the State Governments and ot her implementing agencies. Review 
Meetings are also held from time to time with the S tate Governments of North Eastern Region to 
ascertain the progress of the projects that are bei ng implemented and tender necessary advice as 
required.  The quality of construction of the proje cts is taken care by the respective State 
Governments through their technical experts. Projec ts are also monitored periodically by the 
Nodal Officers of the States and through field insp ections made by the area officers of the 
Ministry, the officers of the Technical Wing of the  Ministry and Independent Quality Monitor 
(IQMs).  
 
Further observation 
 
3.11.3 The Committee, however, feels that the Minis try needs to further strengthen its 
technical wing to have alert monitoring mechanism s o that the project implementation 
mechanism is effective enough for entailing perceptible outcomes.   
 
3.12 NE ROADS CORPORATION  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.12.1 The delay in incorporation of NE Roads Corpo ration shows a lack of coordination 
between Ministries of DONER and Road, Transport and  Highways. It seems that the accessibility 
and transport issues of NER will keep on suffering due to bureaucratic procedural delays. NITI 
Aayog and Ministry of Finance should also have been  prompt in clearance of the projects. 
Identification of projects should also have been do ne well in time. The Committee is displeased 
with this lacklustre approach and recommends that b oth the Ministries must work out the 
formalities at the earliest and begin with the task of identification of projects. 
(Para 2.19.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2 The Government has announced a new scheme in  the Budget 2014-15 under Central Plan 
with an initial allocation of Rs.200Cr for North Ea st Road Corporation for development of roads 
in NER under Major Head 3601. The objective of the North East Road Sector Development 
Scheme (NERSDS) is to develop road transport sector  in NER by extending financial support for 
construction/upgradation of roads and corridors. NE RSDS aims to fund alternative road link 
between NER and rest of India, road connectivity wi th neighboring countries, strategic 
regional/Inter-state roads and roads required for development of other infrastructure sectors. 
 

3.12.3 However, the concerned line Ministries of D/ o Expenditure and NITI Aayog have 
communicated as below: 
(i) Department of Expenditure: D/o Expenditure have  conveyed that the Cabinet has 
approved the proposal of the MoRTH to set up a Nati onal Highways Connectivity 
Company Ltd (NHCCL), dedicated exclusively to the t ask of constructing/upgrading, etc 
of national highways in parts of the country which share international boundaries with 
neighboring countries in order to promote regional connectivity which would also have a 
special focus in the NE States. DoE conveyed that N ERSDS is not included in the current 
plan. The Budget Speech 2014-15 referred to the inv estment in NHAI of Rs.37,880 Cr 
including Rs.3000Cr in NE. It also concedes that th e scheme will overlap with other 
schemes being implemented by various central and st ate Departments. Therefore, to avoid 
unnecessary administrative/organizational expenditu re and duplication of activities, 
Ministry of DoNER was advised to place the allocate d budget with MoRTH to get suitable 
schemes in consultation with NE States, NEC, MoRTH, etc. Accordingly, Budget Division 
(DEA) was advised to shift the budget line to MoRTH , which is already building roads in 
the North Eastern Region. 
 
(ii)  NITI Aayog: NITI Aayog has conveyed that the Union Finance Minister’s Budget 
Speech indicates provision of Rs.3000Cr for NE Road s. This should suffice. It has stated 
that more than 25 organisations/institutions are in volved in Funding/Constructing/ 
Maintaining Roads in NER. Therefore, there is no justification for introducing another new 
central sector scheme which requires Government fun ding of Rs.600Cr in the current Five 
Year Plan. 
  Action taken by M/DoNER: 
 
(iii) M/DoNER after receiving the comments of NITI Aayog and DoE as above, have 
replied that MDoNER does not wish to create any new  entity but is content to work 
through MORTH and NHIDCL. However, it wishes to cha ir the IMC which will prepare 
lists of works to be executed since NE local priori ties are best left to this 
Ministry.  M/DoNER have repeatedly requested DoE to  convene the EFC meeting so that 
the scheme could be rolled out in the financial yea r 2014-15.  However, no action has been 
taken by DoE or DEA (Budget). Hence, the entire bud get had to be surrendered in 2014-
15.  
 
(iv) As the Budget for NERSDS has increased to Rs.2 25 crore for 2015-16, M/DoNER has 
been reminding DoE to convene EFC meeting at the ea rliest so that the next necessary 
steps such as Cabinet Note etc. can be taken up.  M /DoNER has also communicated to 
Cabinet Secretary for his kind intervention to expe dite the decision of Finance Ministry in 
any matter they consider appropriate.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.4 The Committee feels that the Government is n ot taking up the infrastructure issues of 
NER on a priority basis causing delay in implementa tion of related schemes inordinately. 
The Committee fails to understand as to why the EFC  meeting has still not taken place. At 
this pace, it seems that even this year's budget as  well will have to be surrendered. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Governmen t must urgently convene the EFC 
meeting and complete all the pending formalities so  as to roll out the North-East Road 
Sector Development Scheme in the current financial year itself. The Department of 
Expenditure should take immediate action to convene EFC meeting at the earliest.     
  

3.13 ORGANIC FARMING IN NE STATES  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.13.1 The Committee is amused by the fact that Min istry of Finance has, by itself, provided 25% 
higher allocation than the projected demand in a scheme in which no work has begin and no funds 
were utilised till now. However, the other aspect i s that work can be started vigorously under this 
scheme and higher funds can be used to promote orga nic farming in NER in a big way. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of DONER  must utilize this opportunity to intensify 
organic farming activities in NER without any further delay. 
(Para 2.20.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2 The Government had budgeted Rs 100 crore for  Organic Farming scheme in FY 2014-15. 
Ministry of DoNER has accordingly prepared the Conc ept Note and Operational Guidelines and 
held two Standing Finance Committee meetings with G oI line Ministries and State Governments 
of NER. Thereafter, incorporating the minutes of th e SFC meetings, the draft Cabinet Note has 
been circulated to the line Ministries of GOI for their comments.   
 
3.13.3 Initially, D/o Expenditure has conveyed that  since M/o Agriculture have competency and 
expertise on organic farming with National Centre o n Organic Farming, the scheme is being 
transferred to M/o Agriculture for needful action. Similarly, NITI Aayog has also communicated 
that M/DoNER lacks domain knowledge for implementin g the project as D/o Agriculture & 
Cooperation is implementing schemes specific to the  NER under their Mission for Horticulture in 
the NE Region Programme. Keeping in view the commen ts received from D/o Expenditure and 
NITI Aayog, M/DoNER has written to D/o Expenditure to expedite their decision to enable 
utilization of the budgeted fund under Organic Scheme.  
There has been an enhanced allocation in 2015-16 un der Mission Organic Farming – North 
East.  After receipt of comments from concerned Min istries, the Cabinet Note will be submitted 
for approval of the Government.  
 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.4 The Committee takes notes of the fact that e ven in FY 2015-16 the Ministry has failed 
to begin implementation of Organic farming scheme and utilise allocated funds.   This points 
towards an excessive bureaucratisation in the Gover nment with no concern or urgency for 
implementation of schemes. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the Ministry of 
DoNER may urgently hold a meeting with all the conc erned line Ministries and State 
Governments and urge them to fast track submission of their comments on the draft Cabinet 
Note.    
 
3.14 SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF KA RBI ANGLONG 
AUTONOMOUS TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (KAATC)  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.14.1 The Committee feels that the inability of th e Ministry to utilize any funds under this head 
out of Rs 15 crore allocated to it in RE 2014-15 ma y have been a reason for non-allocation of any 

funds this year. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must give concrete details of 
retained projects and precise estimate of funds req uired to implement them to the Ministry of 
Finance and then pursue allocation of required funds at the RE stage. 
(Para 2.21.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.2 An amount of Rs. 15.00 crore was made availa ble under Revised Estimates 2014-15. Out 
of this, an amount of Rs. 10.52 crore has been util ised for implementation of the following six 
viable projects: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Amount 
( Rs .in 
lakh) 
  1. Improvement/Upgradation by M&BT of Road from Kathalguri village 
to Wirwar via Parkup Pahar from Ch. 2500.00m to 9000.00m 
175.00  
2. Improvement and M & BT of road near Satgaon Don Bosco School 
to Mugasong Tiniali road ( length 4.00 Km) 
162.74  
3. Construction of RCC Bridge No. 1/5(L=18.00m) and  5/3 
(L=26.00m) over river Telehor and Dera respectively on Deori 
Tiniali to Deramokam Road 
204.96  
4. Improvement including Metalling & Black Topping at Chaitsema-
Rongmandu Road from Monjuli to Longpai       
(Ch. From 0.00m to 3900.00m) 
178.68 
 
5. Improvement with M&BT of Disagisim Sibnagar Road              
( L=7.448KM ) 
150.50  
6. Improvement of Road from Joysing Doloi Auditoriu m Hall to Bijoy 
Teron Village approach road via Cotton Ginning Mill by widening of 
road formation including construction of RCC Bridge No. 1/1 
180.00  
 Total 1051.88  
 
 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
3.14.3 Though the Ministry has provided a list of p rojects with funds spent on them in FY 
2014-15, it however, fails to establish and justify  a demand for Rs. 70 crores in BE 2015-16. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry must pursue and 
convince the Ministry of Finance for allocation of required funds by giving details of all the 
ongoing projects and a  rationale  and precise estimation of required funds.    
 
3.15 TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.15.1 The Committee takes exception to the fact th at even before the ongoing third party 
evaluation study is completed and its report made p ublic, the Government has decided to suspend 
fresh registrations under this policy which can have serious consequences to the progressive trend 
of growing investment in the region. Apparently, ’M ake in North East’ which could have been 
realized by this policy, has been subjected to budg etary constraints.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry must pursue the Department of Ind ustrial Policy and Promotion to restore the 

benefits under the NEIPP.  Evaluation study should be examined and decision taken at the 
earliest. 
(Para 3.3.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.15.2 As per DIPP, the budgetary allocation for sc hemes under NEIIPP-2007 for the 12 
th  Five 
Year Plan is Rs. 700 crore, out of which Rs. 471.90  crore has already been utilized during the first 
three years of the 12 th  Five Year Plan. The anticipated liabilities under the scheme of NEIIPP-
2007 in the current financial year (i.e. 2015-16) i tself are estimated to be around Rs. 550 crore, as 
per the reports of the State Governments. Due to pa ucity of funds it has been decided to suspend 
fresh registration of industrial units under NEIIPP -2007. However, schemes under NEIIPP-2007 
have neither been cancelled nor withdrawn. 
 
3.15.3 Against budget allocation of Rs. 150 crore ( BE 2014-15) for schemes under NEIIPP-2007, 
funds to the tune of Rs. 221.90 crore was released in the FY 2014-15 by DIPP. Further, against 
annual allocation of Rs. 150 crore for BE 2015-16, Rs. 96.07 crore has already been released by 
DIPP under the schemes of NEIIPP-2007 in the curren t Financial Year. DIPP is also taking up the 
matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments fo r allocation of additional funds under 
NEIIPP-2007. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.15.4 The Committee observes that the higher utili sation of funds in excess of budgetary 
allocation for NEIIPP-2007 in 12 
th  FYP is a good indicator of the success of this policy. 
However, sudden suspension of fresh registration is disappointing and casts a grim shadow 
on the resolve to develop industry in NER.. The Committee recommends that an early 
decision may be taken on resumption of fresh registrations. Additional funds may be 
allocated for the scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.16 EXTINCTION OF MANY TRIBAL LANGUAGES OF NORTH E AST REGION  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.16.1 Committee is dismayed to note the routine an d evasive Action Taken: of the Government 
on such a specific and important issue. The Committ ee has been given to understand that 
according to UNESCO Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger data published in the year 
2009, 26 languages of Arunachal have been identified as endangered and it is even more worrying 
that even languages of largely populated tribal gro ups like Adi, Galo, Nyishi too have been 
categorized as unsafe by UNESCO due to the heavy in fluence of Hindi language. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Government should lo ok into this matter seriously and take 
concrete steps for preservation of tribal cultures and their languages in NER. Separate budgetary 
provision may be made for this purpose.  
(Para 3.6.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.16.2 The views of the Committee have been communi cated to the Ministry of Culture. 

 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.3 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Culture on 
the recommendation.   
 
3.17 BRU TRIBAL FAMILIES’ REPATRIATION AND REHABILI TATION IN 
MIZORAM  
 
Recommendation  
 
3.17.1 The Committee is overwhelmingly concerned th at even after almost two decades the Bru 
tribe is suffering from the aftermath of ethnic vio lence. It is disappointed with the efforts of the 
Governments of Tripura and Mizoram and is worried a bout the fact that till now the complete 
repatriation and rehabilitation of Bru migrants has  not taken place. The Committee recommends 
that Bru migrants must be accorded all support and protection and their repatriation and 
rehabilitation be completed at the earliest. The Co mmittee also recommends that Ministry must 
ensure that shortage of funds must not come in the way of full and final repatriation and complete 
rehabilitation of Bru migrants.  
(Para 3.7.3 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
3.17.2 MHA have informed that due to ethnic tension  between Reang tribals and Mizos, about 
30,000 Reang (Bru) people (about 5000 families) fro m Western Mizoram migrated from October 
1997 onwards. The Bru migrants are sheltered in the  six relief camps set up in Kanchanpur Sub-
Division of North Tripura. 
 
3.17.3 Ministry of Home Affairs has been extending grants-in-aid to Govt. of Tripura since 1997-
98 for maintenance of of Brus lodged in various rel ief camps for providing relief items like Rice, 
Ration/Cash dole etc and to Govt. of Mizoram for re habilitation and repatriation of Bru migrants 
since 2004-05.As on date approx. Rs 246 crore has b een released to Govt. of Tripura and Rs 40 
crore to Govt. of Mizoram. 
 
3.17.4 As a result of regular follow-up by Ministry  of Home Affairs with the state Govt. of 
Mizoram and Tripura, the repatriation of Bru (Reang ) refugees started in Nov.2010 and (approx. 
7000-8000 people) have been repatriated as on date. 
 
3.17.5 On a PIL filed in the Supreme Court in W.P ( C) 1/2005 by Akhil Bhartiya Vanvasi Kalyan 
Ashram and in W.P. (C) 694/2007 filed by Indigenous  &Tribal People And Ors, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in its hearing dated 16-01-2015 has s trongly viewed that the steps taken by the 
central Govt. and the State Govts. Regarding Bru re patriation is highly inadequate. The Hon’ble 
Supreme Court also expressed its strong displeasure  on measures taken to improve the living 
conditions of the Brus in the relief camps in Tripu ra. The  Hon’ble Court further directed to take a 
concrete action plan for early repatriation. 
 
3.17.6 Subsequently a meeting was chaired by JS (NE ), MHA on 30 
th Jan, 2015 to work out the 
modalities for early repatriation of remaining Brus  to Mizoram and improving the living 
conditions of Bru refugees in the relief camps. In the meeting a decision was taken to increase the 
free ration to Bru refugees on their repatriation t o Mizoram to 2 years (from the present one year). 
With a view to improve the living condition in the relief camps of Tripura, it was decided to 
enhance /double the scale of assistance in ration items etc. in relief camps of Tripura. 

 
3.17.7 Accordingly the State Govt. of Mizoram submi tted a ‘Detailed Action Plan 2015’ 
according to which all the remaining Bru (Reang) re fugees (about 3455 families comprising 9,264 
adults and 11,446 minors) will be completed by Aug 2015. A Road Map has been laid down 
indicating series of activities starting from ident ification of Bru families in the relief camps, 
arrangement of logistics to the allotment of House-sites etc. to the Bru families in Mizoram during 
the period Feb-Aug 2015.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministr y according to which the repatriation 
would be completed by August, 2015 as per the Detai led Action Plan, 2015. The Committee 
hopes that it would have been completed by August, 2015. The Committee may be given the 
latest status in the matter. 

 
CHPATER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL - DECREASING ALLOCATION O F FUNDS 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.1.1 The Committee notes with serious concern the trend of decreasing allocation of funds to 
North Eastern Council. The substantial cut in alloc ation at RE stages in consecutive years may be 
a result of non-submission/ late submission of Util ization Certificate by State Governments who in 
turn are unable to do so due to severe weather and heavy monsoon that lead to stoppage of work 
in various projects. The Committee also note that t he assessment period for determining 
budgetary allocation at RE stage, coincides with th e immediate aftermath of the longer monsoon 
season in North East Region. In view of the Committee, this period of assessment is not realistic as 
not only NE Region but also whole country except fe w pockets witness monsoon rains; thus 
causing disruption in construction activities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Finance should take a realistic and practical appro ach to the important issue of deciding 
supplementary allocations and revised allocations a nd adopt a liberal approach or may desist 
from making any substantial cut while allocating fu nds at RE stage for schemes and projects 
particularly of North East Region. Alternatively, t he Ministry of DoNER may in consultation with 
North Eastern States, NITI Aayog and Ministry of Finance may explore a different mechanism like 
considering a different time period for Northeast r egion having normal weather for assessment of 
utilization of funds and consequent increase/ decrease in allocation at RE stage. 
(Para 2.3.8 of 186 
th  Report)  
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 The North Eastern Council (NEC) has taken not e of the observations. NEC has been 
seeking higher allocations and would further pursue  the matter for higher allocation for NEC.  
NEC supports the recommendation of the Hon’ble Comm ittee for Ministry of Finance to take a 
realistic and practical approach while deciding allocations at RE stage.  A reference has been made 
to Ministry of Finance in the matter.  It is felt t hat depending upon the ultimate outcome on the 
same, the question of considering the alternate option could be appropriately considered. 
 
Further Observation 
 
4.1.3 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Fina nce will take a considerate decision on 
the request of the Ministry of DoNER for higher all ocation to NEC. The Committee may be 
apprised of the decision as and when it is taken .   
 
4.2 NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL - NON-RELEASE OF FUNDS BY STATE 
GOVERNMENTS 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.2.1 The Committee is disappointed with the issue of non-release of funds by State Governments 
to implementing agencies becoming a major bottlenec k in project implementation and optimal 
fund utilization. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the State Governments must ensure 

timely release of funds to implementing agencies fo r completion of projects without time and cost 
overruns. The Committee further recommends that the monitoring mechanism must also be further 
strengthened by including strict penal provisions f or delay/ non-release of funds on one hand and 
also giving incentives to those States who comply w ith timelines and guidelines in the completion 
of projects. 
(Para 2.3.10 ibid)  
Action Taken 
4.2.2 The NEC has taken note of the recommendations  of the Committee and would take action 
to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism. As advised by the Hon’ble Committee, NEC 
would take up the suggestion regarding incorporatio n of penal provision for delay in release of 
funds by the State Governments to the implementing agencies in the next Plenary Session of the 
NEC.  The aspect of appreciation of good performance would also be taken up therein.   
 
Further Observation: 
 
4.2.3 The Committee desires to be apprised of the f inal decision taken in the matter.  
 
4.3 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORT H EASTERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM - PROCESS OF ALLOCATION OF FUNDS AT RE STAGE  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.3.1 The Committee reiterates its recommendations made in a preceding para No. 2.3.8 that 
there is need to revisit the whole process of alloc ation of funds under Revised Estimates. The 
Committee in this connection notes that the assessm ent period for determining budgetary 
allocations at RE stage, coincides with the immedia te aftermath of monsoon in the country, which 
is even longer in North East Region. In view of the  Committee, this period of assessment is not 
realistic as not only NE Region but also whole coun try except few pockets witness monsoon rains; 
thus causing disruption in construction activities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Finance should take a realistic and practical appro ach to the important issue of deciding 
supplementary allocations and revised allocation wi th a liberal approach before making any 
substantial cut at RE stage for schemes and project s particularly of North East Region. 
Alternatively, the Ministry of DoNER may in consult ation with North East States, NITI Aayog and 
Ministry of Finance may explore a different mechani sm like considering a different time period 
(when there is normal weather in North East Region)  for assessment of utilization of funds and 
consequent increase/decrease in allocation at RE st age. Also the Ministry must continually exhort 
States to ensure timely submission of UCs/requisite  documents for timely release of funds for 
projects. 
(Para 2.8.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.3.2 The observations of the Hon’ble Committee hav e been noted. Ministry of Finance has been 
requested to take a realistic and practical approach while deciding allocations at RE stage.  It is felt 
that depending upon the ultimate outcome on the sam e, the question of considering the alternate 
option could be appropriately considered. 
 
 
 
4.4 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORT H EASTERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM - POOR FUND UTILIZATION  

 
Recommendation  
 
4.4.1 The Committee also notes that while the subst antial cut in allocation is a matter to be 
addressed urgently, however, the poor fund utilizat ion in 2014-15 is a glaring issue that needs to 
be addressed by the Ministry itself in consultation  with the States. While harsh weather may be a 
reason for poor fund utilization before fund alloca tion at RE stage, however, the same cannot be 
an excuse for low utilization afterwards during nor mal weather. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should intensify its efforts to ensure optimal fund utilization. 
(Para 2.8.6 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.4.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been no ted.   
 
Further Observation 
 
4.4.3 The Committee desires that the Ministry must furnish a concrete plan of action to 
ensure optimum fund utilisation.  
 
4.5 NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORT H EASTERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM - NON-RELEASE OF FUNDS BY THE STATE GOVERNMENTS  
 
Recommendation  
4.5.1 The Committee has a similar feeling that such  audit objections in the CAG reports of 
performance audits may also be there in respect of some other NE States. The Committee notes the 
inconsistency between the Ministry’s submission and  the existing NLCPR Guidelines. Moreover, 
the States must not be allowed to withhold funds be yond reasonable period of time. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must effect suitable amendments to incorporate strict 
penal provisions in the NLCPR Guidelines if the Sta tes withhold release of funds for a time 
greater than a maximum acceptable limit. If the Sta tes fail to release funds for more than three 
months then the funds may be reverted back to the M inistry of DONER and NEC and the payment 
may be made directly to the executing agencies bypa ssing the States altogether in case of the 
project where funds are not timely released by the States. The Committee feels that such a strong 
measure is necessary to prevent huge delays in proj ects due to non-release of funds by the States. 
Accordingly the Ministry must apprise the Committee  at the earliest on the action taken on this 
recommendation. 
(Para 2.8.10 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.5.2 As advised by the Hon’ble Committee, the Mini stry would take up the suggestion 
regarding incorporation of penal provision for dela y in release of funds by the State Governments 
to the implementing agencies in the next meeting of  the NLCPR Committee.  The aspects of 
appreciation of good performance are considered.   
 
 
 
Further Observation 
 
4.5.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of th e decisions of the NLCPR Committee 
meeting on the issue. 
 

4.6 SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCI L  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.6.1 The Committee also notes that one project is yet to be completed from among the 42 
sanctioned projects under the package sanctioned in  2003. Non completion of all the projects in a 
long time span of 12 yeas does not present a good p icture. Likewise under the Additional BTC 
Package of Rs. 250 crore, which was announced in Au gust, 2008, only 2 projects out of 21 
projects have been completed. In view of the Commit tee this is a very sorry state of affairs. The 
Committee therefore strongly recommends that all th e projects must be completed in this fiscal 
year. The Ministry must also ensure that the sancti oned   projects do not suffer for want of funds 
and must ensure timely release of funds to complete all the projects at the earliest. 
(Para 2.10.6 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.6.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been no ted.  
 
4.7 NORTH EAST STATES ROAD INVESTMENT PROGRAMME (NE SRIP)-EAP  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.7.1 The Committee is surprised by the huge shortf all in the budgetary allocation as compared 
to the projected demand. It is incomprehensible as to why such low allocation has been made for 
such an important scheme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should urgently pursue 
the Ministry of Finance for enhancing required allo cation in the Supplementary Demands for 
Grants under this head so that the projects do not suffer for the want of funds.  
(Para 2.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.7.2 The suggestions of the Committee have been no ted.  As advised by the Committee, case 
for additional resources would be made at the RE stage. 
 
Further observations 
 
4.7.3 The Committee may be apprised of the demand p rojected by the Ministry for 
additional funds under this head and amount allocated and released.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.8 OTHER PROGRAMMES  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.8.1 The Committee feels that improving infrastruc ture facilities in the border areas of North 
East Region is imperative from connectivity as well  as strategic point of view. Shortage of funds 
must not become a stumbling block for creation of n ew and up-gradation of existing airports in 
NER. The Committee is concerned with the low budget ary allocation which is less than half of the 
projected demand. Moreover, the huge outstanding li abilities of more than Rs. 80.00 crore will 

further affect the implementation of projects. Ther efore, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry must urgently pursue this matter with the Ministry of Finance and seek supplementary 
Grants for meeting the outstanding liabilities as well as the existing project requirements. 
(Para 2.14.3 ibid)  
Action Taken: 
 
4.8.2 The North Eastern Council (NEC) is in full ag reement with the concerns expressed by the 
Committee regarding the infrastructure facilities in the border areas of North Eastern Region. 
 
4.8.3 The improvement and up gradation of the airpo rts in the North Eastern Region is an 
ongoing activity and would continue as per the traf fic movements. The fund provided for 
development of airports in the Region is not suffic ient and additional amount will be sought from 
the Ministry of Finance at RE stage. 
 
4.9 NER LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP) - EAP  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.9.1 The Committee is concerned with the abysmally  low budgetary allocation which is less 
than one-tenth of the projected demand. It is a mat ter of serious concern as to how this project 
will be implemented with such low allocation. The i ssues of livelihood, community development 
and skill development in rural areas of NER cannot be neglected at any cost.  Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry mus t urgently and continually pursue this 
matter with the Ministry of Finance and ask for higher allocation at RE stage.  
(Para 2.15.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
4.9.2 During the financial year of 2014-15, Rs.90 c rore was allocated to the project (NERLP) for 
taking up activities under various components. The requirement of funds for 2015-16 is Rs. 160 
crore, against which only of Rs. 15 crores has been  allocated at BE stage of 2015-16.  With the 
allocation of Rs. 15 crores, no developmental activ ities as designed in the project could be taken 
up except to meet the expenditure of salary and adm inistrative expenses for seven months only. 
Hence, M/DoNER has taken up with Department of Expe nditure for immediate allocation of 
additional funds in the month of April, 2015 itself.  
 
 
 
 
Further Observations 
 
4.9.3 The Committee may be apprised of the demand p rojected by the Ministry for 
additional funds to NERLP and amount sanctioned, released and so far utilized.   
 
4.10 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ASSISTED NORTH EAST ROA D PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT UNIT  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.10.1 The Committee fails to understand as to why out of eight posts in PMU only one has been 
filled. The Committee is disappointed with the way this plan scheme is becoming a victim of 
bureaucratic negligence. It recommends that all the  posts of PMU must be filled within one year 

so as to ensure proper monitoring of projects under  NESRIP. Also, there should not be such short 
fall in the physical and financial targets.  
(Para 2.17.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10.2 Necessary actions are being taken up to fill  the vacant posts of coordinator, consultants and 
programme assistants in the PMU of NESRIP as per due procedures.  
 
Further Observation 
 
4.10.3 The recruitment for vacant posts in the PMU may be completed at the earliest and 
the Committee may be apprised of the latest status of the recruitment. 
 
4.11 TOURISM  
 
Recommendation  
4.11.1 The Committee notes the steps taken by the G overnment in promoting tourism in the North 
East Region. However it is of the considered view t hat information dissemination in an attractive, 
convincing and focused manner is necessary to attra ct potential tourists. In this regard, the 
Committee finds that the efforts of Ministry and To urism Departments of State Government are 
not up to the mark. The Committee feels that, to pu blicize the tourism potential, it is not only 
necessary to inform and sensitise the general publi c but also it is required to take in the loop the 
services of major tour operators and agencies in a focused manner because ultimately it is they 
who prepare tourist routes and design packages for the tourists. There is a necessity to establish 
strong linkages of long term nature with the tour o perators and provide them necessary 
information and facilities for promoting NE tourist routes. 
(Para 3.2.5 ibid) 
Recommendation  
 
4.11.2 The committee is disappointed by the officia l tourism websites of the various NE States. It 
feels that the Government needs to ramp up the vari ous official tourism websites of various NE 
States. It is probably the first point of informati on and sometimes the most definitive one for a 
potential tourist from outside North East. The Comm ittee observes that except one or two, most of 
the official tourism website of NE States are lacki ng on various technical parameters like user 
friendliness, ability of being one-stop portal of a ll information, multi-lingual content, optimization 
in mobile and tablet computer formats, online payme nt portals, various set tour packages and 
inter linkage between different websites and servic e providers. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry must ensure that the o fficial tourism websites of different States 
incorporate these critical features. That is so because to attract tourists from regions like west and 
south India and also from other countries, the cont ent and information has to be multi-lingual. 
The Committee observes that most of the websites ar e not multi-lingual and even in case there is 
multi-lingual option available (like Arunachal Prad esh) the approach is poor and not effective. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that professio nal translators may be hired to create a 
vibrant and comprehensive multi-lingual content for the official tourism  
(Para 3.2.6 ibid)  
Recommendation  
 
4.11.3 The Committee feels that development of tour ism requires NER specific as well as 
integrated outlook. While a NE circuit train is sti ll not possible due to lack of decent rail 
connectivity in the region, however, the efforts fo r the conceptualization and planning for the 
same must be started right away. The Committee reco mmends that a special circuit train by the 

name of ‘North-East Seven Sisters Circuit’ or other such name be conceptualized and planning for 
the same may be started so as to reap the benefits as soon as the capitals of all the NE states are 
connected by the railway network. 
(Para 3.2.7 ibid)  
Recommendation  
 
4.11.4 The Committee is surprised at the exclusion of important Buddhist cities of NER from the 
Buddhist Circuit. It feels that including sites lik e Rumtek, Kalimpong in Sikkim and Tawang, 
Bomdila in Arunachal Pradesh can help increase tour ism prospects in these regions. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must identif y specially focused projects to develop these 
sites and augment their capacity to attract as well  as sustain increased tourist inflow. The 
Ministry must also explore a way to include them in the Buddhist tourist circuit. 
(Para 3.2.8 ibid)  
Action Taken 
 
4.11.5 Ministry of Tourism are in the process of fo rmulating a comprehensive National Tourism 
Policy during 2015.  Ministry of DoNER has already communicated the views of the Hon’ble 
Committee to Ministry of Tourism so that the same are taken into account appropriately by them. 
 
4.12 HIGHER EUDCATION  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.12.1 The Committee is concerned with the trend of  decreasing annual plan allocation to NER 
Central Universities due to which they are unable t o meet their requirements. Moreover, the fact 
that most of the Plan funds are being spent on sala ries is a matter of concern. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the trend of decreasing p lan allocation must be reversed and sufficient 
allocation must be made to the Central Universities  in NER so as to enable them to resolve the 
issues related to physical infrastructure and train ed faculty, comprehensively. Also, the 
Government of India should take an early decision o n the merger of all the previous plan posts of 
XI Plan into non-plan and dissuade from wasting XII  Plan funds for non-plan purposes. The 
Committee also recommends that in order to attract best talent of teachers, incentive scheme may 
be devised for the purpose.  
(Para 3.4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.2 The views of the Committee have been communi cated to Department of Higher Education.  
 
Further Observation 
 
4.12.3 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Human 
Resources Development on the recommendation.   
 
4.13 FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
Recommendation  
 
4.13.1 The Committee notes that States in NER have very few sectors to look forward for creation 
of employment and revenue generation and food proce ssing sector is one of them. However, the 
Government’s decision to delink Central Government Sponsored Scheme of National Mission on 
Food Processing (NMFP) from the Central Government funds will be too harsh for the NER 

States and they may not be able to sustain the Sche me on their own due to lack of technical know-
how. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the M inistry must argue for continuance of 
Central Government support under NMFP to NE States at least for the remaining 12 th  Plan years.  
(Para 3.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.13.2 Views of the Committee have been communicate d to Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries.  
 
Further Observation 
 
4.13.3 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Food 
Processing on the recommendation. 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
 
TOTAL REVENUE AND CAPITAL OUTLAY - FUND UTILISATION 
 
 The Committee would like to know the concrete step s taken by all the line Ministries 
in the way of enhancing their capacity for utilization of funds to achieve the targeted results. 
(Para 2.2.5)  
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL  
 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure on observi ng the declining trend in the Five 
Year Plan allocation to NEC which has limited NEC's  capacity to take up new projects. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry must frame guidel ines for appropriate earmarking of a 
certain part of funds, at least 40% every year for new projects. It must also be cautious in its 
project selection mechanism so as to avoid taking u p projects having huge throw forward 
costs and must ensure timely project implementation . The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry of DoNER  may take up the matter of shortfall of actual 
allocation with the Ministry of Finance and demand higher allocations in future under this 
head. 
(Para 3.1.3) 
CONSTRUCTION / IMPROVEMENT OF ROADS OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE 
 
 The Ministry’s reply was silent on the Committee’s  recommendation that 
identification of other projects under the Head ‘Co nstruction/Improvement of Roads of 
Economic Importance’ must now begin. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that 
the Ministry must now begin identification of other such projects under this head.  
(Para 3.2.3)  
LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETI NG 
CORPORATION (NERAMAC) 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that the M inistry of DoNER should not 
shrug off its responsibility to ensure revival of f ood processing units on the pretext of 
seasonal nature of food items. The Committee is of the view that a holistic and integrated 
plan is required to ensure sustainable operations.    The Committee in this regard suggests 
that in the short run, to counter seasonal nature o f the food items, the Ministry can establish 
cold storage centre and warehouses.  Moreover, mult iple production cycles can be promoted 
through measures like higher Minimum Support Prices  and assured minimum procurement 
with the cooperation of Food Corporation of India. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the concrete holistic plan including time schedule devised to revive these processing units.  
(Para 3.3.3)  
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORTH EA STERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the monitor ing mechanism should be more 
robust and the Ministry should look into all the pr ojects facing a delay of more than two 
years and prepare a detailed action plan containing  concrete measures to fast track delayed 
projects with a practical yet strict timeline for a chieving completion of all such projects 
without further time overruns.    
(Para 3.4.3)  
NON LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR) – CENTRAL 

 
 The Committee is not convinced with the vague repl y of the Ministry and would 
prefer a detailed action plan as to how the pace of  the projects is proposed to be accelerated 
and whether Ministry has set up a dedicated time line for completion of the projects 
(Para 3.5.3)  
 
SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL 
 
 The Committee feels that this is a classic case of  bureaucratic red-tapism.   The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must impress  upon the State Government for 
early release of the funds.         
(Para 3.6.4)  
NORTH EAST STATES ROAD INVESTMENT PROGRAMME (NESRIP)-EAP 
 
 The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to work out a robust mechanism to 
monitor the pace of work in the States before relea sing the projected funds, as it would be of 
no use to allow the States to keep the funds with t hem when there is no matching progress in 
the targeted work. 
(Para 3.7.3) 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
 The Committee is not happy with the decline in exp enditure in 2014-15 as compared 
to 2013-14 even if the focus is now on long term co urses which may have affected the results. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should i nfuse more funds into this scheme 
and work for its expansion so as to provide better and higher number of employment 
opportunities to NE youth.        
(Para 3.8.4)  
OTHER PROGRAMMES 
 
 The Committee, during its visit to North Eastern R egion visited the Guwahati airport 
and had a first-hand experience of newly constructe d but yet unutilised hangar. The 
Committee was given to understand that the reasons for no airlines utilizing the hangar 
facility was the high maintenance cost of hangar wh ich airlines do not want to bear. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry of DoNER must try  to coordinate with various airlines 
and try to formulate a scheme, in coordination with  the Ministry of Civil Aviation, for 
viability gap funding of maintenance and operationa l costs of hangar facility and further 
incentivise the private airlines to utilize the said facility.  
(Para 3.9.5)  
NER LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP) - EAP 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry, pursua nt to receiving of additional 
funds, if any, at RE stage, must intensify its effo rts for implementation of NERLP and leave 
no stone unturned in achieving the set targets.     
(Para 3.10.6) 
 
 
 
SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADATION IN 
NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 

 The Committee, however, feels that the Ministry ne eds to further strengthen its 
technical wing to have alert monitoring mechanism s o that the project implementation 
mechanism is effective enough for entailing perceptible outcomes.   
(Para 3.11.3) 
NE ROADS CORPORATION 
 
 The Committee feels that the Government is not tak ing up the infrastructure issues of 
NER on a priority basis causing delay in implementa tion of related schemes inordinately. 
The Committee fails to understand as to why the EFC  meeting has still not taken place. At 
this pace, it seems that even this year's budget as  well will have to be surrendered. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Governmen t must urgently convene the EFC 
meeting and complete all the pending formalities so  as to roll out the North-East Road 
Sector Development Scheme in the current financial year itself. The Department of 
Expenditure should take immediate action to convene EFC meeting at the earliest.     
                       (Para 3.12.4)  
ORGANIC FARMING IN NE STATES 
 
 The Committee takes notes of the fact that even in  FY 2015-16 the Ministry has failed 
to begin implementation of Organic farming scheme and utilise allocated funds.   This points 
towards an excessive bureaucratisation in the Gover nment with no concern or urgency for 
implementation of schemes. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the Ministry of 
DoNER may urgently hold a meeting with all the conc erned line Ministries and State 
Governments and urge them to fast track submission of their comments on the draft Cabinet 
Note.    
(Para 3.13.4) 
SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF KARBI A NGLONG 
AUTONOMOUS TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (KAATC) 
 
 Though the Ministry has provided a list of project s with funds spent on them in FY 
2014-15, it however, fails to establish and justify  a demand for Rs. 70 crores in BE 2015-16. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry must pursue and 
convince the Ministry of Finance for allocation of required funds by giving details of all the 
ongoing projects and a  rationale  and precise estimation of required funds.    
(Para 3.14.3)  
TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR 
 
 The Committee observes that the higher utilisation  of funds in excess of budgetary 
allocation for NEIIPP-2007 in 12 
th  FYP is a good indicator of the success of this pol icy. 
However, sudden suspension of fresh registration is  disappointing and casts a grim shadow 
on the resolve to develop industry in NER.. The Com mittee recommends that an early 
decision may be taken on resumption of fresh regist rations. Additional funds may be 
allocated for the scheme.  
(Para 3.15.4)  
 
 
 
EXTINCTION OF MANY TRIBAL LANGUAGES OF NORTH EAST REGION  
 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Culture on 
the recommendation.   
(Para 3.16.3) 
 

BRU TRIBAL FAMILIES’ REPATRIATION AND REHABILITATION IN MIZORAM 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry acco rding to which the repatriation 
would be completed by August, 2015 as per the Detai led Action Plan, 2015. The Committee 
hopes that it would have been completed by August, 2015. The Committee may be given the 
latest status in the matter. 
(Para 3.17.8)  
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL - DECREASING ALLOCATION OF FUNDS 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance w ill take a considerate decision on 
the request of the Ministry of DoNER for higher all ocation to NEC. The Committee may be 
apprised of the decision as and when it is taken .   
(Para 4.1.3) 
 
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL - NON-RELEASE OF FUNDS BY STA TE 
GOVERNMENTS 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the final decision taken in the matter.  
(Para 4.2.3)  
 
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORTH EA STERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM - POOR FUND UTILIZATION  
  
The Committee desires that the Ministry must furnis h a concrete plan of action to 
ensure optimum fund utilisation.  
(Para 4.4.3) 
 
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES FOR NORTH EA STERN 
REGION AND SIKKIM - NON-RELEASE OF FUNDS BY THE STATE GOVERNMENTS  
  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the deci sions of the NLCPR Committee 
meeting on the issue. 
(Para 4.5.3) 
NORTH EAST STATES ROAD INVESTMENT PROGRAMME (NESRIP)-EAP  
 The Committee may be apprised of the demand projec ted by the Ministry for 
additional funds under this head and amount allocated and released.   
(Para 4.7.3) 
NER LIVELIHOOD PROJECT (NERLP) - EAP 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the demand projec ted by the Ministry for 
additional funds to NERLP and amount sanctioned, released and so far utilized.   
(Para 4.9.3) 
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ASSISTED NORTH EAST ROAD PRO JECT 
MANAGEMENT UNIT  
 The recruitment for vacant posts in the PMU may be  completed at the earliest and 
the Committee may be apprised of the latest status of the recruitment. 
(Para 4.10.3) 
HIGHER EUDCATION 
 

 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Human 
Resources Development on the recommendation.   
(Para 4.12.3) 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Food 
Processing on the recommendation. 
(Para 4.13.3) 
 
 
 
 ******** 