PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 138
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13  FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-267

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—15
Chapter-I
Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1—3
Chapter-II
Presentation on the Bill .................................................................................. 4—6
Chapter-III
Issues raised by Committee and comments
of Ministry thereon .......................................................................................... 7—13
Chapter-IV
Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill ................................................... 14—15
4. O
BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................. 16—18
5. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF C OMMITTEE .............................................................. 19—28
6. A NNEXURES — The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 ...... 29—35

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2008)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sanjay Raut
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Prof. K.M. Kadermohideen
21. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
22. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
23. Shri Sachin Pilot
24. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
*28. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma
@29. V acant
#30. V acant
31. Vacant
(i)
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2008.
@ Consequent upon change in nomination as Member and appointment as the Chairman of DRPSC on Agriculture,
Shri Mohan Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th December, 2008.
# Consequent upon vacation of his seat in Lok Sabha as a result of his election to Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh,
Shri Ajit Jogi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 26th December, 2008.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report on the Central Industrial Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 (Annexure I) .
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the Central Industrial Security Force
(Amendment) Bill, 2008, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008 and pending
therein, to the Committee on 9th January, 2009 for examination and report by 15th February, 2009.
3. The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 seeks to consolidate the law
to regulate the deployment of CISF for security of private sector undertakings and joint ventures
on cost reimbursement basis. The objective of the Bill are proposed to be achieved by amending
Sections 3, 4, 7, 10 and 14 of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968.
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 16th January, 2009 heard the presentation of the
Union Home Secretary on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon.
5. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on
24th January, 2009.
6. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 10th February, 2009 and
adopted the same.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable
contributions made by the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and also the Ministry of Law
and Justice who deposed before it and facilitated the Committee in formulating its views on the
Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
10 February, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
* See Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 45658 dated 12th January, 2009.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION
1.0 The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 seeks to further amend the
Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 to enable the Government to provide for deployment
of CISF for security of private sector undertakings and joint ventures on cost reimbursement basis
and in Indian Embassies or UN Peacekeeping Missions. The Bill also makes enabling provisions for
administrative convenience by keeping a generic provision in the Act so that changes in the ranks
and designations can be effected through notifications. Presently, the management of a PSU has
to give only one month’s notice for withdrawal of CISF which is proposed to be enhanced to three
months as considerable amount of logistics and administrative arrangements are involved in the
withdrawal of CISF.
The background
1.1 The Committee was informed that the CISF was formed by an Act of Parliament in 1968
to provide for better protection and security to Public Sector Undertakings after a devastating fire
in HEC, Ranchi in 1964 in which sabotage was suspected. Under the CISF Act, 1968 the force
provides security to Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) on full reimbursement basis. The
Act had been amended on three occasions. By an amendment of the Principal Act in 1983, the
CISF was declared as an Armed Force of the Union. The amendment made in the Act in 1989
made a provision for protection of the personnel of the PSUs as well. The further amendment of
the Act in 1999 enabled the Central Government for deployment of CISF in industrial organizations
owned or funded by the Central Government and to entrust any other duty to the force and also
made provision for consultancy to private sector in security matters.
1.1.1 The Minis try of Home Affairs in their background note stated that under the CISF
Act, 1968, the CISF provides security to Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) on full
reimbursement basis. Besides PSUs, the CISF also provides security to most of the airports, critical
and vital, nuclear power and space installations, major sea-ports, thermal and hydel projects,
petroleum and natural gas installations, industries including mines in Left Wing Extremism (LWE)
affected areas, VIPs, Delhi Metro, important Government buildings and Samadhis. The force was
also deployed on internal security, disaster management and election related duties. Present Act,
however, does not allow deployment of CISF in private sector industry.
1.1.2 The security scenario in the country has under-gone a sea-change during the last few years.
In view of the growing threats due to terrorism and extremism, the private sector has been making
demands for security of their establishments through CISF on cost reimbursement basis. Many vital
industries in the Private Sector and Joint Ventures Sectors are producing goods and rendering
services, which have contributed to the scientific and technological growth of the country and have
also been playing significant role in developing machinery, equipment and gadgetry of strategic
importance. Contribution by the private sector in these fields has substantially contributed in the
economic growth and the rising status of India in the world in the recent years. At the same time,
country’s economic growth and all-round development has created vulnerabilities from forces and
elements inimical to the country in terms of efforts to destabilize our economy through subversive
and terrorist activities. Many of the major cities, most recently Mumbai, have suffered terrorist

2
attacks, bomb blasts, etc. which aim at terrorising the people at large and shake their confidence
in the political system. The looming threat of the terror also shakes the confidence of the private
sector and the investor in the economy.
1.1.3 The CISF is already providing consultancy on security aspects to the private sector.
However, in view of the drastic change in the security scenario of the country, it is now proposed
to amend the relevant sections of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 to enable the
deployment of CISF for security of private sector undertakings and joint ventures on cost
reimbursement basis.
Examination of the Bill
1.2 The Committee in its sitting held on 16th January, 2009 took cognizance of the reference
of the Bill. The Chairperson of the Committee informed the Members that while Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha has referred the Bill to the Committee on the 9th January, 2009 the Hon’ble President
has promulgated an Ordinance on 10th January, 2009 to amend Central Industrial Security Force
Act, 1968 to bring the proposed amendments in operation. The Committee criticized the action of
the executive in promulgating an ordinance when the Bill was pending in Parliament and Hon’ble
Chairman has referred the same in this Standing Committee for examination and report.
1.2.1 The Committee observed that the process of reference of the Bill to DRPSC for detailed
examination and report thereon, that so, within the stipulated short span of time and the
simultaneous executive business of issuance of Ordinance for immediate operationalisation of the
provisions of the Bill, without any pressing need, appeared “as illogical and inconsistent” step giving
impression with the purpose of circumventing the Parliamentary process and procedure.
1.2.2 On this issue, the Committee recapitulated the observation of the earlier DRPSC on Home
Affairs (under the Chairmanship of Shri Pranab Mukherjee) in during the course of examination of
the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998, which is as under:—
“A Bill replacing an Ordinance should not be referred to the Standing Committee and asked
to submit its Report within a short time as that would amount to taking proforma approval
of the Committee inasmuch a particular system or scheme had already been brought into
operation by promulgating the Ordinance.”
1.2.3 In this context, the present Committee also took note of the observations of the erstwhile
DRPSC on Home Affairs (under the Chairmanship of Shri M.M. Jacob) made in its Sixth Report
on the Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993, wherein that Committee took note of the promulgation
of an Ordinance by Hon’ble President on the 20th September, 1993 to provide for the constitution
of a National Human Rights Commission and State Human Rights Commissions in States, whilst
the Bill was under active consideration of the Committee. That Committee had discussed at length
the position arising out of the promulgation of the Ordinance during the pendency of the Bill with
the Committee and decided to go ahead with the presentation of its Report on the Bill to the
Parliament, despite the promulgation of the Ordinance*.
1.2.4 The concerned Committee also recapitulated various instances when Bills have been referred
to DRPSC for examination and report thereon, before/after the issuance of Ordinance viz., the
Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998; the Electricity Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997, the Lotteries
(Regulation) Bill, 1998; the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 1998; the Essential Commodities
(Amendment) Bill, 1998; and the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008.
* Plese see Para 10; page-3-4 of the Committee’s Sixth Report on the Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993 presented
to both the Houses of Parliament on 6th December, 1993.

3
1.2.5 The Committee unanimously decided to go ahead with the examination of the Central
Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 referred to it, despite the promulgation of an
Ordinance on the subject.
1.2.6 The Committee, however, desired that the Home Secretary should explain the pressing
circumstances which necessitated promulgation of the CISF (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 on
10th January, 2009, after reference of the Bill to the Committee.

4
CHAPTER-II
PRESENTATION ON THE BILL
2.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 16th January, 2009 heard the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the Bill. The Home Secretary, whilst explaining the circumstances under which the
Ordinance was promulgated on 10 January, 2009, referred the background note on the Bill as
furnished by the Ministry, the relevant portion which is as under:—
“Keeping in view the urgency involved due to various incidents of terrorist attacks and with
a view to reassure the private industry of the Government’s readiness to provide them
security, Home Minister gave notice to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Secretary General,
Rajya Sabha on December 15, 2008 of his intention:
(i) to move for leave to introduce the Bill during the current session of the Rajya Sabha;
(ii) to introduce the Bill;
(iii) to waive the reference of the Bill to the Department-related Standing Committee; and
(iv) to waive the provision requiring copies of the Bill to be made available for use of the
Members at least two days before the day on which the Bill is proposed to be
introduced under direction 19 B (1).
Though the Bill to amend the CISF Act, 1968 was introduced by the Home Minister in the
Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2008, it could not be passed.
2.2 As the Parliament was not in session and the President was satisfied that the circumstances
existed which rendered it necessary for her to take immediate action to give effect to the
provisions of the said Bill, the President has, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1)
of article 123 of the Constitution, promulgated the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2009 on January 10,2009.”
2.3 The Home Secretary drawing the attention of the Committee, to the discussion held during
the examination of Demands-for-Grants (2008-09) wherein he had commented on the issue of
security providing to the private sector in the context of naxalism. The Home Secretary added as
under:—
“While it is not possible to have the CISF security in every private sector unit even if there
is an enabling provision, there may be some critical sectors where this kind of thing can
be provided and we are looking at the possibility of how we can provide an enabling clause
to do this. Now, in the wake of the attacks in Mumbai where basically apart from the
Railway station premises, which is a public premises, there were two major private sector
units which had been attacked and which have a certain degree of importance in terms of
reflecting the growth, development and other aspects of the country.”
2.4 As regards the immediate necessity of the Bill, the Home Secretary further added as
under:—
“One of the intentions also was to create a degree of assurance among the people that we
are going to take measures across the board, including measures of this nature where
governmental security can be provided to critical private sector units.
4

5
2.5 On the issue of promulgation of the Ordinance after reference of the Bill to the Committee
by Hon’ble Chairman, the Home Secretary stated that the Ministry was not aware of that fact. We
observed as follows:—
“We were of course not aware that when the process of the Ordinance was going on,
which was again for the same reason. Basically, there was a feeling that we need to do
things, ...aimed at creating a sense of assurance. So, it was that background which also
informed the ‘proposition of issuing an Ordinance. Now, we were not aware of it at that
point in time, because, for the Ordinance, we went through the Cabinet approval process
and, in fact, when the Cabinet approval was sought, we had also sought, apart from the
Ordinance, an approval that we will move official amendments which means that we are
not saying that the Bill has gone for or we did not say that we will withdraw this and then
replace the Ordinance with a separate Bill and so on. We did not. We were not aware of
it because of the Cabinet approval; and whatever is done after that, in terms of the
Ordinance going to the Hon. President and so on, takes its own process. We were also not
aware of the other developments that had taken place in terms of the reference of the Bill
and the dates and so on. There was first the idea of wanting to see that the Bill could pass
through Parliament after certain waivers. When that could not become possible, it was for
the same reasons that the Ordinance was promulgated.”
2.6 The Committee, while taking note of the explanation of the Ministry of Home Affairs, felt
that this situation could have been avoided, had the Ministry been in touch with the Offices of
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha/Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to keep itself at abreast of any
development regarding reference of the Bill to DRPSC on Home Affairs. To this, the Home
Secretary replied that the proposal for Cabinet approval was moved on 31st December, 2008. The
Cabinet approved it on 2nd January, 2009 and by that date, the Bill was not referred to the DRPSC
on Home Affairs.
2.7 The Home Secretary then elaborated the main components of the amendments which are
as under:
(i) enable deployment of CISF in joint venture and private sector undertakings;
(ii) generic clause for rank structure for supervisory officers to avoid frequent
amendments;
(iii) enhancing the notice period for withdrawal of CISF from one month to three months;
and
(iv) enabling deployment of CISF outside India.
2.8 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in a powerpoint presentation, dwelt upon the
following points:—
(i) Heightened threat perception after terrorist attack at Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, and recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai etc. has necessitated the piloting of
the Bill for incorporating some enabling provisions in the CISF Act, 1968 for
administrative convenience;
(ii) CISF has been entrusted with the security of Airports, important monuments (including
Taj Mahal based on orders of Supreme Court in 2002), Government buildings, VIP
security (SSG), Delhi Metro Rail Corporation and UN Mission in Haiti;
(iii) As of now, CISF is deployed in 189 PSUs, 49 Government Buildings, 57 Airports and
33 other units like Delhi Metro, Monuments, Samadhis etc.;

6
(iv) CISF consultancy wing is ISO certified which has provided consultancies to 63 public
and private sector units, i.e. security consultancy to 24 units, fire consultancy to 9
units and combined security and fire consultancy to 30 units;
(v) CISF is not deployed in battalion/coy form, except six Reserve Battalions. Posts are
sanctioned on the basis of PSU location, layout etc., which may not conform to coy
structure;
(vi) Induction is made by using Reserve Battalion, followed by recruitment and training
against new posts, and the infrastructure is provided by client units;
(vii) Request for induction of CISF is examined in terms of priority and threat perception
which is followed by joint survey for assessment of manpower, equipment and
logistics;
(viii) Approval of MHA for induction, and creation of posts, deployment using Reserve
Battalions, followed by recruitment and training against new posts; and
(ix) Ceiling of strength has been raised to 1,45,000 for the period upto 2011; review of
strength is proposed to be done in 2011.

7
CHAPTER-III
ISSUES RAISED BY COMMITTEE AND COMMENTS OF MINISTRY THEREON
3.0 The Committee in its sitting held on 16th January, 2009 heard the presentation of the Home
Secretary on the Bill. During the course of the presentation, the Members of the Committee raised
certain queries pertaining to the provisions and implications of the Bill. The issues raised, replies
of the Home Secretary and Committee’s observation/recommendation thereon, are given in the
succeeding paragraphs:—
ISSUE
(i) Recruitment procedure and existing strength in CISF
3.1 Several queries were made by Members of the Committee in relation to the procedure of
recruitment in CISF and the existing strength of the Force.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.1.1 The Home Secretary elaborating the recruitment procedure and existing strength in the CISF,
stated that unlike the other Central Para Military Forces where at any given point of time the strength
was fixed and a certain number of battalions were raised, there is no fixed strength at any given point
of time in CISF due to the pattern of its recruitment. He also stated that approval of the ceiling within
which posts would be created, depending upon the demand, was being obtained for CISF. He further
added that such ceiling was increased from around 93,000 to 1,10,000 personnel and the same has
now been further increased to 1,45,000 to meet the requirement.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.1.2 The Committee noted that after the enactment of the Central Industrial Security
Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008, there would be a considerable increase in the strength of the
CISF. The Committee has been given to understand that there is stagnation in certain
cadres and resultant resentment in the force. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that
efforts should be made to increase the promotional avenues in all the cadres of CISF in
general and in the affected cadres in particular, so that the motivational level of its
personnel remain at its peak always.
ISSUE
(ii) Security Audit in Private Installations
3.2 The Committee raised the issue as to whether any request from a private company to
provide CISF security had been received by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and, if so, whether any
security audit had been made in regard to security requirement in the private sector. The Committee
also desired to know whether the present ceiling of 1,45,000 would be sufficient to meet the
requirement of the current demand from private installations.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.2.1 The Home Secretary replied that the Government had received requests from various
companies, like Infosys, and other IT C ompanies, Biocon, National Stock Exchange, Ambuja
Cements, Jindal Steel and Power, Tata Steel, Reliance Energy, Reliance Petroleum, JayPee Group,
7

8
etc. It was also stated that a security audit to assess the security requirement and upgrading their
protective cover was underway. The security audit would also cover oil refineries located near the
coastal ports, stock exchanges and big hotels in metros and beaches frequented by foreign tourists.
The Committee was also informed that on receipt of the requisition from the private sector, ajoint
survey would be done to have a security audit especially to take stock of the requirement for
deployment of CISF. It was, however, added that the final decision regarding the deployment of
the forces would remain with the Ministry of Home Affairs.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.2.2 The Committee feels that the Government should have undertaken security audit of
the installations/industries in the private sector, prior to the introduction of the Bill, as the
same would have given the right assessment of the quantum of deployment of CISF for
providing security coverage in private and joint sectors. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government may conduct an initial comprehensive security audit for
private sector before deployment of CISF.
ISSUE
(iii) Change in the Behavioural Pattern of CISF
3.3 The Committee felt that there would be temperamental and attitudinal changes in the CISF
personnel on their posting in the private and joint sectors which may cause heart burning and
bitterness due to posting of some personnel in private sector in big cities vis-a-vis posting in public
sector situated in some remote areas or areas having law and order problems such as naxalism
infected areas. Some Members felt that every CISF personnel would prefer a leading private sector
company to public sector enterprise because the environment and facilities of private sector viz.
high perks, accommodation, transport facilities, medical facilities and study facilities for their
siblings, etc, would always induce a personnel to work in such tempting environment, leading to
several requests for posting of choice. They, therefore, suggested that there could be a separate
battalion of CISF for outsourcing and providing security to the private sector.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.3.1 Replying to the Committee’s query, the Home Secretary stated as under:—
“There may also be issues about their feeling about being relatively deprived in terms of
allowances, in terms of getting much better facilities, conditions, etc. at one end, and at
another end that could lead to some problems within the administration and even
management problems within the CISF. Now, of course, that is something, which the CISF
needs to examine because if you look at the policy, we are always trying to see that there
is a certain amount of rotation between different kinds of duties and I don’t know whether
it will really be very practicable...I think this problem we should take note of as a
possibility, which needs to be addressed within the management systems, within the policies
for rotation of the force between different kinds of duties, which may be in the private
sector or the public sector or in government duty. The point raised by the Hon. Member
is extremely important. We will take note of that specifically and we would request the
CISF to specifically deal with this matter to see how we can do it”.
As regards the suggestion for raising a separate battalion, the Home Secretary deliberated upon the
issue as under:—
“Now, some very relevant points have been mentioned that the conditions of deployment
and employment and things of that nature are likely to be different from what it would be
where CISF personnel are deployed in the protection of a Government building or a public
sector unit and so on...but I have apprehensions that if we were to raise a separate

9
battalion, etc., there would be difficulties and that itself would create more problems. I
think the best way of managing it is through rotational system and the policy where most
of the force is exposed to different type of duties that they are supposed to do and which
should also be taken care of by training curricula that are in force”.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.3.2 The Committee is of the view that there would be a natural inclination amongst the
CISF personnel to seek lucrative postings in the private sector . Therefore, there is need for
putting in place a suitable personnel policy in the CISF to impart the required re-
orientation to its personnel in the wake of the new areas of deployment, so that their
devotion to duty and commitment to serve the nation remain at its peak always.
ISSUE
(iv) Cost Reimbursement
3.4 Some Members of the Committee desired to know the details of the components of the
costs to be charged from the private sector/joint sector in lieu of providing CISF security coverage
and methodology of the billing system and whether the Government proposed to levy equal charges
for both the private sector and joint venture industries.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.4.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs replied that the reimbursement cost would include defraying
the cost of the training and other things which go into the raising of a force and no element of
profit is involved. The Home Secretary, elaborating the concept of “cost-reimbursement” further
added as under:—
“Now the reimbursement cost, really speaking, would mean defraying the cost of the
training and other things, which go into the raising of a force, and no element of profit
is involved. Now when the Government under an Act is going to provide for a force of
the Union, the good issue to be considered would be whether we look at this as an exercise
of the sovereign function of the State or should we look at it by something plus because
we are going to provide service to the private sector. Sir, I would not be able to respond
to this immediately at this point in time. We would examine this matter and I think this is
a matter on which a policy decision needs to be taken because there is a clear distinction
between what we are doing as a sovereign function of the State. Now whether there should
be a separate payment for it, it is something that we would examine”.
The Home Secretary further added that the issue was basically whether the Government should
have a differential reimbursement policy, which should to be seen in the light of an understanding
in all kinds of functions to be entrusted in terms of sovereign responsibilities for any Government.
Responding to the query, the Home Secretary stated that the cost would be charged three months
in advance and would also include the service tax liability.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.4.2 The Committee is of the considered view that Government should formulate a
comprehensive billing system for charging the costs from the private/joint sector which
must include, among others, all cost-component viz. medical facilities, pension and gratuity,
in lieu of providing CISF security coverage. Government should ensure that it does not
incur any expenditure, direct or indirect, for security coverage provided in any private
installation. In any case the cost for providing CISF protection to any Private industrial

10
house must not be less than the cost for providing security protection to Government owned
industrial houses, P.S.Us. and Government establishments. Private industrial houses should
not be allowed to seek the CISF protection in order to save on benefits like provident fund,
gratuity, retirement benefits, ESIC, etc, by suspending, terminating services of personnel
already employed by them. The Committee desires that early action may be taken to
examine the issue, as assured by Home Secretary.
ISSUE
(v) Inclusion of Co-operative Sector in the ambit of CISF Security
3.5 Some Members felt that since CISF coverage is proposed to be extended to private sector,
co-operative sector may also be brought under the extended coverage, so that the latter may not
be deprived of this facility.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.5.1 R eplying to the query, the Home Secretary responded as under:-
“I will not be able to respond to it immediately. I have taken note of this point. Before we
came in, we were ourselves discussing this issue in the context of requests made by
IFFCO. Now, there are certain cooperatives, which are, in a manner of speaking,
Government cooperatives. There are other cooperatives which are pure cooperatives. So,
we have taken note of that. We will, certainly, examine it”.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.5.2 The Committee is of the view that since the Government is extending the security
cover of CISF to the private sector, it would be appropriate if the extended coverage could
also include cooperative sector, as there are some big industries in that sector, which are
also contributing to the national economic growth and development. The Committee
therefore urges upon the Government to examine this aspect.
ISSUE
(vi) Criteria for Selecting Private Sector installations and joint ventures
3.6 Some Members sought to know the criteria for selecting specific installations in the private
sector and joint venture and the factors, which would decide whether a particular installation would
qualify for getting CISF cover.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.6.1 The Home Secretary replied that the Ministry had done the following prioritization on the
basis of which priority is decided for providing CISF cover:—
(i) In the first priority, comes sectors like power, atomic energy, space, airports, science
and technology, which could, perhaps, now be stretched to include Information
Technology, not an isolated unit here and there, but information technology as such;
(ii) The second priority includes some of the major units in the Naxalite or insurgency-
affected areas; and
(iii) The third category says ‘Others’, which may not be getting reflected in the priority units
but, in a given situation, could be given security.
The Home Secretary further stated that with the proposed inclusion of private/joint sector in the ambit
of CISF security, the Ministry was harping upon re-prioritization, a re-examination exercise, with a
view to have a re-look into the matter. Even otherwise, the Ministry was having a regular exercise

11
of identification of ‘Vital Areas’ (V A) and ‘Vital Points’ (VP). This exercise was being done on a
regular basis even by the intelligence agencies to identify where the kind of vulnerability existed. He
further stated that in wake of terrorists’ attacks and in light of the requests and demands coming
from the private sector, the Ministry was revisiting the whole issue of prioritization. However, he
clarified that each and every private sector unit of any kind would not be given the CISF protection
because provision for providing CISF cover had to be selective on the basis of the principle of ‘VA ’
and ‘VP’ exercise to be determined by the intelligence related criteria.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.6.2 The Committee agrees with the submission of the Home Secretary about the need for
re-examining the criteria for selecting the units in private and joint sector for providing
CISF protection. The Committee recommends that the criteria that may be finalized for
providing the CISF protection, should be scientific, reasonable and transparent, based on the
ground realities viz. the threat perception, security and integrity of the country.
ISSUE
(vii) Capability of CISF Personnel in preventing cyber and digital crimes in IT Sector
3.7 Some Members referred to the occurrence of cyber crime in digital/wireless form and
sought to know the preparedness of CISF personnel in preventing such crime.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.7.1 The Home Secretary responded to the query by stating that the deployment of CISF would
be for the physical security of a particular area of an IT company. While acknowledging the
existence of cyber terrorism and variety of other crimes, he pointed out that MHA in co-ordination
with the Ministry of Communications and IT, was looking at all such aspects.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.7.2 The Committee feels that while the CISF would be entrusted with physical protection
and security of the Vital Areas and Vital Points in a company, the cyber related crimes
should also be appropriately addressed. If necessary, training may be given to CISF
personnel and setting up of a separate IT Unit may be considered.
ISSUE
(viii) Proper training to CISF personnel
3.8 Some Members wondered whether the CISF personnel were adequately trained,
commensurate to their proposed role in the private and joint sectors, in case of chemical or
biological attack.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.8.1 The Home Secretary replied that the Ministry was trying to redesign the training curricula
and suitable amendments would be made in SOPs to incorporate an orientation programme. The
Home Secretary added as under:—
“So far as training is concerned, the training curriculum for all the forces, including
CISF, is being continuously upgraded. Chemical and biological warfare etc. type of threats:
that is a very specific area of training for which the paramilitary forces are being trained
through these National Disaster Response Battalions, where the CISF has got this particular
responsibility...not only that, in the NDRF, we are giving battalions by way of rotation. So,
a member of the force would stay in the NDRF for five years and, then, a new member
would go there. So as part of the process, a large part of the force is, naturally, getting
trained for those purposes.”

12
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.8.2 The Committee noted the response of the Home Secretary.
ISSUE
(ix) Endowing CISF with latest weaponry and technology to enhance their preparedness
3.9 Some Members enquired whether the CISF personnel have the latest technology to combat
the onslaught of terrorists and whether the CISF have anti-aircraft guns or helicopters to protect
the establishment in a quick response situation.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.9.1 The Home Secretary replied that the Ministry was trying to change the training curricula
and suitable amendments would be made in SOPs to incorporate an orientation programme. The
Home Secretary further replied as under:—
“In so far as anti-aircraft guns are concerned, there is no Para-Military Force of
the Union, which keeps these. These are squarely within the relevant control of the
Armed Forces, i.e. the Air Force, and so on. As regards the helicopters, this is a static
deployment which is made in a unit”.
The Home Secretary further added that in case of emergent situation requiring deployment of
battalion armed with anti-aircraft guns and helicopters, there is a provision to make a requisition
for deployment of army and air force to deal with such situation. He further apprised that the
Government is contemplating to establish ‘regional hubs’ of NSG to expedite the movement of
commandos. He added that anti-aircraft guns and helicopters cannot be provided to the CISF or
any other para-military force.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.9.2 Since the CISF is already providing security to strategic public sector installations
including atomic and nuclear energy installations and with the proposed amendment in the
Act, CISF would also be providing security cover to vital units of private sector and joint
venture, the Committee feels that it would be appropriate to provide helicopters to CISF for
quick response to meet any emergent situation. The Committee accordingly recommends to
the Government examine this aspect.
ISSUE
(x) Possibility of use of CISF personnel in resolving industrial disputes
3.10 Some Members expressed apprehension that the private/joint sector managements may use
the CISF personnel for resolving industrial disputes, labour strike, land settlement, local disputes etc.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.10.1 Replying to the query, the Home Secretary clarified that the CISF personnel deployed in the
private sector units would not be used in industrial disputes as that were an area of the Labour
Department and the local police who would deal with such issues. The duty of the CISF was to
protect the assets and the employees of the company/units of private and joint sector. The Home
Secretary assured the Committee that if necessary, suitable modifications could be made in
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to avoid involvement of CISF personnel in industrial disputes
and strikes etc.

13
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.10.2 The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs that
industrial dispute, land dispute and other local issue should be resolved by the concerned
State Authorities through tripartite machineries. The Committee, however, recommends
that CISF should strictly be deployed to protect the installations and machineries and
production only and will not be deployed by the industry houses to interfere into industrial
dispute, land dispute and other local issue.
ISSUE
(xi) Definite and defined role and responsibility of CISF personnel
3.11 The Committee noted that the deployment of CISF personnel in the public and private
sector establishments would be at the command of the employer while the State Police would be
under the command of State Government. In this context, the Committee raised the issue of role
and responsibility of the CISF deployed in the public and private sectors vis-a-vis the role of State
Police and private security in maintaining security and surveillance at the place of deployment.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.11.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs clarified that with the declaration of CISF as an Armed Force
of the Union, there has been “doctrinal-change” in the duties of CISF. The deployment of CISF
personnel would be to protect critical areas, which may relate to access control and surveillance
in a unit as a Quick Reaction Team (QRT) and the other access control should be in the hands
of private security guards. However, wireless communication system would be maintained by the
CISF. In case of any problem, the QRT of the CISF would immediately rush to the situation. The
Home Secretary stated that there is a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and the CISF has been
functioning in the industrial units of public sector for several years.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.11.2 The Committee has been given to understand that CISF and private security would
work in tandem as a cohesive team, with private security agencies doing the job of watch
and ward, and the CISF providing security and surveillance network. The Committee,
however, is of the considered view that clear-cut role and responsibility of the CISF deployed
in the private sector, must be defined in the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) in the
case of a terrorist threat, or a labour unrest or an agrarian movement and a movement
connected with a local issue, so that the district police/state police/private security and the
CISF personnel could perform their assigned tasks effectively and without any confusion.
ISSUE
(xii) Deployment of CISF personnel abroad and training in local language
3.12 Some Members felt that while deploying CISF personnel abroad, there was a need for them
to undergo a language course to avoid communication gap.
GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE
3.12.1 The Home Secretary replied that language training to CISF personnel was precedent to their
deployment abroad.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION
3.12.2 The Committee noted the reply of the Home Secretary.

14
14
CHAPTER-IV
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
4.0 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on
24th January, 2009. The observations/conclusions/recommendations of the Committee, on each
clause, are enumerated below:—
Clause 2
4.1 Clause 2 seeks to amend Section 2 of the Principal Act by inserting the definitions of “Joint
venture” and “private industrial undertaking” to pave the way for expanding the ambit of CISF to
private sector and joint ventures.
4.1.1 Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted.
Clause 3
4.2 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (I) of section 3 of the Principal Act by
inserting the words “joint venture or private industrial undertaking” after the words “industrial
undertakings owned by that Government” which is an enabling provision.
4.2.1 Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted.
Clause 4
4.3 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 4 of the Principal Act by substituting sub-
section (1) of Section 4 whereupon the Central Government may appoint a person to be the
Director-General of the Force and such other supervisory officers as considered necessary.
Section 4 deals with appointment and powers of supervisory officers. Sub-section (1) of Section
4 stipulates that the Central Government may appoint a person to be the Director-General of the
Force and may appoint other persons to be Inspector-General, Deputy-Inspector-General,
Commandants, Deputy Commandants or Assistant Commandants of the Force.
4.3.1 This amendment has been brought forward for administrative convenience and is
generic in nature. The clause is adopted without any change.
Clause 5
4.4 Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 7 of the Principal Act by substituting the words
“an Inspector-General, a Deputy Inspector-General, a Commandant, a Deputy Commandant or an
Assistant Commandant” with the words “such other supervisory officers as considered necessary”.
4.4.1 The amendments are consequential to the amendments being made in Sections 3 and
4. The clause is adopted without any change.

15
Clause 6
4.5 Clause 6 seeks to make two amendments in Section 10 of the Principal Act, which deals
with the duties of the members of the Force. The first one intends to insert the words “any joint
venture, private industrial undertaking and” after the word “safeguard” in clause (c). The second
amendment intends to insert the words “within and outside India” after the words “any other duty”
in clause (h).
3.6.1 The first amendment expands the duties of the members of the Force whereas the second
amendment formalizes deployment of CISF outside India, in Indian Embassies or UN Peacekeeping
Missions etc.
4.5.2 Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted.
Clause 7
4.6 Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to make three amendments in Section 14 of the Principal Act to
enable deputation of the Force to industrial undertakings in public sector, joint venture or private
sector. Under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 14, the management of a PSU has to give
only one month’s notice for withdrawal of CISF. This period is proposed to be enhanced from one
month to three months.
4.6.1 The Committee notes that the first two amendments are consequential and the third
one is for administrative convenience, whereby the period of notice for withdrawal of CISF,
from one month to three months, seems appropriate, as it involves lot of logistics and
administrative arrangements. Therefore, subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee made in Chapter-III, the clause is adopted.
Clause 8
4.7 Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 15 of the Principal Act to cover the deployment
of CISF outside India also. This amendment is consequential to the amendment to Section 10.
4.7.1 Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
4.8 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2008” and “Fifty-ninth” to be substituted
by “2009” and “Sixtieth”, wherever these occur.
4.9 The Committee would like the Government to examine the observations/
recommendations made by it in Chapter II of this report and initiate appropriate action,
before the Bill is taken up for consideration and passing in both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee would also like the Minister of Home Affairs to apprise both the Houses of
the action taken/proposed to be taken on the various issues dealt with in this report
including the action the Government may be contemplating for amending the rules framed
under the Principal Act and the guidelines/SOPs’ framed in relation to the Force, while
piloting the Bill in Parliament.

16
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
Recruitment procedure and existing strength in CISF
The Committee noted that after the enactment of the Central Industrial Security
Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008, there would be a considerable increase in the strength of the
CISF. The Committee has been given to understand that there is stagnation in certain
cadres and resultant resentment in the force. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that
efforts should be made to increase the promotional avenues in all the cadres of CISF in
general and in the affected cadres in particular, so that the motivational level of its
personnel remain at its peak always. (Para 3.1.2)
Security Audit in Private Installations
The Committee feels that the Government should have undertaken security audit of
the installations/industries in the private sector, prior to the introduction of the Bill, as the
same would have given the right assessment of the quantum of deployment of CISF for
providing security coverage in private and joint sectors. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government may conduct an initial comprehensive security audit for
private sector before deployment of CISF. (Para 3.2.2)
Change in the Behavioural Pattern of CISF
The Committee is of the view that there would be a natural inclination amongst the
CISF personnel to seek lucrative postings in the private sector. Therefore, there is need
for putting in place a suitable personnel policy in the CISF to impart the required
re-orientation to its personnel in the wake of the new areas of deployment, so that
their devotion to duty and commitment to serve the nation remain at its peak always.
(Para 3.3.2)
Cost Reimbursement
The Committee is of the considered view that Government should formulate a
comprehensive billing system for charging the costs from the private/joint sector which
must include, among others, all cost-component viz. medical facilities, pension and gratuity,
in lieu of providing CISF security coverage. Government should ensure that it does not
incur any expenditure, direct or indirect, for security coverage provided in any private
installation. In any case the cost for providing CISF protection to any Private industrial
house must not be less than the cost for providing security protection to Government owned
industrial houses, PSUs. and Government establishments. Private industrial houses should
not be allowed to seek the CISF protection in order to save on benefits like provident fund,
gratuity, retirement benefits, ESIC, etc, by suspending, terminating services of personnel
already employed by them. The Committee desires that early action may be taken to
examine the issue, as assured by Home Secretary. (Para 3.4.2)
Inclusion of Co-operative Sector in the ambit of CISF Security
The Committee is of the view that since the Government is extending the security
16

17
cover of CISF to the private sector, it would be appropriate if the extended coverage could
also include cooperative sector, as there are some big industries in that sector, which are
also contributing to the national economic growth and development. The Committee
therefore urges upon the Government to examine this aspect. (Para 3.5.2)
Criteria for Selecting Private Sector installations and joint ventures
The Committee agrees with the submission of the Home Secretary about the need for
re-examining the criteria for selecting the units in private and joint sector for providing
CISF protection. The Committee recommends that the criteria that may be finalized
for providing the CISF protection, should be scientific, reasonable and transparent, based
on the ground realities viz. the threat perception, security and integrity of the country.
(Para 3.6.2)
Capability of CISF Personnel in preventing cyber and digital crimes in IT Sector
The Committee feels that while the CISF would be entrusted with physical protection
and security of the vital areas and vital points in a company, the cyber related crimes
should also be appropriately addressed. If necessary, training may be given to CISF
personnel and setting up of a separate IT unit may be considered. (Para 3.7.2)
Proper training to CISF personnel
The Committee noted the response of the Home Secretary. (Para 3.8.2)
Endowing CISF with latest weaponry and technology to enhance their preparedness
Since the CISF is already providing security to strategic public sector installations
including atomic and nuclear energy installations and with the proposed amendment in the
Act, CISF would also be providing security cover to vital units of private sector and joint
venture, the Committee feels that it would be appropriate to provide helicopters to CISF for
quick response to meet any emergent situation. The Committee accordingly recommends to
the Government examine this aspect. (Para 3.9.2)
Possibility of use of CISF personnel in resolving industrial disputes
The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry of Home Affairs that
industrial dispute, land dispute and other local issue should be resolved by the concerned
State Authorities through tripartite machineries. The Committee, however, recommends
that CISF should strictly be deployed to protect the installations and machineries and
production only and will not be deployed by the industry houses to interfere into industrial
dispute, land dispute and other local issue. (Para 3.10.2)
Definite and defined role and responsibility of CISF personnel
The Committee has been given to understand that CISF and private security would
work in tandem as a cohesive team, with private security agencies doing the job of watch
and ward, and the CISF providing security and surveillance network. The Committee,
however, is of the considered view that clear-cut role and responsibility of the CISF deployed
in the private sector, must be defined in the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) in the
case of a terrorist threat, or a labour unrest or an agrarian movement and a movement
connected with a local issue, so that the district police/state police/private security and the
CISF personnel could perform their assigned tasks effectively and without any confusion.
(Para 3.11.2)

18
Deployment of CISF personnel abroad and training in local language
The Committee noted the reply of the Home Secretary. (Para 3.12.2)
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
Clause 2
Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted. (Para 4.1.1)
Clause 3
Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted. (Para 4.2.1)
Clause 4
This amendment has been brought forward for administrative convenience and is
generic in nature. The clause is adopted without any change. (Para 4.3.1)
Clause 5
The amendments are consequential to the amendments being made in Sections 3 and
4. The clause is adopted without any change. (Para 4.4.1)
Clause 6
Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted. (Para 4.5.2)
Clause 7
The Committee notes that the first two amendments are consequential and the third
one is for administrative convenience, whereby the period of notice for withdrawal of CISF,
from one month to three months, seems appropriate, as it involves lot of logistics and
administrative arrangements. Therefore, subject to the observations/recommendations of the
Committee made in Chapter-III, the clause is adopted. (Para 4.6.1)
Clause 8
Subject to the observations/recommendations of the Committee made in Chapter-III,
the clause is adopted. (Para 4.7.1)
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes which
are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2008” and “Fifty-ninth” to be substituted
by “2009” and “Sixtieth”, wherever these occur. (Para 4.8)
The Committee would like the Government to examine the observations/
recommendations made by it in Chapter-III of this report and initiate appropriate action,
before the Bill is taken up for consideration and passing in both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee would also like the Minister of Home Affairs to apprise both the Houses of
the action taken/proposed to be taken on the various issues dealt with in this report
including the action the Government may be contemplating for amending the rules framed
under the Principal Act and the guidelines/SOPs’ framed in relation to the Force, while
piloting the Bill in Parliament. (Para 4.9)

19
MINUTES

20

21
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 16th January, 2009 in Room No. 074, Ground
Floor, PLB, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramachandra Khuntia
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri T.K. Hamza
10. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri Raman Srivastava, Special Secretary
3. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
4. Shri Shyam Jindal, Director
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri N.P. Das, Director-General
2. Shrimati Manjari Jaruhar, IG
3. Shri Ajay Bhatnagar, DIG
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the sitting and apprised them
of the agenda of the day. She informed the Members about the reference of the Central Industrial
21

22
Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 with the direction of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
to submit report thereon by 15th February, 2008. Delineating the ambit of the Bill, she apprised
the Members that the proposed Bill sought to provide deployment of CISF for security of private
sector undertakings and joint ventures on cost reimbursement basis and deployment of CISF
outside India, in Indian Embassies or UN Peacekeeping Missions, etc. She further informed the
Members that the Home Secretary had been invited to make a presentation on the Bill.
2.1 The Chairperson then informed the Members that while Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had
referred the Bill to the Committee on 9th January, 2009, Hon'ble President had promulgated an
Ordinance on 10th January to bring into force with immediate effect the proposed amendments to
the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968. The Committee criticized the action of the
executive in promulgating an Ordinance while the Bill was pending in Parliament and Hon'ble
Chairman had referred the same to the Standing Committee for examination and report.
2.2 The Chairperson recapitulated the observations made by the Standing Committee on Home
Affairs during its previous tenure when it had occasion to examine a Bill seeking to replace an
Ordinance. She also recalled the observations made by the Committee in the past when Government
had promulgated an Ordinance on a certain subject while the Bill thereon was still under active
consideration of the Committee.
2.3 The Committee also took note of the various instances when Bills had been referred to the
Standing Committees for examination and report thereon, before/after the promulgation of
Ordinances.
2.4 The Committee thereafter unanimously decided to go ahead with the examination of the
Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008 which had been referred to it, despite the
promulgation of an Ordinance on the subject.
3. The Committee then took up examination of the Bill and invited the Home Secretary and
other officials to make a presentation thereon. The Committee desired that before commencing his
presentation, the Home Secretary should explain the pressing circumstances which necessitated
promulgation of the Ordinance, after reference of the Bill to this Committee.
3.1 The Home Secretary stated that the urgency for promulgation of the Ordinance emanated
due to various incidents of terrorist attacks and the need to reassure the industry of the
Government’s readiness to provide them security. He further stated that as the Parliament was
not in session and the President was satisfied that the circumstances existed which rendered
it necessary to take immediate action to give effect to the provisions of the said Bill, the
President had, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of the
Constitution, promulgated the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 on
January 10, 2009.
3.2 The Home Secretary drew the attention of the Committee, to the discussion held during the
examination of Demands-for-Grants (2008-09) wherein he had commented on the issue of
providing security to the private sector, in the context of naxalism. The Home Secretary added that
it was not possible to have the CISF security in every private sector unit even if there was an
enabling provision. There may be some critical sectors where security could be provided.
3.3 The Committee, while taking note of the explanation of the Home Secretary, felt that the
situation could have been avoided, had the Ministry been in touch with the Offices of Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha/Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to keep itself abreast of any development
regarding reference of the Bill to the Standing Committee. To this, the Home Secretary replied that
the proposal for Cabinet approval to issue the Ordinance was moved on 31st December, 2008. The

23
Cabinet approved it on 2nd January, 2009 and by that date, the Bill had not been referred to the
Standing Committee.
3.4 The Home Secretary then elaborated on the main components of the Bill.
4. The Joint Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs in a powerpoint presentation dwelt
upon the salient features of current deployment of CISF and the proposed deployment of the force
in the private and joint sector establishments.
4.1 Arising out of the presentations, Members of the Committee raised a number of queries
pertaining to the provisions of the Bill and implications thereof.
4.2 The Home Secretary appropriately answered the queries of the Members. With regard to
some issues, he submitted that the Ministry would look into those and take suitable steps.
(The Committee adjourned for lunch at 1.00 
P.M. and reassembled at 1.40 P.M.)
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 2.10 
P.M. to meet again on 23rd and 24th January, 2009.
*** Relates to other matters.

24
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, 24 January, 2009 in Room No. 074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ilyas Azmi
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri Tapir Gao
11. Shri T.K. Hamza
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Prof. Kadermohideen
14. Shri Hemant Khandelwal
15. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
16. Km. Agatha K. Sangma
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D. K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary
2. Shri Raman Srivastava, Special Secretary (IS)
3. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary
24

25
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri N.R. Das, Director General
2. Shrimati Manjari Jaruhar, IG
3. Shri Ajay Bhatnagar, DIG
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Additional LC
Representative of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri S.K. Dullo, Additional LA
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee scheduled for
taking up clause-by-clause consideration of the CISF (Amendment) Bill, 2008. The Chairperson also
welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials of the Ministries/Departments/CISF.
3. The Chairperson and some Members raised certain queries pertaining to the Bill which were
responded to by the Home Secretary.
4.0 The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Clause 2
4.1 The Committee was of the view that since the Government proposed to extend the security
cover of CISF to the private sector, it would be appropriate if the extended coverage could also
include cooperative sector, as there were some big industries in that sector, which were also
contributing to the national economic growth and development.
4.1.1 Subject to the above observation, the clause was adopted.
Clause 3
4.2 The Committee observed that there was a need to re-examine the criteria for selecting units
in private and joint sector for providing CISF protection and the same should be scientific,
reasonable and transparent, based on the ground realities viz. the threat perception, security and
integrity of the country.
4.2.1 Subject to the above observation, the clause was adopted.
Clause 4
4.3 The Committee noted that the proposed-amendment was brought forward for administrative
convenience and was generic in nature. The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 5
4.4 The Committee noted that the proposed amendment was consequential to the amendments
being made in Sections 3 and 4. Therefore, the clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 6
4.5 The Committee noted that the proposed amendments were consequential in nature.
Therefore, the clause was adopted without any change.

26
Clause 7
4.6 The Committee noted that the first two amendments sought to made by this clause were
consequential and the third one was for administrative convenience, whereby the period of notice
for withdrawal of CISF from a PSU was sought to be increased from one month to three months,
seemed appropriate, as it would involve lot of logistics and administrative arrangements. Therefore,
subject to the observations made under clause 2 of the Bill, the clause was adopted.
Clause 8
4.7 The Committee noted that the proposed amendment was consequential to the amendments
to Section 10. Therefore, the clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1 the Enacting Formula and the Title
4.8 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, “2008” and “Fifty-ninth” to be substituted by “2009”
and “Sixtieth”, wherever those occur.
5. The Chairperson thereafter, raised the issue of grievances of Group A Direct Recruit
Officers of CISF. The Chairperson pointed out that the issue was first highlighted by the
Committee in its 54th Report, followed by the 59th Report. She stated that the Committee in its
83rd Report comprehensively dealt with the subject and made a series of recommendations.
Thereafter, the Committee presented its 117th Report. In that context, the Chairperson and another
Member of the Committee brought to the notice of the Home Secretary that some of the genuine
grievances of Direct Recruit officers of the CISF had remained unredressed as a result of which
many such officers had left the force and those who continued in its service, remained aggrieved
and demoralized.
5.1 The Home Secretary replied to the concerns raised by the Committee. He submitted that
pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, the issue was twice placed before the Cabinet
in May and July 2006 and the Government approved the action taken by MHA in the matter. He
further submitted that a lot of improvement had taken place in the career progression of those
officers and the organization was comparatively better off than the other para military forces. The
Home Secretary observed that while making improvement in the service conditions of the Direct
Recruit officers of CISF, Government would have to keep in mind its possible implications on other
para military forces.
5.1.1 The Chairperson, however, desired that the Ministry may offer its comments/replies in
writing in response to a detailed questionnaire to be prepared by the Secretariat so that the issue
could be taken up at a later date.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.

27
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 10th February, 2009, in Room No. 074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Biren Singh Engti
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. * * *
3.1 The Committee, then, took up for consideration following draft Reports:—
(i) 137th Report on the Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants;
(ii) 138th Report on the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008; and
(iii) 139th Report on the Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007.
3.2 A Member of the Committee suggested some changes in the draft 138th Report which were
briefly discussed. The Committee adopted the draft report with some modifications in paras 3.4.2
and 3.10.2.
3.3 The Committee adopted draft 137th and 139th Reports without any change.
27
*** Relates to other matter.

28
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament on
13th February, 2009. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri S.S.
Ahluwalia, Member, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, Member
Rajya Sabha, to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Biren
Singh Engti, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Baju Ban Riyan, Member, Lok Sabha,
to lay the Reports on the Table of that House.
5. The Chairperson put on record the invaluable contribution made by the Convenor of the
erstwhile sub-Committee on Civil Defence and Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia,
in the drafting of the 137th Report. She also thanked other Members of the Committee for their
co-operation and active participation in completing the examination of the Bills within a short period
of time and finalizing the reports thereon. On behalf of the Committee, she also placed on record
her deep sense of appreciation for the excellent work done by the Secretariat while assisting it.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

29
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS I NTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
18 DEC., 2008
Bill No. LXXI of 2008
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Central Industrial Security
Force (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2—
(a) after clause ( ca), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
31
Short title and
commencement.
50 of 1968. Amendment of
section 2.

32
‘(cb) “joint venture” means a venture jointly
undertaken by the Central Government or State
Government with private industrial undertaking.’;
(b) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ga) “private industrial undertaking” means an
industry owned, controlled or managed by a person other
than the Central or State Government or any industrial
undertaking in public sector.’.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after the
words “industrial undertakings owned by that Government”, the words
“,joint venture or private industrial undertaking” shall be inserted.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be
the Director-General of the Force and such other supervisory
officers as considered necessary.”.
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2)—
(i) for the words “an Inspector-General, a Deputy
Inspector-General, a Commandant, a Deputy Commandant or an
Assistant Commandant”, the words “such other supervisory
officers as considered necessary" shall be substituted;
(ii) after the words “industrial undertaking”, the words
“joint venture or private industrial undertaking” shall be inserted.
6. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( c), after the word “safeguard”, the words
“any joint venture, private industrial undertaking and” shall be
inserted;
(ii) in clause ( h), after the words “any other duty”, the
words “within and outside India” shall be inserted.
7. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, after the words “public
sector”, the words “joint venture or private sector” shall be
inserted;
(b) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “public sector”,
the words “joint venture or private sector” shall be inserted;
(c) in the proviso to sub-section ( 2), for the words “one
month’s notice”, the words “three month’s notice” shall be
inserted.
8. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the word “within”, the words “or outside” shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 15.

33
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) constituted under the Central
Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (No. 50 of 1968) provides protection and
security to the Central Government Industrial Undertakings. By the amendment
of 1983, the CISF was declared as an Armed Force of the Union. The
amendment of the Act in 1999 enabled the Central Government to entrust any
other duty to the Force and also made provision for consultancy to private
sector in security matters.
2. With the growing threat of terrorist outfits, industries in the private
sector and joint venture, which have contributed to the growth of economy also
require security by CISE It is, therefore, proposed to amend the relevant
sections of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 to enable the
deployment of CISF for security of private sector undertakings and joint
ventures on cost reimbursement basis.
3. There are a few other amendments required for administrative reasons.
Sections 4 and 7 of the Act mention specifically the ranks of the supervisory
officers of the Force. It is proposed to keep a generic provision in the Act so
that changes in ranks and designations will not require amendment to the Act.
4. Section 14(2) of the Act stipulates one month’s notice from the
management of a PSU for the withdrawal of CISF, which is considered
inadequate for the force as considerable amount of logistics and administrative
arrangements are involved. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance this notice
period from one to three months.
5. Section 15 of the Act is also proposed to be amended to enable
deployment of CISF outside India in Indian Embassies or UN Peacekeeping
Missions, etc.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM
The 15th December, 2008
33

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C ENTRAL I NDUSTRIAL S ECURITY F ORCE A CT, 1968
(50 OF 1968)
* *** *
4. The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Director-General
of the Force and may appoint other persons to the Inspectors-General, Deputy
Inspector-General, Commandants, Deputy Commandants or Assistant Commandants
of the Force.
* *** *
7. (1)* * * * *
(2)  Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the administration of the
Force within such local limits as may be prescribed shall be carried on by an
Inspector-General, a Deputy Inspector-General, a Commandant, a Deputy
Commandant or an Assistant Commandant in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and of any rules made thereunder and every supervisory officer placed
incharge of the protection and security of an industrial undertaking shall, subject
to any directions that may be given by the Central Government or the
Director-General in this behalf, discharge his functions under the general supervision,
direction and control of the Managing Director of that undertaking.
* *** *
34
Appoint-
ment
and
powers
of
Supervisory
Officers.
Superin-
tendence
and
administra-
tion of
the
Force.

35
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968.
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.