Raft  
CONFIDENTIAL  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 149RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
                                                       
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY NINETH REPORT 
                                        
                                      ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY 
FIFTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2 JUNE 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2 JUNE 2011) 
                                     
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON   ……., 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON   …, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/ JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 
 1

C.S.(H.A.)-----       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
         DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
         STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY NINETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY 
FIFTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2 JUNE 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2 JUNE 2011) 
        
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON ………………….) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON ………………………) 
 
 
 
                 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/ JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 
 
 
 2

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                          (i)   
 
2. PREFACE                                                           (ii) 
                                                                           
3. REPORT                                          
      
 
 
CHAPTER I Observations/Recommendations which have          
been accepted by the Government                          
   
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee                  
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies         
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of                                  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee.                       
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which                       
Final Replies of the Government are still awaited       
 
 
 
  4.          RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE               
 
             
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                     
                 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(Constituted on 31st  August 2010) 
 
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu                      - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Rishang Keishing     
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia     
5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal  
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
7. Shri Javed Akhtar∗
 
                                                
 
8. Shri Tariq Anwar     
9. Dr. V. Maitreyan  
10. Shri D. Raja  
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri L.K. Advani    
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala    
13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar    
14. Shri Raman Deka  
15. Shri L. Raja Gopal    
16. Shri Maulana Mohammed Asrarul Haque    
17. Shri Naveen Jindal    
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik  
19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel  
21. Shri Nilesh N. Rane  
22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray  
23. Adv. A. Sampath  
24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed    
25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar  
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh    
27. Shri Ravneet Singh  
28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay  
29. Shri Harsh Vardhan  
30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
                     
            SECRETARIAT 
SECRETAsdddddddddddjjjjjjjggffffIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
 
∗ nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 21st September, 2010. 
 4

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Department-rela ted Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Comm ittee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred and Forty-Nineth Re port on the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in its On e Hundred and Forty-Fifth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region. 
 
2. The One Hundred and Forty-Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was pr esented in the Rajya Sabha and Laid in the Lok Sabha  on 6 th 
May, 2010.  
 
3. The Ministry of Development of North E astern Region (DoNER) furnished the Action Taken 
Notes on the One Hundred and Forty Fifth Report of the Committee, on 19 th November, 2010.  The 
Minister of DoNER laid on the Tables of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha, a statement on 
the status of implementation of the recommen dations contained in th e said Report of the 
Committee, on 30th November, 2010 and 29 th November, 2010, respectively, pursuant to the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s Direction dated 24th September 2004.   
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report a nd adopted the same at its meeting held on 15 th 
April 2011. 
 
5. Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
15 April, 2011 
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary  
       Standing Committee on Home Affairs
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
 
 5

Report 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Re gion on the recommendations contained in the 
One Hundred and Forty Fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010-11).  
The One Hundred forty Fifth Report was presented to/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and 
Lok Sabha on the 6
th May 2010. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of DoNER in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I:  The recommendations/observations, wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.1.1, 2.2.3, 2.3.7, 2.4. 8, 2.7.10, 2.9.4, 2.11.7, 3.1.6, 3.2.8, 3.3.19, 
3.4.8, 3.6.9, 3.7.3, 3.7.4, 3.9 (of  One Hundred and Forty-Fifth Report)   Total 
recommendations- 15 
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Mini stry has accepted its fifteen recommendations 
as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Pa ra Nos. 2.1.12, 2.3.6, 2.4.6, 212.8, 2.12.9, 
3.5.3, 3.5.4, 3.8.5 (ibid) Total recommendations- 8 
  
 The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, 
does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
   
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos.  2.6.6, 2.7.11, 2.8.9, 2.10.6, 3.2.9, 3.4.5 
(ibid) Total recommendations- 6 
  
 The Committee expresses its concern over th e non-implementation of its recommendations 
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Mini stry should furnish convi ncing explanations in 
respect of those recommendations.  
 
 Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in r espect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 2.5.6, 3.3.17, 3.3.18, 3.4.6, 3.4.7, 3. 6.10, 3.9 (ibid) 
Total recommendation- 7 
  
 In respect of seven recommendations in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished interim 
reply or couched its response in vague terms. Th erefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry 
should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the recommendation categorized 
in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit of the recommendation. 
 
3. The details of the ATRs have been analy sed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 6

CHAPTER- I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
1.1. IMPLEMENTATION OF NER PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 Human beings have little or no control o ver the vagaries of weather. Likewise, the 
climatic peculiarities of the North-East are not new and cannot and   should not be used as a 
pretext for the slow pace of utilization of f unds and delayed completions of projects in the 
NER. Therefore, given the climat ic conditions of that region, it would be a prudent step on 
the part of administrative Minist ry and the State Governments, to organize the activities in a 
rational way to offset the adverse impact of th e nature. Accordingly, the projects in NER 
should be implemented during the seasons when conditions are favourable, at a grater pace, 
to compensate the loss of time during the mons oon season, so that projects are implemented 
in time. In this context, the Committee would like to advise the Government to step up vigil in 
monitoring the expenditure, as in the flurry of works, there is every likelihood of siphoning of 
funds meant for development.  
  (Para 2.1.11)  
Action Taken 
1.1.2 The State Governments have been advised to  plan the implementation of the projects 
in such a way that the adverse impact of na ture could not affect implementation and the 
projects may be implemented with greater p ace during working season to compensate the 
loss of time during monsoon season. The State Gove rnments have also been advised to keep 
in view the workload available with various executing agencies in the State taking into 
account the capacity of indivi dual executing agency while proposing the projects in the 
annual priority list so as to distribute the equal workload to all the executing agencies.   
 
1.1.3 To encourage the States for timely comp letion of projects it has been decided to 
provide an incentive to good performing Stat es in terms of completion of projects by 
retaining projects upto Rs.20.00 cr ore as per State’s choice over and above its annual 
entitlement.     
 
1.1.4 To strengthen the monitoring of the projec ts the Ministry instructed designated State-
wise Area Officers for making bi -monthly visits to the States  for review of the NLCPR 
Scheme and field visits to the project sites. Ch ief Secretaries of the St ates have been advised 
for holding regular quarterly meetings on the scheme.  
 
Further Observation 
1.1.5 The Committee, while noting the reply, desires to be informed of the steps taken 
by the State Governments in this regard and the impact thereof.   
   
 
 
 
 
 7

1.2 TIMELY APPROVAL OF FUNDS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee is not in agreement with  the approach of the Planning Commission. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the Pl anning Commission should formulate initial 
projections and give approval th ereto. If necessary, those may be reviewed later. The 
Committee urges upon the Planning Commission to take an early decision in this regard.  
(Para 2.2.3) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 The matter was taken up with the Planning Commission who have intimated as 
under:- 
 
 The projected Central Assistance for NEC, BADP, HADP/WGDP for the 11
th Plan is 
Rs.14894 crore at 2006-07 prices.  The projec ted outlay for HADP/WGDP is Rs.2500 crore 
and for BADP Rs.5000 crore.  Thus, th e projected outlay for NEC for the 11 th Plan is 
Rs.7394 crore.   
 
 As regards NLCPR, since this provision is made available through the budget of 
DoNER for the Central Pool (unspent balance of 10% earmarking) no projection can be made 
in advance. 
 
1.2.3 However, 11
th Plan outlay suggested by the Mini stry under its various schemes and 
the allocation made by the Planning Commission ag ainst those, during the first four years of 
the current plan i.e. 2007-2008 to 2010-2011 is given as under:- 
 
 Plan Schemes  11th Plan 
allocation 
proposed by the 
Ministry  
(Rs. In Crore) 
Plan size 
approved by 
Planning 
Commission  
(Rs. In Crore) 
Allocations made 
in the first four 
years of 11 th Plan, 
i.e., 2007-08 to 
2010-11  
(Rs. In Crore) 
1. Non Lapsable Central Pool of 
Resources 
6000.00 -- 2786.00 
2. North Eastern Council (:NEC) 6000.00 7394.00 2547.00 
3. Loans to North Eastern 
Development Finance 
Corporation Limited (NEDFi) 
  500.00   339.61 
(384.43) 
  240.00 
4. Advocacy & Publicity     50.00     41.11 
  (36.32) 
    26.00 
5. Capacity Building & Technical 
Assistance 
  100.00     78.90 
  (69.70) 
    57.00 
6. Development of roads in NE 
States (EAP) 
1562.80       0.06 
    (0.06) 
    70.01 
7. Schemes of Bodoland Territorial 
Council 
  191.28 --   300.00 
8. NER Livelihood Project (EAP)       5.00 --    38.50 
 Total 14409.08  6064.51 
 (Figures in brackets show allocation at 2006-07 prices.) 
 
 
 8

1.2.4 Since the allocation made by the Planning Commission is far less than our projected 
requirements in the first four years of the Cu rrent Plan Year, the Mi nistry would project 
further requirements under various Schemes, keeping in mind the outlay proposed initially 
and the allocations made so far in the current Plan. 
 
Further Recommendation 
1.2.5 The Committee reiterates its recommenda tion that the Planning Commission 
should consider enhanced requirement of the Ministry of DoNER so that the projects 
undertaken and proposed to be undertaken, may not be affected for want of funds.  
 
  
1.3 TIMELY COMPLETION OF PROJECTS UNDER NLCPR 
 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee is not convinced with the argument given by the Ministry for justifying 
the delay. The Committee is also not satisfied with  the reply given by the Ministry in which it 
has been argued that the concerned States of the region are responsib le for under-utilization 
in Plan allocation to NLCPR. The Committee feels that besides revising guidelines, proactive 
measures are required to be taken on the part of the Ministry of DoNER to ensure completion 
of projects with the stipulated timeframe. The Committee strongly recommends that the State 
Governments of the NER should strictly adhere to the time schedules in this regard.   
 
(Para 2.3.7) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 State Governments have been advised to  give more stress on completion of the 
ongoing projects. In order to en courage the States, the Minist ry has decided to give an 
incentive every year for a good performing State, in terms of completion rate of the projects, 
by retaining projects upto Rs.20.00 crore as per their choice, over and above their annual 
entitlement.   
 
1.3.3 To reduce the burden and improve the functioning of executing agencies, State 
Governments have been advised to analyze th e workloads available with various executing 
agencies in the State taki ng into account the cap acity of individual executing agency 
(manpower available) and accordingly propose the pr ojects in the annual priority list so as to 
distribute equal workload to all the executing agen cies, so that a particularly agency is not 
overloaded and projects can be implemented as per schedule. Further, to strengthen the 
monitoring of projects the Area Officers designat ed for 8 NE States in the Ministry are 
advised to take up regular field visits to the project sites and review the progress.  
 
Further Observation 
1.3.4 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed of the action taken by 
the State Governments and the impact thereof.  
 
1.4 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL 
 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee is given to understand that  out of Rs. 1002.32 crore projected by the 
Ministry, it has been al located only Rs. 700.00 crore for 2010-11. This may hamper the 
 9

progress of the ongoing projects under this Sc heme. The Committee feels that the Ministry 
and particularly NEC should make quarterly assessment during the year, of the 
progress/achievements of the projects and ask fo r increase in the allocation at RE stage, if 
required.  
(Para 2.4.8) 
Action Taken  
1.4.2 During 2010-11 an amount of Rs.14876.00 lakh or  say 21.25% have been released in 
the first quarter of the current financial ye ar, out of the total budget provision of Rs.70,000 
lakh.   
 
1.4.3 NEC will continue to monitor release of f unds during each next quarter of the current 
financial year so that it can seek more funds at the RE Stage, if required. 
 
 
1.5 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The  Committee  takes  note  that  the  allocation  for  the  Scheme of Technical 
Assistance and Capacity Building has been enhanced by 50% in the BE 2010-11 in 
comparison to the previous year’s allocation and hopes that it will go a long way in 
developing human resource in the region.  The Co mmittee also notes that  the Ministry has 
tied up with national and regional instit utes and centers of exce llence for imparting 
professional education to student s of the NER.  Vocational tr aining and computer training 
are very important programmes which can impro ve the employment potential for the people 
of the region. The Committee recommends that emphasis may be given on this aspect. 
(Para 2.7.10) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 Noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
1.5.3 The Committee would like to be informed of the outcome of the efforts made by 
the Government on its recommendation. 
 
 
1.6 SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFR ASTRUCTURE 
UPGRADATION IN NORTH EASTERN REGION.  
 
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee is happy to note that the scheme under Special Fund for 
Infrastructure upgradation in North Eastern States, is an enabler to identify the urgent needs 
of the North Eastern Region, especially Arunachal Pradesh and the border areas and to 
address their special needs and problems. As th is is a good opportunity to develop remote 
areas of NER, the Committee urges upon the Minist ry of DoNER to play a pro-active role in 
implementing scheme even though this is funded by Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 2.9.4) 
 
 
 10

Action Taken 
1.6.2 A special fund of Rs.500 crore for infrastructure upgradation in North Eastern Region 
was announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of 2008-09.  After this 
announcement and consultation with the State Governments, 15 projects / schemes have been 
identified for funding under this fund keeping in view the demands and priorities of the 
North Eastern States. 
 
1.6.3 Out of these, six projects -two in Arun achal Pradesh, one in Assam, one in Sikkim 
and two in Nagaland - have been  sanctioned at a total cost of  Rs.221.39 Crore.  Another four 
projects - one each for the State of Assam, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura - at a total cost of 
Rs.87 crore are in the process of sanctioning. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
1.6.4 The Committee recommends that the projects already sanctioned may be 
implemented within a fixed time schedule. The projects proposed to be sanctioned, may 
also be cleared at the earliest.   
 
 
1.7 LOAN TO NORTH EASTERN REGI ONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
CORPORATION (NERAMAC) 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee appreciates that the turnover  of the Corporati on has almost doubled 
in 2009-10 and it is a positive devel opment.  The Committee desires that the Ministry should 
give further impetus to the d evelopment and improvement of in frastructure for procurement 
and marketing of agro-horticultural commodities.  The Committee feels that as ginger is 
produced in the region on a massive scale, its products need to be taken up for 
commercialization. The Committee recommends t hat the proposals of setting up Cashew 
Processing Plant at Mankachar, Assam, modernization of Pineapple Jui ce Plant at Nalkata, 
Tripura, setting up Central Packaging Centre  at Chaigaon in Assam and setting up Multi 
Fruit Processing Plant at Silchar,  may be implemented at the earliest.  
(Para 2.11.7) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 To improve the basic infrastructure fo r agro-horticulture commodity and their 
procurement and marketing, NERAMAC has initiated the following: 
 
i) An Integrated Ginger Processing Plant at EPIP, Byrnihat, Meghalaya has been set up 
with the support of Technol ogy Mission for North East a nd NLCPR Fund. This unit 
is catering to the Ginger growers for production of Ginger Oil, Ginger Power & fresh 
graded Ginger. 
 
ii) The cashew processing plant at Mankach ar, Assam is under construction and is 
expected to be completed during 2011. 
 
iii) The project proposals of modernization of Pi neapple Juice Plant at Nalkata, Tripura, 
Central Packaging Center at Chaigaon, Assam and multi-food processing plant at 
Silchar, Assam are under examination in the line Ministries. Matter is being pursued 
with these for early sanction.  
 11

 
iv) Besides (a) above  a proposal  is under consideration for setting up nine Procurement 
and Collection Centers with the facility of pack houses with a project cost of 
approximately Rs. 80.00 crore to suppor t the farmers. (b) Assam Industrial 
Development Corporation (AIDC) has set up  a Pack House with provision of cold 
storage at EPIP (Export Promotion Industrial Park), Amingaon near Guwahati with an 
investment of approximately Rs. 10 crore. This facility is nearing completion. 
NERAMAC proposes to participate in this pr oject. This will be a big support to the 
ginger growers.  
 
 
1.8 TRANSFER OF HILL AREA DEVE LOPMENT PROGRAMME (HADP) AND 
BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (BADP) 
 
Recommendation: 
1.8.1 The Committee is exasperated over the fa ct that although three years have passed 
since it made its recommendations, no progress has been made so far and the issue is still 
pending with the Government. The Committee strongly recommends that Government should 
finally arrive at a decision without further delay,  in the interest of be tter implementation of 
the Schemes.  
(Para 3.1.6) 
Action Taken: 
1.8.2 On 17.8.2010 the Government of India is sued a notification making inter-alia 
following amendments in the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961: 
 
(i) Hill Area Development Programme in North Eastern Region will be under the 
Ministry of DoNER. 
(ii) Border Area Development Programme (without any geographical distinction) will 
be under the Ministry of Home Affairs.    
 
Consequently, the above recommendations of the Committee stands met with.  As shown 
above, BADP will remain with Ministry of Home Affairs and HADP in the North Eastern 
Region will be implemented by Ministry of DoNE R.    The Ministry has already taken up 
with the Planning Commission to transfer docum ents pertaining to the said programme.  The 
entire programme upto now was being implemented by the Commission. 
 
Further Observation: 
1.8.3 The Committee notes the decision taken by the Government. 
 
 
1.9 TOURISM  
 
Recommendation: 
1.9.1 There is no two opinion that NE region has great potential to become a tourist hot 
spot in the country particularly for eco and adventure tourism. The Committee hopes that the 
initiatives taken including promoting NE br and tourism “Paradise Unexplored”, would go a 
long way in attracting domestic as well as foreign tourists in the region.  The Committee 
 12

desires that the Ministry shoul d prepare a long-term perspective plan for developing world 
class tourism infrastructure in the region. 
(Para 3.2.8) 
Action Taken: 
1.9.2 The Ministry of Tourism has reported that  development, monitoring and promotion of 
tourism are undertaken primarily by the State Govts.  The Ministry of Tourism extends 
financial assistance to the State Govts. for tour ism related projects wh ich are identified in 
consultation and interaction with them, under schemes for Product/Infrastructure 
Development of Destination/Circ uits and Rural Tourism.  Proj ect proposals received from 
the State Govts. that are complete in all respects, are approved on the basis of inter-se priority 
and funds are released subject  to availability under respective Head of Account.  The 
Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned various projects for developm ent of tourism in the North 
Eastern Region for Tourism Des tination/Circuit etc.  During the period 2007-08 to 2009-10, 
the Ministry of Tourism has sa nctioned projects for development of tourism in NE Region in 
the range of Rs. 150-180 crore, which amounts to  more than 15% of the Plan Allocation of 
the Ministry as against the 10% earmarked fund which amounts to about Rs.100 crore.  
1.9.3 In so far as NEC is concerned, short term plans for promotion of tourism are expected 
to take-off during the current financial year 2010-11. The co mprehensive Tourism Master 
Plan for NER is expected by December, 20 10. This will pave the way for a long term 
perspective plan to develop world class tourism infrastructure in the region.  
1.9.4 The Tata Consultancy Services, Mumbai has been entrusted to prepare the above said 
comprehensive Tourism Master Plan for North Eastern Region. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
1.9.5 The Committee is hopeful that the comprehensive Tourism Master Plan has 
been prepared. Steps should be taken to implement the same. 
 
 
1.10 CONNECTIVITY 
 
Recommendation: 
1.10.1 The Committee also recommends that the bottlenecks like land acquisition, 
environmental clearance, etc. may be removed at the earliest so that SARDP-NE projects 
could be completed as per schedule. 
(Para 3.3.19) 
Action Taken: 
1.10.2 Ministry of Road Transport & Highway s have intimated that the State Level 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, has been constituted in respective 
North-Eastern, States to review the progress of  the various road projects in North-Eastern 
States and to resolve the issues relating to land acquisition, environmental and forest 
clearances, etc.  
1.10.3 Further, Ministry of DoNER and NE C are the members of the High Level 
Empowered Committee of MORTH, which sancti ons the projects und er the scheme. The 
projects are being implemented by the State Governments, NHAI, BRO and private parties in 
case of roads under PPP-Annuity model and BRO. There are regular reviews in such 
meetings to remove such bottlenecks.  
 13

1.11 MONITORING MECHANISM 
 
Recommendation: 
1.11.1 The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the physical outcome 
must match the financial outlays and that concurrent audit should be introduced for release 
of funds. 
(Para 3.4.8) 
Action Taken: 
1.11.2 In the 58
th Council Meeting of the NEC, which was held on 9 th February, 2010 at 
Guwahati, the Council has approved that it woul d be mandatory that the information relating 
to name of the projects, its cost, time sche dule indicating date of commencement and 
completion of the projects, name of executing ag encies and contractors,  be displayed at the 
project sites for the information of the public at large.  Action has also been initiated to post 
the complete list of projects/ schemes of the NEC on its website. 
1.11.3 Under the NLCPR Scheme, the second and subsequent installments of the projects 
are released only after physical progress is commensurate with financial expenditure is 
achieved in the projects. 
 
 
1.12 KEY AREAS AND PROJECTS UNDER LOOK EAST POLICY 
 
Recommendation: 
1.12.1 The Committee understands that the geographical and topographical location of the 
North Eastern States of India joined with th e rest of the country by a narrow land corridor, 
of 21 to 40 Km in width and known as the Chi cken’s Neck, act as a serious impediment for 
the development of the region which has resulted in the region lagging behind the rest of the 
country in terms of infrastructure and development. Under the given circumstances, massive 
infrastructural development plan is required for all round development of the region.  
(Para 3.6.9) 
Action Taken: 
1.12.2 Noted for compliance. 
 
 
1.13 VISION NER 2020 
 
Recommendation: 
1.13.1  The Committee underscores Vision NER 2020 as a guiding document in terms of 
policy formulation of action plans and implementation, for overall development of the region. 
The Committee hopes that the Vision Document  would translate in to action plans and 
investments and give the desired results. The Committee desires that the Vision Document 
would act as catalytic blue-print for balan ced and equitable development of the region so 
that the economic growth of the North-East  Region would catch up with national economic 
growth. The Committee, therefore, recommends that development of infrastructure, sound 
industrial, agricultural and allied sectors with  special emphasis on ho rticulture, should be 
given primacy, while implementing the Vision Document.  
 (Para 3.7.3) 
 
 14

Action Taken: 
1.13.2 As a follow up action on the preparation of  a road map for actualization of the 
recommendations of NER Vision 2020 document, the following actions have already been 
initiated by the Ministry of DoNER/NEC: 
 
(i) Action Plan on Inland Waterways S ector prepared – available on 
M/DoNER’s website. 
(ii) Action Plan on Telecommunications Se ctor prepared – available on 
M/DoNER’s website. 
(iii) Ministry of Railways is working on Action Plan. 
(iv) NEC has commissioned a Master Plan on Circuit Based Tourism in NER 
by Tata Consultancy Services. 
(v) NEC-Directorate General of Civ il Aviation is commissioning a 
comprehensive study and road map for civil aviation in NER. NEC will 
fund the study. 
(vi) NEC has commissioned a study on border trade by Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (Ministry of External 
Affairs). 
(vii) NEC and PGCIL have jointly funded preparation of DPRs for 
strengthening of transmission, sub- transmission and distribution systems 
in NER. 
(viii) Task Force on Look East Policy headed by Secretary, DoNER. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
1.13.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of bi-annual status reports on action 
taken to implement the vision NER 2020 Document. 
 
 
Recommendation: 
1.13.4 The Committee hopes that Rs. 14 lakh crore, proposed to be invested both from public 
and private sectors, as outlined in the documen t, to enable the region, to match the National 
Growth Rate, would translate into a reality.  
(Para 3.7.4) 
Action Taken: 
1.13.5 Noted for compliance. 
 
 
1.14 GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
1.14.1 The Government should set up a full fledged technical wing, having officers upto the 
level of Chief Engineer (on deputation basis), in the Ministry of DON ER to ensure inhouse 
technical competence and expeditious examination of DPRs. 
(Para 3.9) 
Action Taken: 
1.14.2 
 In the meeting of Committee of Secretaries held on 21 st March 2005 in Cabinet 
Secretariat, it was discussed inter-alia that Ministry of DoNER would initiate measures to 
 15

have its own small complement of technica l manpower for preliminary checking of the 
projects and the cost estimates. Subsequentl y, the Ministry of DoNER took up the matter 
with Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure vide their ID 
No. 1450/JS(Per.)/E.Coord.I/2007 dated 3.10.2007 ha d approved creation of the following 
posts for the Technical Wing of the Ministry: 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Post/Scale of Post No. of posts 
approved 
1 Superintending Engineer (Rs.14300-
18300) 
1 
2 Executive Engineer (Rs.10000-15200) 1 
3 Asstt. Executive Engineer (Rs.8000-
13500) 
2 
4 PA (Rs.5500-9000) 2 
5 UDC (Rs.4000-6000) 1 
                                Total 7 
 
1.14.3 This Ministry accordingly initiated necessary action by advertising the vacancies to 
fill up the posts of Civil Engineers. However, as there was no requisite number of 
applications received, only one post of Superi ntending Engineer (Civil) could be filled up on 
deputation basis. Subsequently, the Ministry of DoNER took up the matter with the Central 
Public Works Department (CPWD), Ministry of Urban Development for encadering 4 posts 
of Civil Engineers and the M/o Urban Developm ent had agreed to encadre the 4(four) posts 
of Civil Engineers. This Ministry has requested the CPWD, to depute the other posts of Civil 
Engineers for the Technical Wing of the Ministry  and the posts are bei ng filled up from the 
Central Engineering Service Cadre of CPWD. 
 
1.14.4 A  large  number  of  vacancies  exist  in  various  Central  Government organizations 
in the NER, due to the reluctance of officials to serve there on account of difficult conditions 
in the region. The Committee is of the view that the official s in the Ministry of DoNER and 
Central Government officials posted in NER including those of NEC, should have fixed 
tenure. The Government should provide attrac tive incentives, over and above the existing 
allowances, to the officials posted in Centra l Government Organizations in the North East. 
At the same time action should be initiated aga inst those officers who do not serve or are 
reluctant to work at the allotted places.  
(Para 3.9) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.14.5 The matter was taken up with the Departme nt of Personnel & Training, Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions and they have stated as under: 
 
(i) The EO Division of DoPT deals with a ppointment of offices  to the posts at 
Deputy Secretary/Director and Joint Secr etary levels in Central Government 
offices located in the North Eastern Region and filled under the Central Staffing 
Scheme.  The tenure of officers appointed  under the Central Staffing Scheme is 
five years for Joint Secretary and Dir ector levels and four years for Deputy 
Secretary level.  Officers appointed to such posts located in the North Eastern 
 16

Region are being allowed thes e tenures.   At times, to  overcome shortage of 
officers available for posting in the Regi on extension of tenures is also being 
considered. 
 
(ii) In so far as the recommendation for in itiating action against officers who do not 
serve or are reluctant to work at the allo tted places, it is mentioned that as per 
extant policy, officers who do not join the posts on appoi ntment to posts filled 
under the Central Staffing Scheme, are debarred from Central Staffing Scheme for 
a period of five years. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
1.14.6 The Committee reiterates its recommenda tion that the Government should 
provide attractive incentives, over and above the existing allowances to the officials 
posted in the NER,  to overcome the problem of shortage of officials in that region. 
 
 
1.14.7 Suitable   training   programmes  are  required  to  be  chalked   out   in  IT  and  ITeS   
for the youth through reputed organizations like DOEACC. The programmes can be made 
hugely successful by providing employment to the trainees in BPOs and similar ventures.  
(Para 3.9) 
Action Taken: 
1.14.8 In so far as NEC is concerned, it has taken the following initiatives in the IT sector: 
(i)      IT Training:  Under this programme, so far more than 1200 schools have been 
supported by way of providing hardware s and 70 colleges have also been 
supported for starting the BCA Courses in North Eastern Region. In IT Education 
programme, more than a thousand teachers have also been trained. 
(ii)      In IT Entrepreneurship: A programme was taken on a pilot basis in Mizoram in 
which 400 unemployed youths were given training. 70% of the trained youths 
have been absorbed in the State and outside and 30% have  started their own 
business in IT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17

CHAPTER- II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY 
 
 
2.1 UNDER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee is unhappy to note that only 56.8 % of the allocated fund under plan 
schemes has been utilized upto February end.  The Committee is disappointed to note that 
during the financial year 2008-09, utilization had been low in Bodoland Territorial Council 
(BTC) (67%), Advocacy & Publicity (52.8%), North Eastern Region Livelihood Project 
(73%) and North Eastern State Road Project (Nil). During the financial year upto 28 
February, 2010, under utilization of funds has been reported in sectors like Non-Lapsable 
Central Pool of Resources (41.1%), North Eastern Council (62.5%), Advocacy & Publicity 
(32.5%),  North Eastern Region Livelihood Project (19.2%).  The Committee desires to 
highlight that in the case of projects like NERLP, where the vagaries of weather do not play 
any role, only 19.2% of allocated fund has been utilized. That being the case, the Committee 
is not optimistic that the allocated funds would be full y utilized by March 2010. The 
Committee observes that under- utilization of f unds by the Ministry, makes its case weak 
before the Planning Commission for higher projection for allocation.  The Committee feels 
that outlays made should give the desired results as the Planning Commission would 
consider the demand for higher allocation only when allocated  funds meant for development  
of  NE Region are fully and optimally utilized and show the results.   
(Para 2.1.12) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 Under NLCPR, during 2009-10, against budge t allocation of Rs.700 crore, Rs.668.62 
crore have been released to the NE States  upto March 2010. The utilization of funds is 
95.52%. The Ministry was in position to utili ze the entire budget allocation but Rs.31.38 
crore could not be rele ased to avoid parking of funds w ith State Government, as advised by 
the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
2.2 SLOW PACE OF PROJECTS UNDER NLCPR 
 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee has noted with concern that the Government could complete only 4 
projects out of the 258 infrastructure project s sanctioned during last three years and out of 
these, completion has been delayed in 143. In th is context, the Committee notes that in reply 
to a question, the Ministry has replied that due to their effo rts and coordination with State 
Governments, 112 NLCPR projects have been completed during the last th ree years. It is 
thus not clear whether the figur e of 112 includes the 4 complete d projects mentioned earlier 
or 112 projects in all have been completed since inception of NLCPR.  
(Para 2.3.6) 
 
 18

Action Taken 
2.2.2 During last three financial years a total 114  projects have been completed. This figure 
was inadvertently reported earlier as 112 projects completed, which is regretted. The 114 
projects completed during last three financial years includes the 4 completed projects 
mentioned earlier. 
 
 
2.3 NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL 
 
Recommendation: 
2.3.1 The Committee is at a loss to understand as to how so much amount can be utilized or 
disbursed within one month.  There appears to be something amiss in the system of utilization 
of funds and implementation of schemes.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that this 
may be rectified. 
(Para 2.4.6) 
Action Taken: 
2.3.2 In so far as NEC is concerned, it is undeniable that the amount of Rs. 170.06 crore 
(27.28% of the total  allocation for 2009-10) wa s incurred as expend iture in March,2010, in 
the last month of the financial year and it form s a high percentage of the total release during 
the year but this bunching up of expenditure during the last month was unavoidable as the 
State Governments normally send their priority lists very late in the financial year whereas, 
for releases to the State G overnments (under Major Head-36 01), NEC follows the priorities 
laid down by the State in their respective priority lists. The other reasons for delay are as 
under:  
a) Non-finalisation of CPSMS (the software fo r plan funds release) till August,    2009. 
b) Non-receipt of utilization Certificates from the Implementing   Agencies/State 
Government. 
c) Revision of EFCs for new road schemes. 
d) Clearance of other schemes through NE C-PAC in NEC also took time  due to 
clarifications that were to be obtained from the implementing agencies.     
In future, NEC will try to improve the spacing of expenditure. 
 
 
2.4 NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORPORATION LIMITED 
(NEDFi) 
 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee takes note of the activi ties of NEDFi and its performance and hopes 
that the Corporation will improve its perfor mance in the years to come so that its 
contribution to the economic growth and development of the region becomes significant and 
noteworthy.  The micro-finance scheme of th e Corporation is really good and the Committee 
desires that it may be further strengthened.  
(Para 2.12.8) 
2.4.2 The Committee feels that the government shoul d take further initiatives in the field of 
micro-finance or similar assist ance to self-help gr oups, in terms of quantum and coverage.  
Some beginning   in this area has already   been made by NE DFi. The hill areas are too far 
 19

from the NEDFi office in Guwahati and the cost  of servicing these loans is high both for 
NEDFi and for the loanee. Hence, in the remote  hill areas, the role of intermediaries like 
Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) or NGOs in securing small loans to farmers and 
small-scale industries is crucial. Increasing the number of successful entrepreneurs requires 
the creation of a competiti ve environment which encourages new entrants and provides 
enough finance for efficient enterprises to expand. Appropriate steps are required to be taken 
by the Government in this direction.  
(Para 2.12.9) 
Action Taken  
2.4.3 The Corporation has taken note of  the Committee’s recommendation for 
strengthening its initiative in the micro finance segment.   In addition, the Ministry is taking 
up the matter with the State Governments as well as other stakeholders to further improve the 
performance of the Corporation. 
 
2.4.4 The Ministry is also proposing to support NEDFi in taking up large number of 
entrepreneurship development programmes in the region. 
 
 
2.5 SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN IN THE REGION 
 
Recommendation: 
2.5.1 The Committee observes that  despite the li teracy rate in the NE region standing at 
68.5 per cent, with a female literacy rate at 61.5 per cent, which are higher than the 
country’s average of 64.8 per cent and 53.7 per cent, respectively, there are significant 
variations in the literacy rates among differ ent States, with Assam,  Arunachal Pradesh and 
Meghalaya below the national average. Moreover , there are concerns about the quality of 
education. More importantly, the literacy ra te has not been translated into higher 
employability or productivity. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government   
should popularize the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan in the region, for equitable outcome of the 
scheme in all the States of the region. 
(Para 3.5.3) 
Action Taken: 
2.5.2 Increased funding is being provided to No rth Eastern States for implementation of 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme.  Central releases which were Rs.817.06 crore in 2008-09 
increased to Rs. 905.31 crore in 2009-10.  In 2010-11, a Central budget of Rs. 1397.89 crore 
has been provided for NE States
. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
2.5.3 The Committee urges upon the Government  to properly utilize the enhanced 
allocation by the Central Government for Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme. The 
Government should strive to reduce the variations in the literacy rates among the North 
East States and improve the quality of education.  
 
Recommendation: 
2.5.4 The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that some of the  North-Eastern 
States, namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalay a, Mizoram and Sikkim have not  provided 
their 10% share for Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan which has led to slowdown in implementation of 
 20

this flagship scheme of the Government. The Committee recommends that these State 
Governments should be persuaded to provide thei r share as soon as possible to enable the   
implementation of the Scheme which is meant to  ensure that the fundamental right of the 
children of the country becomes a reality. 
(Para 3.5.4) 
Action Taken: 
2.5.5 As per financial review of all the St ates/UTs done as on 31.3.2010, no state share has 
been pending in respect of Meghalaya, Mizoram & Sikkim.  So far as Arunachal Pradesh is 
concerned, there was a net sh ortfall in state share to th e tune of Rs.28.12 crore.  The 
Arunachal Pradesh Government has been reminded to clear their dues of state share for 
implementation of SSA programme at an early date. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
2.5.6 The Committee hopes that the Government  of Arunachal Pradesh will clear its 
dues of state share for implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme soon. 
 
 
2.6 HYDROPOWER IN THE NORTHEAST:  POTENTIAL AND HARNESSING  
 
Recommendation: 
2.6.1 The Committee feels that development of hy dro electric energy in the region, which 
has vast potential for it, will help make the region as the energy hub.  The Committee 
understands that harnessing the immense untapped hydropower potential in the Northeastern 
Region will open avenues for growth and provide an opportunity to improve the well-being of 
the people, while making substantial contribution to the national economy.  The Committee 
takes note of the fact that out of total potential of about 62604 MW in the region, only 1686 
MW has been harnessed so far. However, the Committee hopes that with the allotment of 
various projects to private and public sectors, the region will see the ray of hope in the years 
to come.  
(Para 3.8.5) 
Action Taken: 
2.6.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been  referred to Ministry of Power, who 
are concerned with the matter, for taking necessary action for harnessing further the untapped 
hydropower potential of the Region. 
 
2.6.3 NEC is also providing support for 18 Hydro-Electric Projects which will have an 
installed capacity of generating 2000 MW power.  It has already helped in the development 
of 673 MW Hydro-Electric Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21

CHAPTER- III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED OR IS NOT SATISFIED WITH THE 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
 
 
3.1 ADVOCACY & PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee takes serious not e of the fact that out of Rs. 6.5 crore allocated under 
the Plan Scheme of Advocacy & Publicity during 2008-09, only an amount of Rs. 3.54 crore 
was spent and also during 2009-10, out of Rs. 6 crore only Rs. 3 crore were spent till 20-03-
2010.  The Committee also takes serious note of the reasons for the savings under the scheme 
in the last two years. Keeping in view the trend of under-utilization of the fund meant for this 
scheme during the previous two consecutive years, the Committee apprehends repeat of the 
same outcome in the year 2010-11.  The Committ ee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that the measures prop osed are actually implemented so that there 
are no unspent balances at the end of the current financial year. The Committee is of the 
view that despite claims of several steps being taken under ‘A dvocacy & Publicity’ by the 
Ministry, the results are still not perceptible. The Committee recommends to the Ministry to 
review its strategy and come out with an innovative idea to showcase the Region to the world 
as an ideal destination for investment, tourism etc. 
(Para 2.6.6) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 The Ministry has taken note of the Co mmittee’s recommendation on its Scheme of 
Advocacy and Publicity.  It would be the endeavour  of the Ministry that there are no unspent 
balances at the end of the financial year.  The Ministry is also in constant touch with the 
various partners in order to fulfill the objectives of the scheme.  A number of new initiatives 
are also proposed to be taken during the year under the scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.3 The Committee is dismayed to observe that  no steps have been taken to arrest 
the trend of under-utilization of the fund meant for this scheme during the previous two 
consecutive years as the actuals 2010- 11 (upto 31.1.2011) stands at Rs. 2.39 crores 
against BE and RE 2010-11 at Rs. 7.00 crores .  The Committee therefore strongly 
recommends that sincere and serious efforts sh ould be taken to ensure that financial 
targets under this scheme are achieved with more inflow of investment in the region. 
The Committee also desires to be apprised of the new initiatives proposed to be taken 
by the Government under the Scheme. 
 
3.2 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
Recommendation: 
3.2.1 The Committee expresses serious concern over  the inordinate delay in setting up the 
Pilot Training Institute at Lilabari, Assam.  The Committee in its One Hundred and Thirty 
Third Report recommended for an early decision in starting the Institute. Again, the 
 22

Committee in its One Hundred and Forty First Report expressed con cern over delay in 
setting up the institute. In spite of this, it is unfortunate that the proposal is at land clearance 
stage though the Committee in its One Hundred and Forty First Report     recommended for 
expediting the process of getting land use clearance from Land Advisory Committee, 
Government of Assam. It is surprising and a c ause of concern that there is no perceptible 
change in the situation. The Committee strong ly recommends that th e land clearance issue 
may be sorted out immediately. The Minist ry of Civil Aviation may send its comments 
immediately on the Expression of  Interest (EoI). The Committee desires that the Institute 
should be functional during 2010-11 positively.  
(Para 2.7.11) 
Action Taken: 
3.2.2 The Ministry has reviewed the case and it was found that at pr esent, there is no 
shortage of pilots at the co-pilot level since a number of institutions have been set up by the 
private-sector.  There is, however, a serious s hortage at the commander level as training 
facilities for such pilots are expensive and requ ired a spare aircraft which airlines or the 
Government has so far not been  able to establish in requi red numbers.  Accordingly, NEC 
has been suggested to explore possibility of partnership with AAI whereby the proposed land 
at Lilabari can be used by AAI  for setting up a composite tr aining facility for ground level 
staff for navigation and aircraft maintenance.  
 
Further Recommendation: 
3.2.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply  given by the Ministry.   The issue is 
being unnecessarily dragged on.   This del aying tactic is not acceptable to the 
Committee.   NEC may explore the possibilit y of partnership with AAI whereby the 
proposed land at Lilabari can be used by  AAI for setting up a composite training 
facility for ground level staff for navigation and aircraft maintenance.   The Committee, 
however, would like to discuss the matter wi th the officers of the Ministry at an 
appropriate time. 
 
 
3.3 EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 As already mentioned ear lier in its One Hundred and Th irty-Third and One Hundred 
and Forty-First Reports, the Committee while expre ssing its displeasure over the sad state of 
affairs, had recommended for earl y operationalization of external ly aided projects like, the 
NESRP, NESTICI and NERLP. However, the projects have still not moved beyond the 
drawing board stage. The Committee again expresses its displeasure over the fact that the 
NESRP is still at the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) preparation stage.  The Committee 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should make sincere ef forts in coordination 
with the Ministry of Finance and the external donor agencies to ensure that the schemes do 
take off during the current financial year. The Committee feels that if the projects do not take 
off soon, they may loose the relevance and utility for the NER. 
(Para 2.8.9) 
 
 
 
 23

Action Taken 
3.3.2 NESRP 
 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) in respect of all the project roads in the first investment 
programme consisting of tranche – I and II have already been prepared.  
 
The successful conclusion of the on going c onsultation mission of ADB on loan appraisal 
requires the accomplishment of the following key activities: 
 
a.    EFC clearance      approval of full Pl anning Commission (FPC)    CCEA approval     
Administrative approval by MDONER to St ate Governments for the recruitment of 
Construction Supervision Consultants (CSC) and recruitment of Project Management and 
Monitoring Consultant by MDONER.  
 
b.  
 DPRs clearance by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
 Land acquisition, wherever required by the State Governments 
 Decision on project road pertaining to the State of Manipur (Loktak Lake issue) 
 
 While the activities mentioned at (a) and lyi ng on the critical path are inter-dependent 
in nature i.e. the next activ ity cannot be undertaken with out the accomplishment of the 
preceding activity, the activities mentioned under (b), though not dependent upon each other, 
are important in nature for enhancing the project implementation readiness and are pre-
requisites for undertaking loan negotiations with ADB.  
 
 Necessary action with regard to the activ ities mentioned at (a) and (b) has already 
been initiated i.e. the matter has already been taken up with the concerned stakeholders. It is 
expected that NESRP will take off during the current financial year 2010-11. 
 
3.3.3 NESTICI
 
The Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) is  again being requested  to impress upon ADB 
to undertake project preparator y activities in order to achi eve full project preparedness 
leading to loan negotiations between ADB and GOI in 2011. 
 
3.3.4 NERLP 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region proposes to implement World Bank Aided 
North East Rural Livelihood Project (NERLP ) from 2010-2017.  The proposed project has 
four major components viz. Social empowerment; Economic empowerment; Partnerships 
development & management and Project manageme nt in the identified two districts each of 
the four North Eastern States, namely, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim. 
 
 For preparation of Detailed Project Repor ts and conduct of the relevant studies, the 
World Bank has provided a Project Preparat ory Facility (PPF) of US $ 1.215 Million 
(approx. Rs.6 crore) which will cover Consultant’s services, holding of Capacity Building 
and Training Workshops, Goods and Operating Costs. 
 
 For effective implementation of the project, a North East Livelihood Promotion 
Society (NELPS) has been constituted and re gistered at Guwahati in May, 2009, Society has 
 24

already started functioning from the month of December 2009, under the supervision of the 
Project Director. 
 
 For the year 2010-11, a provision of Rs.35 cr ore has been kept in the project. 
 
 Ministry of DoNER has awarded the studi es to the firms afte r due consideration 
according to the World Bank guidelines in the th ree fields i) Environmental Assessment ii) 
Social Assessment and iii) Live lihood Studies in consultation with the World Bank.  The 
studies will be completed by the end of November, 2010. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.5 The Committee is disappointed with the tardy progress of the schemes. It is 
unfortunate that the schemes again coul d not take off in the year 2010-11. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for completion of all formalities to ensure 
that the schemes take off in the year 2011-12.   The Committee would also like to discuss 
the issue with the officers of the Ministry at the appropriate time. 
 
 
3.4 NON-PLAN LOANS TO NORT H EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND 
HANDLOOMS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NEHHDC) 
 
Recommendation: 
3.4.1 The Committee is concerned over the fact that the Corporation is a sick unit and has 
been incurring losses since its inception. Even though the sales are increasing, the 
Corporation is not able to turnaround. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should undertake specia l steps for financial and opera tional restructuring of the 
Corporation and make it a viable entity. 
(Para 2.10.6) 
Action Taken: 
3.4.2 In order to make the Corporation a commercially viable unit the Ministry, in 
consultation with the Corpor ation, had prepared a “Turna round Package” involving 
expenditure of Rs.841.25 lac and had referred it to  Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) for its consideration.  The Board considered the Package in its meeting 
held on 4.2.2010 and suggested that  the corporation may be made only a Promotional Body 
and its activities should be fi nanced through the budgetary support of the Ministry.  Further, 
it need not be run as a commercial entity  under the Companies Act, 1956 and may be 
liquidated in its present form.   
 
3.4.3 The Ministry has explained to the Board that the Corporation had been set up with 
sole-objective of promoting Handloom and Handicraft Sectors of the North Eastern Region 
and consequently is performing only promotional activities or acting as a Promotional Body.  
Therefore, whether there is still a need to c onvert it into any other form of Promotional 
Body?  Further, whether for performing its promotional activities can it be provided any 
budgetary support? 
 
The response of the Board is awaited.   
 
 
 25

Further Recommendation 
3.4.4 The Committee desires that the issue should be sorted  out as soon as possible 
with the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). 
 
 
3.5 TOURISM 
 
Recommendation: 
3.5.1 The Committee notes that the flow of tour ists has increased in Sikkim and Arunachal 
Pradesh due to relaxation of LTC Rules. The Committee would however, impress upon the 
Government to ensure that tour ists arriving in North East ar e not harassed and exploited by 
unscrupulous tour operators, travel agents and tout s.  With regard to visit to such places, 
where permit is required, the Committee reco mmends that procedure for obtaining the same 
for restricted areas be simplified.   
(Para 3.2.9) 
Action Taken: 
3.5.2 The recommendation of the Committee has alre ady been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, who are concerned with the matter, for examining the possibility of 
simplifying further the procedure for obtaining permits for visiting restricted areas of the 
North East Region by the tourists. 
 
3.5.3 The recommendation of the Committee is  also being forwarded to the State 
Governments of the North East Region to ensure  that tourist visiting North East Region are 
not harassed and exploited by unscrupulous tour operators, travel agents and touts. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.5.4 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Governments of the NE states on its recommendati on which has been 
forwarded to them. 
 
 
3.6 MONITORING MECHANISM  
 
Recommendation: 
3.6.1 The Committee is of the view that to ma ke any project successful in terms of 
implementation, completion without time and cost over-runs, it is imperative to have a 
proper monitoring mechanism. Unfortunately, desp ite   allocation of large amount of funds 
under various plan schemes, the region is not only lagging behind but the performance of 
most of the schemes is unsatisfactory, which fli es in the face of the monitoring mechanism in 
place. The Committee has repeatedly recommende d in its earlier reports for strengthening 
the monitoring mechanism. Reiterating its earlier recommendation, the Committee desires 
that a robust monitoring mechanism may be put  in place for ensuring timely completion of 
the projects.  
(Para 3.4.5) 
 
Action Taken: 
3.6.2 The Evaluation & Monitoring Sector in  NEC is planning to evolve a robust 
monitoring mechanism for all NEC sponsored  projects. Such mechanism requires an 
 26

adequate strength of manpower with qualified officers and professionals to be drawn from 
varied disciplines comprising the project economists, approved valuers, engineers and other 
experts. Since the E&M Sector in NEC Secret ariat does not have adequate manpower to 
overcome this problem, the NEC has already proposed to set up a Project Formulation and 
Quality Management Cell (PFQM) in the NEC Secretariat in the XIth Five Year Plan, as 
already approved by Planning Commission.   The Cell will be manned by a team of 
consultants/ project managers and experts ex pected to be drawn from different fields. 
Empanelment of the NEDFi has also been taken into consideration while appointing the 
experts. This constitutes the ‘Third Party Monitoring System’. Guidelines for monitoring the 
schemes/ projects are being prepared in the NEC. The ultimate objective is to ensure timely 
completion of projects to avoid time and cost overruns and also for proper implementation of 
the projects.  
 
3.6.3 The monitoring of NLCPR Projects has al so been strengthened by asking the Area 
Officers designated in the Ministry  for eight NE States advised to  take up regular field visits 
to the project site. The Chief Secretaries of NE States have been advised for preparation of an 
Action Plan for completion of the ongoing proj ects. They are advised for holding review 
meetings at their level of NLCPR projects. To strengthen the monitoring mechanism further 
the introduction of third party monitoring of NLCPR projects is under active consideration of 
the Ministry.  
 
3.6.4 In addition, appointment of consultants is under process for the purpose of having a 
robust monitoring mechanism in place in order to ensure timely completion of the projects. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
3.6.5 The Committee takes a serious view of the delay at several levels in putting in 
place a robust monitoring mechanism for ensuri ng timely completion of the projects in 
the NER.  The Committee notes that the various  steps mooted by the Ministry are still 
at proposal stage only.  The Committee woul d, therefore, like to be informed of the 
status of implementation of the various monitoring mechanisms and concrete results 
achieved due to the monitoring systems already in force.  
 
3.7 GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
3.7.1 The Ministry of DoNER and the NEC should engage reputed agencies for 
independent monitoring of the projects and fo r DPR preparation. The expenses for this 
purpose should be charged to the Scheme concerned (NLCPR and NEC). 
 
Action Taken: 
3.7.2 The work for empanelment of consultant s as a Third Party Monitoring System is 
being examined by NEC by involving NEDFi. NEC also has a budget provision to provide 
support for preparation of DPRs by engaging reput ed agencies.  Similarly, to strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism, putting up the system of  third party monitori ng of NLCPR projects, 
is under active consideration of the Ministry.  Under NLCPR, the projects are submitted by 
the State Governments.  The State Government s have been advised for engaging reputed 
agencies for preparation of DPRs.  The Ministry  is also working on standard designs/models 
 27

of some of the projects in consultation w ith the subject matter Ministries and reputed 
institutes, which NE States can use for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
3.7.3 The Committee takes a serious view of the delay at several levels in putting in 
place a robust monitoring mechanism for ensuri ng timely completion of the projects in 
the NER.  The Committee notes that the various  steps mooted by the Ministry are still 
at proposal stage only.  The Committee woul d, therefore, like to be informed of the 
status of implementation of the various monitoring mechanisms and concrete results 
achieved due to the monitoring systems already in force.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28

CHAPTER- IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (BTC) 
 
Recommendation 
4.1.1 The Committee notes the above information.  The Committee desires that the 
remaining twenty five projects should be co mpleted without further delay.  Though financial 
allocation had commenced in 2004-05 and the commitment of a ssistance was completed in 
2008-09 and allocation is still cont inuing, it is unfortunate that the physical targets have not 
been achieved so far.  If it continues like this, the very purpose of financial assistance would 
be defeated. The Committee recommends that the balance amount of Rs. 36.37 crore out of 
the sanctioned amount, may be released at the ear liest so that the projects may be completed 
as per schedule in a time bound manner.   
 (Para 2.5.6) 
Action Taken  
4.1.2 It is a fact that 42 projects with appr oved / indicative cost of Rs. 476.26 crore has 
been sanctioned as per the Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) signed between Govt. of India 
and Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) in the year 2003 wherein it was agreed to provide 
financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore per annum for 5 years (Rs. 500 crores) for projects to 
develop the socio – economic infrastructure in Bodo Territorial Council (BTC) areas over 
and above the normal plan assistance to the St ate of Assam. Agains t the total approved / 
indicative cost of Rs. 476.26 crore, Rs. 450.50 crore has so far been released by this Ministry 
against which the State Government have sent  the UC for Rs. 352.57 crore.  (The figure of 
releases includes Rs.10.61 crore released during 2010-11). The State Government have 
submitted the Completion Certificates (CCs) for 17 Projects.  
 
4.1.3 The matter regarding non – utilization of funds and non – completion of the projects 
after lapse of more than 4 years have been regularly followed – up with the Government of 
Assam / BTC but the desired result could no t be achieved. The matter relating to the 
completion of remaining 25 projects will natu rally be vigorously followed up with the State 
Government / BTC.  
 
4.1.4 So far as releasing the balance amount of  36.37 crore is concerned, Rs. 10.61 crore, as 
shown above, has been released  in the current financial ye ar i.e. 2010 -1 1 (till 10.11.2010) 
and the remaining amount of Rs . 25.76 crore will be released on receipt of all necessary 
documents such as UC, QPR, Inspection Report, Work Plan, Photographs and Reasons for 
delay etc.  
 
Further Recommendation 
4.1.5 The Committee is constrained to express it s displeasure over the fact that despite 
vigorous follow-up action by Ministry of DoNER, the projects could not be completed in 
time.  The Committee recommends that all th e projects should be completed and the 
funds allocated should be utilized on with in a strict timeframe. The Committee notes 
that the Government has still not released th e balance of the sanctioned amount for the 
year 2009-10.   The Committee hopes that the Ministry of DONER would play an active 
 29

role in procuring all the necessary docume nts viz. UC, QPR, Inspection Report, Work 
Plan, etc. for timely release of funds so  that the pending projects are completed 
expeditiously.  
 
4.2 CONNECTIVITY 
 
Recommendation: 
4.2.1 The Committee feels that development of infras tructure in the civil aviation sector has 
been hit by bottlenecks mainly on account of  land acquisition and environmental issues. In 
this context, the Committee woul d like to suggest that a Master Plan for creation of civil 
aviation facilities in NE Region on the lines of the Road Development Plan namely SARDP-
NE may be prepared. In this connection, the Committee would like to mention that in its One 
Hundred and Thirty-third and One Hundred and Forty-first reports, it had recommended for 
completion of upgradation of the airports with out further delay. The Committee, reiterating 
its earlier recommendations, desires that all necessary steps may be taken for development of 
existing airports and upgradation and operationalisation of non-operational airports in the 
NER within a strict time schedule.  
(Para 3.3.17) 
Action Taken: 
4.2.2 The para has been referred to the Mini stry of Civil Aviation for seeking their 
comments and the same are awaited. 
4.2.3 The responsibility of development of airpor ts and air connectivity rests with Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. However, NEC has supported the development of the Airports in the NER. 
The issue of Master Plan on the lines of SARD P-NE was raised in the meeting held in the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on a number of occasions. The issue was reiterated by the 
Secretary, DoNER in a meeting held on 13.1. 2010 and 19.5.2010 in the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has inst ructed the Airports Authority of India to do 
the needful. Regarding the upgradation of ex isting airports, NEC ha s already funded the 
upgradation of 10 Airports in the region. Due to  the problem of land acquisition, two airports 
viz;  Dibrugarh (Assam) and Umroi (Meghalaya) are yet to be completed by the AAI. In 
order to make the non-functional airport at Tezu, operational, the NEC has accorded 100% 
financial support.  
4.2.4 Keeping in view the importa nce of the Sector, the Hon’ ble Minister himself took a 
meeting on 4.10.10 to discuss issues related with the development of Airports in the North 
Eastern Region which was attende d by senior officers from Air ports Authority of India and 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
Further Recommendation 
4.2.5 The Committee has found the action take n reply of the Ministry to be too 
general to be commented upon.  The Committe e has not been apprised of the current 
scenario with respect to the development of airports and air connectivity.  The 
Committee calls upon the Ministry to send a comprehensive status report to it 
immediately. 
 
 
 
 
 30

Recommendation: 
4.2.6 The Committee understands that improving connectivity is the only way to develop 
North Eastern Region and the Government should accord top priority to it. The Committee 
recommends that the Government should expedite  all the projects on hand for linking the 
States of the region through rail  network.   The target now fixed for the co mpletion of the 
projects is 2016. Though the target year is fa r away, yet the Committee desires that the 
Government should stick to this targeted period.  
(Para 3.3.18) 
Action Taken: 
4.2.7 The para has been referred to the Minist ry of Railways for s eeking their comments 
and the same are awaited. 
4.2.8 However, Ministry of DoNER has been pur suing the projects to facilitate the States’ 
efforts. The works on all the railway lines to co nnect the State capitals are at different stages 
of progress. The NEF Railways face problems of land acquisition and finalization of the rail 
alignment and for this, regular review meetings are being held with the state representatives.  
Further Recommendation 
4.2.9 The Committee reiterates its recommendation  that the Government should stick 
to the target for linking the States of th e region through rail network. The Committee 
expresses its displeasure over the fact that Ministry of Railways has not furnished its 
comments even after such a long time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
DoNER should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Railways.  
 
4.3 MONITORING MECHANISM 
Recommendation: 
4.3.1 The Committee further recommends that there should be a separate wing of the 
Central Vigilance Commission ex clusively for North Eastern Region to oversee proper 
utilization of public funds for NER projects, from the vigilance angle.  
(Para 3.4.6)  
4.3.2 The Committee is also of the view that since huge amount of money is being spent on 
various projects in NE region and there is  a general feeling of misappropriation and 
siphoning of funds and that so me underground groups are also  illegally receiving some 
portion of funds, a post of Joint Director, CBI is required to be created for NE Region, to 
look into such cases. 
(Para 3.4.7) 
Action Taken: 
4.3.3 Since the recommendations concern DOP&T, these have been referred to them for 
taking further necessary appropriate action.  
 
Further Recommendation: 
4.3.4 The Committee desires to be apprised immediately of the response of the 
Government. 
 
 
 31

4.4 KEY AREAS AND PROJECTS UNDER LOOK EAST POLICY  
Recommendation: 
4.4.1 The Committee is of the considered view t hat various road projects linking the region 
with neighbouring landlocked countries could be of great help in increasing border trade 
with neighbouring countries and tackling insurgency in the region. The Committee also feels 
that the initiatives viz. Ka ladan multi-modal project, constr uction of Rih-Tidim and Rih-
Falam Road, Ashuganj (Bangladesh) as port of call , direct bus service from Kolkata to 
Agartala, project on Tri-latera l highway connecting Moreh to Maesot (Thailand) via Bagan 
(Myanmar) and improvement of Tamu Kalemyo Kalewa (TKK) Road in Myanmar, etc would 
greatly help opening commercial trade with the neighbouring countries of Bangladesh and 
Myanmar. The Committee, therefore, recommends  that under the ‘Look East Policy’, the 
Government may undertake steps towards completion of these projects at the earliest. 
(Para 3.6.10) 
Action Taken: 
4.4.2 The para has been referred to Ministry of  External Affairs for their comments which 
are awaited. 
 
Further Recommendation 
4.4.3 The Committee reiterates its recommenda tion that the Government should 
complete all the projects at the earliest . The Committee calls upon the Ministry of 
DoNER should pursue the matter with the Mini stry of External Affairs and apprise it 
immediately of their response in the matter.  
 
 
4.5 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
4.5.1 The Committee has been given to understand that there is huge potential of 
agriculture and allied sectors in the Nort h East and there is also a huge gap between 
potential and actual realization. In the agriculture and allied sect or, investment is low.  The 
Ministry should, therefore, unde rtake steps for ensuring special attention to th e agriculture 
sector.  
(Para 3.9) 
Action Taken: 
4.5.2 The matter  has  been  taken  up  with the Ministry of Agriculture.  In this regard, it is  
also pertinent to mention that recently the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries has organized a review meeting on 18 /5/2010 at Guwahati with the officials of NE 
States.  A number of issues have been iden tified and follow up actio n is being taken to 
improve the performance of this sector. 
 
4.5.3 A dedicated Small & Medium Enterprises (SME) Debt Fund is needed in the Region  
to help first time entrepreneurs, which may be considered for being set up by SIDBI in 
association with major Banks.  
 
4.5.4 Reduction  in  Guarantee  Fee (GF)  and Annual Service Fee (ASF) from 1.5% to 1%  
and from 0.75% to 0.5%, respectively, unde r the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) of Credit 
Guarantee Fund Trust For Micro A nd Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)  is a welcome step. But, 
 32

for NER, CGTMSE may consider further reduc tion of 50% in GF and ASF to make it more 
effective in the NER. 
 
4.5.5 Interest Subvention provided in the agricultu re sector to commercial banks (lending 
at 7% with the shortfall being made up by Government of India) should be widened to 
include NBFC development finance institution (like NEDFi) not only for agricultural credit 
but also for promoting first generation entrepreneurs in the NER for projects upto Rs. 50 
lakh. The actual lending rate in such cases should be 7% with the deficit being made good by 
the Government of India. 
(Para 3.9) 
Action Taken: 
4.5.6 The matter has been taken up with the Depa rtment of Financial Services, Ministry 
of Finance.  Their response is awaited. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
4.5.7 The Committee feels that the government  should pay more attention to the 
agriculture and allied sectors in the region. The Committee takes serious note of the 
fact that the Department of Financial Serv ices, Ministry of Finance has not furnished 
its response even after a long gap. The Co mmittee feels that the Ministry of DoNER 
should have pursued the matter with the concerned Ministry and place the comments 
before the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 33

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  - AT A 
GLANCE 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF NER PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee, while noting the reply, desires to be informed of the steps taken 
by the State Governments in this regard and the impact thereof.                     (para 1.1.5) 
   
TIMELY APPROVAL OF FUNDS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Planning Commission 
should consider enhanced requirement of the Ministry of DoNER so that the projects 
undertaken and proposed to be undertaken, ma
y not be affected for want of funds.                                 
                                                                                                                                  (para 1.2.5) 
 
 
TIMELY COMPLETION OF PROJECTS UNDER NLCPR 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed of the action taken by 
the State Governments and the impact thereof.                                                 (para 1.3.4) 
 
 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
 The Committee would like to be informed of the outcome of the efforts made by 
the Government on its recommendation.                                                             (para 1.5.3) 
 
 
SCHEME UNDER SPECIAL FUND FOR INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADATION IN 
NORTH EASTERN REGION.  
 
 The Committee recommends that the pr ojects already sanctioned may be 
implemented within a fixed time schedule. The projects proposed to be sanctioned, may 
also be cleared at the earliest.                                                                                (para 1.6.4) 
 
TRANSFER OF HILL AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (HADP) AND 
BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (BADP) 
 
 The Committee notes the decision taken by the Government.              (para 1.8.3) 
 
 
TOURISM  
 
 The Committee is hopeful that the comprehensive Tourism Master Plan has 
been prepared. Steps should be taken to implement the same.                          (para 1.9.5) 
 
 
 34

VISION NER 2020 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of bi-annual status reports on action 
taken to implement the vision NER 2020 Document.                                       (para 1.13.3) 
 
 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommenda tion that the Government should 
provide attractive incentives, over and above the existing allowances to the officials 
posted in the NER,  to overcome the problem of shortage of officials in that region. 
(para 1.14.6) 
 
SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN IN THE REGION 
 
 The Committee urges upon the Government to properly utilize the enhanced 
allocation by the Central Government for Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme. The 
Government should strive to reduce the variations in the literacy rates among the North 
East States and improve the quality of education.                                             (para 2.5.3) 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Government of Arunachal Pradesh will clear its 
dues of state share for implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme soon.                                 
                                                                                                                                  (para 2.5.6) 
 
ADVOCACY & PUBLICITY 
 
 The Committee is dismayed to observe that  no steps have been taken to arrest 
the trend of under-utilization of the fund meant for this scheme during the previous two 
consecutive years as the actuals 2010- 11 (upto 31.1.2011) stands at Rs. 2.39 crores 
against BE and RE 2010-11 at Rs. 7.00 crores .  The Committee therefore strongly 
recommends that sincere and serious efforts should be taken to ensure that financial 
targets under this scheme are achieved with more inflow of investment in the region. 
The Committee also desires to be apprised of the new initiatives proposed to be taken 
by the Government under the Scheme.                                                                (para 3.1.3) 
 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply  given by the Ministry.   The issue is 
being unnecessarily dragged on.   This del aying tactic is not acceptable to the 
Committee.   NEC may explore the possibi lity of partnership with AAI whereby the 
proposed land at Lilabari can be used by  AAI for setting up a composite training 
facility for ground level staff for navigation and aircraft maintenance.   The Committee, 
however, would like to discuss the matter wi th the officers of the Ministry at an 
appropriate time.                                                                                                    (para 3.2.3) 
 
 
 
 
 35

EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee is disappointed with the tardy progress of the schemes. It is 
unfortunate that the schemes again coul d not take off in the year 2010-11. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for completion of all formalities to ensure 
that the schemes take off in the year 2011-12.   The Committee would also like to discuss 
the issue with the officers of the Ministry at the appropriate time. 
(para 3.3.5) 
 
NON-PLAN LOANS TO NORTH EAS TERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS 
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NEHHDC) 
 
 The Committee desires that the issue shou ld be sorted out as soon as possible 
with the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). 
(para 3.4.4) 
 
TOURISM 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the action taken by Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Governments of the NE states on its recommendati on which has been 
forwarded to them.                                                                                                 (para 3.5.4) 
 
 
MONITORING MECHANISM 
 
 The Committee takes a serious view of the delay at several levels in putting in 
place a robust monitoring mechanism for ensuri ng timely completion of the projects in 
the NER.  The Committee notes that the various  steps mooted by the Ministry are still 
at proposal stage only.  The Committee woul d, therefore, like to be informed of the 
status of implementation of the various monitoring mechanisms and concrete results 
achieved due to the monitoring systems already in force.  
(para 3.6.5) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
 The Committee takes a serious view of the delay at several levels in putting in 
place a robust monitoring mechanism for ensuri ng timely completion of the projects in 
the NER.  The Committee notes that the various  steps mooted by the Ministry are still 
at proposal stage only.  The Committee woul d, therefore, like to be informed of the 
status of implementation of the various monitoring mechanisms and concrete results 
achieved due to the monitoring systems already in force.  
(para 3.7.3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36

BODOLAND TERRITORIAL COUNCIL (BTC) 
 
 The Committee is constrained to express it s displeasure over the fact that despite 
vigorous follow-up action by Ministry of DoNER, the projects could not be completed in 
time.  The Committee recommends that all th e projects should be completed and the 
funds allocated should be utilized on with in a strict timeframe. The Committee notes 
that the Government has still not released th e balance of the sanctioned amount for the 
year 2009-10.   The Committee hopes that the Ministry of DONER would play an active 
role in procuring all the necessary docume nts viz. UC, QPR, Inspection Report, Work 
Plan, etc. for timely release of funds so  that the pending projects are completed 
expeditiously.                                                                                                          (para 4.1.5) 
 
CONNECTIVITY 
 
 The Committee has found the action take n reply of the Ministry to be too 
general to be commented upon.  The Committe e has not been apprised of the current 
scenario with respect to the development of airports and air connectivity.  The 
Committee calls upon the Ministry to send a comprehensive status report to it 
immediately.                                                                                                            (para 4.2.5) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation  that the Government should stick 
to the target for linking the States of th e region through rail network. The Committee 
expresses its displeasure over the fact that Ministry of Railways has not furnished its 
comments even after such a long time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
DoNER should pursue the matter with the Ministr
y of Railways.                                                                
                                                                                                                                  (para 4.2.9) 
MONITORING MECHANISM 
 The Committee desires to be apprised  immediately of the response of the 
Government. 
(para 4.3.4) 
KEY AREAS AND PROJECTS UNDER LOOK EAST POLICY  
 The Committee reiterates its recommenda tion that the Government should 
complete all the projects at the earliest . The Committee calls upon the Ministry of 
DoNER should pursue the matter with the Mini stry of External Affairs and apprise it 
immediately of their response in the matter.  
(para 4.4.3) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Committee feels that the government  should pay more attention to the 
agriculture and allied sectors in the region. The Committee takes serious note of the 
fact that the Department of Financial Serv ices, Ministry of Finance has not furnished 
its response even after a long gap. The Co mmittee feels that the Ministry of DoNER 
should have pursued the matter with the concerned Ministry and place the comments 
before the Committee.                                                                                            (para 4.5.7) 
 
 37

RAJYA SABHA 
MINUTES OF MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-
RELATEDPARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON HOME 
AFFAIRS 
 
XVII  
 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING  
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 15 th April 2011 in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.   Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu -  Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3.    Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri L.K. Advani 
6.    Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
7.    Adv. A. Sampath 
8.    Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9.    Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
10.    Shri Ravneet Singh 
11.    Shri Harsh Vardhan 
12. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
 
 38

 39
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
2.  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
3.  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
 
 
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
 
3.0 The Chairman then informed the Members that the meeting has been scheduled  to 
consider and adopt the draft 149
th & 150th Reports on:- 
 
(i) The Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 145
th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of DoNER; and 
 
(ii) The Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 144
th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
Draft 149th Report  
 
4.0 The Committee then first took up for consideration the draft 149 th  Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the obser vations/recommendations contained in the 
145th Report on Demands for Grants  (2010-11) of the Ministry of DoNER.  The Members 
discussed in detail the draft re port.   After some discussion, the Committee adopted the same 
with some changes. The Chairman and Memb ers of the Committee then felt that the 
Committee should discuss the is sues of underdevelopment in  the NE Region with the 
concerned Ministries later.   The Committee agreed to the proposal.   
 
Draft 150th Report 
 
5.0 The Committee, thereafter,  took up for consideration the draft 150 th  Report on the 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 144th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.  The Committee 
discussed in detail the draft report and adopted the same with some changes. 
 
6.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
7.0 The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. 
 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                   D.K. MISHRA 
18 May 2011                                                                      JOINT DIRECTOR  
***** 