PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 123
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27  FEBRUARY, 2007)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27  FEBRUARY, 2007)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27  FEBRUARY, 2007)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27  FEBRUARY, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL BILL, 2006

105
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL BILL, 2006
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27 TH FEBRUARY , 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27 TH FEBRUARY , 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-237

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—8
4. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................. 9—10
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 1 1—32
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 33 —104
I. The Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006 .................................................................. 73—98
II. Replies of the Ministry to the questionnaire prepared by the
Secretariat on the Bill ........................................................................................... 99—104

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August, 2006)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri N. Jothi
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Km. Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Shri T.K. Hamza
19. Shri Raghunath Jha
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Ajit Jogi
22. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
23. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
*27. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 10th October, 2006 vice Shri Rahul Gandhi who is nominated to Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Twenty-third Report of the Committee on the Sashastra Seema Bal
Bill, 2006.*
2. In pursuance to sub rule (a) of Rule 273 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in the Rajya Sabha, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 3rd August 2006 referred** the Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
(Annexure-I), as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28th July 2006 and pending therein, to the
Committee for examination and report. The Chairman directed the Committee, under sub-rule (b)
of Rule 273 of the Rules of Procedure to present the Report on the Bill within three months from
the date of reference.
3. The Committee at its meeting held on 30th October, 2006 felt that it would need more time
to complete examination of the Bill and accordingly decided to seek extension upto the last day of
the first week of Budget Session (2007). The Chairman, Rajya Sabha accordingly granted extension
of time as requested by the Committee for presentation of its report to Parliament.***
4. In its meeting held on 20th September, 2006, the Committee heard the presentation of the
Special Secretary (Internal Security), Ministry of Home Affairs on the Bill and held preliminary
discussion thereon.
4.1 In its sittings held on 8th and 9th January, 2007, the Committee held detailed discussion
on the Bill. The Committee thereafter considered the Bill clause-by-clause on 9th January, 2007.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report on the Bill in its sitting held on 22nd February, 2007
and adopted the same.
6. In examining the Bill and in finalizing its report, the Committee has made use of the
following material sources:
(i) background note;
(ii) replies to the questionnaire (Annexure-II) ;
(iii) presentation of the Special Secretary, Internal Security, MHA; and
(iv) oral evidence of Home Secretary.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
22 February, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
* Bill published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Section-2, dated 28th July, 2006.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 43344 dated 3rd August, 2006.
*** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 43511 dated 7th November, 2006.

1
REPORT
SPECIAL SERVICE BUREAU
Historical Perspective
The Special Service Bureau (SSB) was raised in 1963 under the Ministry of External Affairs
in the backdrop of the Chinese aggression of 1962 and pursuant to the philosophy that security
of the borders was not the responsibility of armed forces alone and that it also requires a well-
motivated and trained border population. The SSB came under the Prime Minister’s Secretariat on
January 1, 1965 and subsequently it was transferred to Cabinet Secretariat on September 1, 1965.
The organization was initially functional in the region of the then North East Frontier, N orth Assam,
North Bengal, hills of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu. Subsequently, its activities
were extended to other border areas in Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Mizoram, South Bengal, Nagaland and some areas of Kashmir valley. In January, 2001, on transfer
of the Special Service Bureau from Cabinet Secretariat to Ministry of Home Affairs, it was assigned
the new role of a border guarding force on Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. The name
of Special Service Bureau was changed to Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) with effect from
27th March, 2004.
Role in earlier set up
1.1 The role of SSB in its earlier set up was to inculcate a sense of security and spirit of
resistance amongst the border populace, promoting national awareness and security consciousness
among the people of the border areas, generating mass support in the border areas through National
Integration Programmes and welfare activities, organizing and preparing border population to resist
enemy and perform ‘Stay Behind’ role during invasion/occupation and countering enemy
propaganda through psychological war operations and awareness campaigns.
Change in Organizational Structure
1.2. The organizational structure and sphere of responsibility of the SSB have undergone a
qualitative change since its inception in 1963. On January 15, 2001, the administrative control of
the SSB was transferred to the Ministry of Home Affairs, in pursuance of the recommendations
of the Group of Ministers (GoM) on reforming the National Security System. The GoM
recommended the principle of ‘one border one force’ for better accountability and also
recommended the necessity of comprehensive border management including management of Indo-
Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. Accordingly, the Ministry of Home Affairs entrusted to the SSB
the role of guarding Indo-Nepal Border stretching over 1751 kms. w.e.f. June 19, 2001 with the
following objectives, namely:
(i) to promote a sense of security among the people living in the border area;
(ii) to prevent trans-border crimes and unauthorized entry into or exit from the territory
of India; and
(iii) to prevent smuggling and any other illegal activities.
1.2.1 On June 29, 2001, SSB was declared as a Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) for Indo-Nepal
Border. On March 12, 2004 the Ministry of Home Affairs further assigned the task of guarding
Indo-Bhutan Border to the SSB, stretching over 699 kms. The SSB seeks to achieve these

2
objectives by policing the border through Armed Combatised Wing, which is being restructured by
the Ministry of Home Affairs into 41 Battalions of 7 Companies each.
1.2.2 After transfer of SSB to MHA, both the uniformed and non-uniformed wings of the Force
are functioning. However, as per the policy decision of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Area
Wing (non-uniformed) component of the SSB shall be phased out systematically on account of
promotion or retirement etc. and vacancies arising thereof shall be filled up by the corresponding
combatized personnel on the base posts. For the purposes of governance of the non-uniformed
civilian component the same shall continue to be dealt with under the relevant Central Government
Rules till they are phased out.
1.2.3 The Government now feels it necessary that a comprehensive legislation be enacted on
account of the following factors on the lines of similar law enacted for the Indo-Tibetan Border
Police (ITBP).
(i) to lend statutory backing to the organisation and clothe it with a separate and
independent identity at par with other Border Guarding Forces (BGFs);
(ii) to dispense with the existing arrangement of extending selective applicability of the
provisions of the CRPF Act, 1949 to SSB personnel and to introduce uniformity by
enacting a separate comprehensive legislation for the SSB;
(iii) to reinforce superintendence, guidance and control for effective operational efficiency
and management of the organization to achieve its organizational objectives as a BGF;
and
(iv) to pave way for cohesive organizational structure as also to provide for a set of rules,
methods and procedures in matters of discipline and performance.
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE BILL
2. The Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006  (Annexure-I)  seeks to regulate the Sashastra Seema
Bal inter alia with the following salient features:
(a) Creation of SSB as an armed force of the Union with provision for control, direction
and service conditions of the personnel;
(b) Bringing under purview of the proposed Bill all persons appointed (whether on
deputation or in any other manner) in the Force, namely;
(i) Officers and subordinate officers; and
(ii) Under-Officers and other personnel so enrolled.
(c) Constitution of the SSB Force ‘Courts and provision for the powers, processes and
procedures to be followed, and, the penalties which can be imposed. Death penalty
has also been stipulated for certain grave categories of offences.
3. The Bill introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28 July, 2006 and pending therein, was referred
to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on 3 August, 2006
for examination and report.
PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSIONS
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs made a presentation before the
Committee on 20th September, 2006. Further, oral evidence of Home Secretary was recorded on
9th January, 2007.

3
4.1 The Special Secretary and the concerned Joint Secretary in the Ministry made presentation/
observations on the history of the force, its complete makeover from its previous role to its present
mandate and also on the highlights of the provisions of the Bill.
THE ISSUES
5. During the presentation and oral evidence of Home Secretary, the following points emerged
on which the Committee deliberated. The Ministry’s response thereto and Committee’s observations
on each point are as follows:-
RELEVANCE OF INITIAL ROLE:
6. As already explained earlier, the role of SSB has changed from a ‘stay behind role’ in the
event of external aggression to a ‘Border Guarding Force’ after it has come under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs in 2001.
6.1 Pursuant to the acceptance of the recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GoM) on
Reforming National Security System, administrative control of the SSB was transferred from the
Cabinet Secretariat to the Ministry of Home Affairs with effect from 15.1.2001. Accordingly, the
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has entrusted the SSB with the task of guarding Indo-Nepal
Border stretching over 1751 kilometres in the States of Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West
Bengal and Sikkim and Indo-Bhutan Border stretching over 699 kilometres in the States of Sikkim,
West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh and also designated it as the Lead Intelligence Agency
(LIA) in the areas of deployment.
6.2 The Committee understands that the Padmanabhaiah Committee recommended for
continuation of the organisation’s motivational role for security preparedness in border areas where
the SSB enjoyed goodwill and popular support. However, this does not find place in the present
Charter of Duties of the SSB.
6.3 On the relevance of the original role of the Force i.e. ‘Stay Behind Role’, the Home
Secretary stated that the specific mention of that role has been omitted from the Charter of Duties
of the SSB. The SSB has now been reorganized. He however added that despite omission of the
‘Stay Behind Role’ in the Charter of the Force, as and when required, it may be asked to perform
its original functions like motivating and morale boosting of the border populace, providing medical
and educational aid and helping them in a variety of other ways. The Home Secretary observed that
it is a very sensitive area and the people in and without uniform perform all these functions.
6.4 The Home Secretary agreed with the unanimous view of the Committee that the original role
of the SSB should be clearly spelt out. He agreed that there is a need for appropriately clarifying
the ‘Civic Action Programme’ of the SSB. He assured the Committee that the ‘Civic Action Role’
of all the BGFs including the SSB would be formalized by executive orders.
6.5 The Committee takes note of the fact that the role of the erstwhile SSB was inter
alia to promote national awareness and security consciousness among the people of the
border areas. The Committee feels that the original role of SSB is relevant even to this day.
The Committee accordingly recommends that the erstwhile role of the SSB should be clearly
spelt out in the statute. It is however apprehensive of the fact as to how effectively the
uniformed force would perform the ‘Stay Behind Role’ so efficiently performed by its non-
uniformed wing. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
consider this aspect in the light of the sensitivities of the border areas. It is the considered
view of the Committee that love, affection and esteem of the people cannot be gained by
bullets but by benevolence. Winning hearts and minds of the people is far more important
than combatised action. The Committee apprehends that the proposed combatisation of the

4
non-combatised wing may prove counter-productive due to lack of developmental and
welfare activities. The SSB has been declared as a Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) for Indo-
Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. Presently, the main tasks of LIA are being carried out in
the field formations of SSB by the civil components (non-uniformed) which are receiving
applauds from all the quarters concerned which is possible because the civil component
enjoys the love and affection of the masses and are carrying benevolent activities for the
border populace. The Committee recommends that the Government may consider retaining
the non-combatised wing permanently. Since the Home Secretary has agreed to include the
Civic Action Programme in the role of SSB, the non-combatised wing can be better utilised
for the Civic Action Programme.
COMBATISED VS. NON-COMBATISED WINGS
7. There is a role-reversal for combatised and non-combatised personnel of the Force. Earlier,
the non-combatised wing was the main wing and the combatised wing was supporting it. Now,
being the Border Guarding Force (BGF), the combatised force is the main wing while the non-
combatised force is being phased out. Some Members were concerned about the future of the non-
combatised wing.
7.1 On a query as to whether the promotional avenues of the non-combatised force are likely
to be affected, the Ministry in its written reply stated that consequent upon shifting of
administrative control of SSB from Cabinet Secretariat to MHA and subsequent change in the role
of SSB, the Force has been recognized as a BGF, which has led to the reorganization of the Force
for rationalisation of command structure. Despite the decision to phase out the non-combatised
cadres, they are being allowed promotions within their own cadre as hitherto. It has been further
stated that in order to ensure that the promotion of non-combatised personnel do not suffer as a
result of rationalization of the posts in SSB, the Government has already decided to give an
opportunity to willing/eligible civilian personnel to opt for combatisation. Remaining civilian
personnel would continue in their respective grades and enjoy the existing perks/promotional
avenues.
7.2 On a query as to whether the officers of the SSB are happy with the changed role, the
Additional Director-General, SSB stated that, by and large, the officers of the Force are happy to
get combatised. When this offer was given, a large number of medical cadre, which was earlier
non-combatised, have opted and have put on their uniform. Many more persons, particularly from
engineering and para-engineering cadres as well as the veterinary and para-veterinary cadres, which
are non-combatised, want to get combatised because they gain in terms of leave, various
allowances such as uniform allowance, etc. Accordingly, they are now in the process of being
given that option. Many officers are very keen that this should be done at the earliest. The Home
Secretary further added that though the option for being combatised is given, others will not be
retrenched or thrown out of service. They will continue till the time they reach their
superannuation. But, there will be no fresh recruitment in non-combatised or civilian component of
the force because that role has got merged into the present configuration.
7.3 The Committee is of the view that with the enactment of the Bill, the complexion
of the Force is going to undergo a metamorphosis. This phase is very crucial for the
personnel working in the non-combatised wing. The Committee is given to understand that,
despite a positive picture depicted by the Home Secretary and the Additional Director-
General of the SSB, the decision to phase out the non-combatised Force has badly affected
their morale and caused disenchantment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
civilian cadres should be reviewed immediately to facilitate their promotional avenues at par
with the combatised wing. They should continue to be allowed to work with dignity and

5
honour without any adverse impact on their career prospects, whether they opt for the
combatised wing or not.
DEFINITION OF ‘ENEMY’
8. The Committee found that the definition of the term ‘enemy’ as contained in the Bill was
deficient inasmuch as it does not include illegal migrants and needed to be re-looked. A view was
also expressed that the activities of agencies such as ISI and the fake currency racketeers and
related activities needed to be brought under the scope of the definition.
8.1 The Home Secretary agreed that the definition of ‘enemy’ was deficient and needed to be
reconsidered. He, however, felt that bringing ‘illegal migrants’ within the scope of the definition
would not be appropriate as it would involve humanitarian aspects and some international covenants
to which India was a signatory.
8.2 The Committee recommends that the definition of ‘enemy’ may be made more
comprehensive bringing persons involved in illegal and contraband activities under its scope.
ENROLMENT OF NON-CITIZENS IN SSB
9. The Bill provides for enrolment of a non-citizen for a limited period in the Force with the
approval of the Central Government. The Committee was at a loss to understand the rationale of
this provision, particularly when there is no such provision in the Acts of BGFs.
9.1 The Ministry in the written reply stated that the draft SSB Bill, 2006 had been framed on
the basis of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 in which enrolment has been defined
in Clause 6 which is as follows:
“6 Enrolment – The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment, and the
procedure of enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed.”
In the process of finalization of the Draft Bill, a thorough examination of the instant clause
was conducted and it was observed that Clause 6 of the ITBP Act, 1992 provided a scope for
enrolment of non-citizens as per policy of the Government of India in vogue which envisaged that
citizens of Nepal and Bhutan can be appointed to posts in the Central Government.
9.2 In this context the Ministry of Home Affairs in its written response further stated as under:
“‘In view of the deployment of the SSB on the Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Border, it was
considered appropriate not to induct citizens of Nepal and Bhutan in SSB contemplating that
such enrolment may create problems in the effective vigil of these borders. Taking into
consideration the above-said administrative aspects and that no such provision exists in the
BSF Act, 1968 and the ITBP Act, 1992, it was felt necessary to incorporate an additional
sub-clause to Clause 6 in the Draft SSB Bill, 2006 as below:
‘(2) A person other than a citizen of India shall not be enrolled in the Force except with
the approval of the Central Government, granted for a limited period, having regard to the
special services required in the interest of the security of Borders of India’.
It is worthwhile to mention that the aforesaid addition to the Clause was made with an
intention to exercise an administrative check on recruitment of non-citizens, simultaneously
keeping the possibilities of such enrolment through specific permission of the Central
Government for a limited period. It is an exception and not the rule.
However, there is no objection even if the Clause of recruiting/enrolling non-citizens for a
limited period is deleted.”

6
9.3 The Home Secretary, during the course of his oral evidence, appreciated the concerns of
the Members of the Committee. He assured the Committee that the Government will have a fresh
look at the clause.
9.4 The Committee feels that enrolling of non-citizens, though for a limited period,
would not be appropriate in the interest of security of the borders of India. Such services
could also be taken from non-citizens without enrolling them. The Committee recommends
that clause 6 (2) may be re-looked.
NEED FOR DIFFERENT FORCE NOMENCLATURE
10. Some Members were of the view that though there are different BGFs known by different
names guarding different stretches of the country’s borders, basically, their function was the same.
A view emerged in the Committee that instead of numerous BGFs on different Borders, there could
be one common BGF, by whatever name called, indicating clearly the border that is being guarded
by the force like BGF (Nepal), BGF (Pakistan), BGF (Bangladesh), etc.
10.1 On this, the Home Secretary responded that India has 15000 kilometres long land border and
about 7000 kilometres coastal border. In this land border of 15,000 kilometres, different Forces are
at different stretches. BSF guards Pakistan and Bangladesh Borders, whereas ITBP is on the China
Border. SSB has been given the task to guard Nepal and Bhutan Borders. The sensitivities of each
border are different in nature. He further elaborated that the sensitivities involved with Nepal and
Bhutan are different from that of Myanmar, Bangladesh or even from Pakistan. The training given,
the sensitization, the equipment are all done considering the nature of the Force and the border
involved. They become specialist officers manning the particular border which is very essential.
10.2 The Home Secretary also stated that in addition to the sensitivities of the Border, ‘cadre
management’ is an important issue. The Forces are already so huge that if they are merged
together, it becomes a monolithic Force of about four lakh. This will create innumerable problems.
Further, all the Forces are very old and many are older than SSB. Assam Rifles is the oldest Force;
SSB, ITBP are older than BSF. Each Force has its own pride and they want to retain that. The
Home Secretary, therefore, stated that it would be better to maintain the status quo .
10.3 The Committee agrees with the views of the Ministry.
DEPUTATION OF IPS OFFICERS
11. Clause 3 provides that the person appointed, whether on deputation or in any other manner,
will be subject to this Act. One of the Members raised a query as to whether the IPS officers who
come on deputation to SSB would be governed by this Act or would be regulated by the All-India
Services Conduct Rules.
11.1 Clarifying the issue, the Home Secretary stated that as per the guidelines of Department of
Personnel and Training, deputation is with the consent of the individual. No officer is sent on
deputation to another place without obtaining his consent. If an IPS officer gives his consent that
he is willing to go to the SSB, for all practical purposes, he will be subjected to the regime of
this Act. He further stated that the provision is also there in ITBP Act and is functioning well. The
Home Secretary added that as regards those who are already serving in SSB on deputation, their
consent will again be taken before the Act comes into force. He also assured the Committee to
examine inclusion of such a provision in BSF and CRPF Acts also.
11.2 The Committee notes the clarification given by the Home Secretary. The Committee
recommends that provisions similar to Clause 3 of the present Bill may be introduced in
other Acts also.

7
BORDER AREA DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (BADP)
12. A Member expressed concern over proper utilization of funds meant for BADP. He felt that
practically the BADP fund is entrusted to State Governments and in turn it is allocated under MLA
Local Area Development Fund, which is utilised in the district headquarters for constructing school
buildings, roads, etc. The fund thus does not reach the people actually targeted.
12.1 The Home Secretary, while replying to this issue, assured the Committee that the issue will
be examined in the Ministry so that instead of the districts there would be some kind of
specification i.e., a distance earmarked from the international border for application of the BADP.
12.2 The Committee therefore recommends to the Ministry to reexamine the issue
expeditiously.
WEIGHTAGE IN THE RECRUITMENT
13. It was felt by some Members that weightage should be given to people residing in border
areas in recruitment in BGFs who, being familiar with the topography, are better acclimatized and
more suited for such forces.
13.1 Responding to this issue, the Home Secretary replied that recruitment to BGFs is made in the
following manner: 20 per cent from the area being guarded, 20 per cent from the militancy affected
areas and 60 per cent from the rest of the country. All the forces have been instructed accordingly.
13.2 The Committee recommends that the standard norms of recruitment in BGFs should
be strictly followed.
DIFFICULTIES IN GUARDING BORDERS IN BIHAR
14. SSB faces difficulties in effective guarding of some areas in Indo-Nepal border in Bihar due
to intermittent floods in the riverine areas and non availability of mobile phone services in such
areas due to prohibition of installing mobile phone towers upto 10-12 kms from border.
14.1 The Home Secretary replied that a policy decision has been taken in the Ministry to increase
the numbers in the existing forces and provide for mobile patrolling, mobile surveillance through
good border road network. As regards prohibition in installing mobile phone towers, the Home
Secretary stated that as a policy, within 10 kms of the borders, particularly for sensitive borders,
such installations are not encouraged due to security reasons. He stated that Nepal Border is a
porous one and certain groups are operating there. Infiltration has also been noticed on several
occasions. Hence establishing telelinks would involve little hazard. However, he assured that if in
a particular area, facilitation is required with certain checks, it would be looked into.
14.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Clause-by-clause Consideration
15. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on
9th January, 2007 and took decisions as under:
Clause 2
15.1 Clause 2 seeks to define the various expressions used in the Bill.
15.1.1 Sub-clause (1) (i) of the clause defines ‘enemy’ and reads: “Enemy includes all armed
mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and my person in arms against whom it is the duty
of any person subject to this Act to take action”.

8
15.1.2 The Committee adopts the clause subject to its recommendation in para 8.2.
Clause 3
15.2 C lause 3 seeks to specify the persons subject to the proposed legislation.
15.2.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 4
15.3 Clause 4 seeks to provide for the constitution of the Sashastra Seema Bal.
15.3.1 The Committee adopts the clause subject to its observations/recommendations
contained in para 6.5.
Clause 5
15.4 Clause 5 seeks to provide for the general superintendence, direction and control of the
Force and appointment of officers of the Force.
15.4.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 6
15.5 Clause 6 deals with enrolment of persons to the Force.
15.5.1 The Committee adopts the clause subject to its recommendation made in para 9.4.
Clauses 7 to 156
15.6 The Committee adopts the clauses without any change.
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title
15.7 Clause 1, the enacting formula are adopted without any change and the title is
adopted with some consequential change, namely, “2006” to be substituted by “2007”,.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION/MODIFICATIONS
16. Certain improvements/modifications have been suggested in some provisions of this
Bill. Similar changes are also required to be made in the corresponding Acts for other
forces such as BSF Act, ITBP Act. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring
forward necessary changes in those Acts at the earliest.

9
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
RELEVANCE OF INITIAL ROLE
The Committee takes note of the fact that the role of the erstwhile SSB was inter
alia to promote national awareness and security consciousness among the people of the
border areas. The Committee feels that the original role of SSB is relevant even to this day.
The Committee accordingly recommends that the erstwhile role of the SSB should be clearly
spelt out in the statute. It is however apprehensive of the fact as to how effectively the
uniformed force would perform the ‘Stay Behind Role’ so efficiently performed by its non-
uniformed wing. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
consider this aspect in the light of the sensitivities of the border areas. It is the considered
view of the Committee that love, affection and esteem of the people cannot be gained by
bullets but by benevolence. Winning hearts and minds of the people is far more important
than combatised action. The Committee apprehends that the proposed combatisation of the
non-combatised wing may prove counter-productive due to lack of developmental and
welfare activities. The SSB has been declared as a Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) for Indo-
Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. Presently, the main tasks of LIA are being carried out in
the field formations of SSB by the civil components (non-uniformed) which are receiving
applauds from all the quarters concerned which is possible because the civil component
enjoys the love and affection of the masses and are carrying benevolent activities for the
border populace. The Committee recommends that the Government may consider retaining
the non-combatised wing permanently. Since the Home Secretary has agreed to include the
Civic Action Programme in the role of SSB, the non-combatised wing can be better utilised
for the Civic Action Programme. (Para 6.5)
COMBATISED VS. NON-COMBATISED WINGS
The Committee is of the view that with the enactment of the Bill, the complexion
of the Force is going to undergo a metamorphosis. This phase is very crucial for the
personnel working in the non-combatised wing. The Committee is given to understand that,
despite a positive picture depicted by the Home Secretary and the Additional Director-
General of the SSB, the decision to phase out the non-combatised Force has badly affected
their morale and caused disenchantment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
civilian cadres should be reviewed immediately to facilitate their promotional avenues at par
with the combatised wing. They should continue to be allowed to work with dignity and
honour without any adverse impact on their career prospects, whether they opt for the
combatised wing or not. (Para 7.3)
DEFINITION OF ‘ENEMY’
The Committee recommends that the definition of ‘enemy’ may be made more
comprehensive bringing persons involved in illegal and contraband activities under its scope.
(Para 8.2)
ENROLMENT OF NON-CITIZENS IN SSB
The Committee feels that enrolling of non-citizens, though for a limited period,
9

10
would not be appropriate in the interest of security of the borders of India. Such services
could also be taken from non-citizens without enrolling them. The Committee recommends
that clause 6 (2) may be re-looked. (Para 9.4)
NEED FOR DIFFERENT FORCE NOMENCLATURE:
The Committee notes the clarification given by the Home Secretary. The Committee
recommends that provisions similar to Clause 3 of the present Bill may be introduced in
other Acts also. (Para 11.2)
GENERAL OBSERV ATION/MODIFICATIONS
Certain improvements/modifications have been suggested in some provisions of this
Bill. Similar changes are also required to be made in the corresponding Acts for other
forces such as BSF Act, ITBP Act. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring
forward necessary changes in those Acts at the earliest. (Para 16)

11
MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 20 September, 2006 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri N. Jothi
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
9. Shri Ilyas Azmi
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
11. Shri Tapir Gao
12. Shri T.K. Hamza
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
15. Shri Sachin Pilot
16. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and CPOs on the Sashastra Seema Bal
Bill, 2006
1. Dr. G .S. Rajagopal, Special Secretary (IS)
2. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
3. Shri H.S. Brahma, Joint Secretary (Border Management)
4. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary (Ministry of Law)
5. Shri Tilak Kak, Director General, SSB
6. Shri S.K. Bhagat, IG (Pers), SSB
13

14
7. Shri Manoj Aggarwal, Director
8. Shri R.S. Virk, Addl. DIG, ITBP
9. Shri Vikram Srivastav, Additional DG, SSB
The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee, especially Shri Ram Chandra
Paswan, who, being a newly nominated to the Committee, was attending its meeting for the first
time. She apprised the Committee that two new Bills viz. Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006 and
Criminal Procedure Code Bill, 2006 had been referred to the Committee. Although, the Committee
was scheduled to hear the Home Secretary in the matter, the latter, due to his urgent engagement
in the western zone Council meeting had sought her exemption from attesting the meeting. Although
his request was acceded to, instead of postponing the hearing, she had decided to hear his deputy,
viz. Special Secretary (Internal Security) in the matter while keeping open the option to hear the
Home Secretary in the matter at a future date.
2.1 The Chairperson, then, welcomed the Special Secretary (Internal Security) in the Ministry
of Home Affairs along with his colleagues and invited him to make a presentation on the two Bills,
beginning with the Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006.
3. The Special Secretary (IS) thanked the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee and
made brief introductory remarks on the Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006 including the constitution
of the force in the name of Special Services Bureau under the Cabinet Secretariat and its
subsequent transfer to Ministry of Home Affairs on January 15, 2001; consequent change in its
name, role and the necessity of a comprehensive legislation on the lines of similar Acts for other
border guarding forces.
4. The Joint Secretary in the Ministry then made a power point presentation containing brief
background of SSB, its initial and present role, its structure, main objects, salient features and the
various provisions of the SSB Bill 2006.
5. The Chairperson then raised queries to the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs such
as how the SSB is different from the BSF and the ITBP, how the Bill is different from the Assam
Rifles Bill, 2005, the position of legal officer in the summary Force Court, whether the original role
of SSB has no relevance in the present context, etc. Besides, she also enquired from the DG, SSB
that as the head of the force whether he was satisfied with the Bill or he wanted some
improvement in it.
6. Members raised queries such as the need for a new organization while the roles are same
as that of BSF and ITBP, the reason for incorporating new provision in the Bill, the details of the
Padmanabhaioh Committee recommendations on SSB, the need for including the role of non-citizens
in the Bill etc.
6.1 Another Member asked about the details of the deficiencies experienced during the last four
decades of the existence of the force, the difference in the nature of duties of the earlier and the
proposed nomenclature, why it has been earmarked for two borders only etc. He also raised several
issues relating to personnel policies of the force as also about their welfare. It was also asked
whether the personnel are being provided paramilitary training, will they be co-opting in the Force
as a non-uniform person.
6.2 Some other members enquired whether their roles have been reversed or they have been
given additional duty, their charter of duties, how SSB was managing to defend the Indo-Nepal
Border with the limited volumes of forces available, whether any attempt were made to unite the
forces, the objective on which the Group of Ministers decided the policy of ‘One Border One
Force’.

15
6.3 Other points/issues raised included whether the civilian forces were not resisting the
application of new rules on them, is the number of people sufficient to guard an area of 2500
kilometers, why the headquarters of SSB was in Delhi, why the nomenclature of the force is in
Hindi, why the initial role of the force have been removed from the Bill. A Member objected to
the provision of non-citizens being used in the force, as is there in the Bill.
7. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses and the Members.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. to meet at 3.00 P.M. on 28 September, 2006.

16
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, 30 October, 2006 in Committee Room G 074,
Ground Floor, ‘K’ Block, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri N. Jothi
6. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ilyas Azmi
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
12. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
14. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
15. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2. Shri P. V . Bhide, Additional Secretary
3. Shri B.A. Coutinho, Joint Secretary (HR)
4. Shri Jag Ram, Director (NI)
Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
5. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Law Secretary
6. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
16

17
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
7. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary
8. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
extended her greetings for Deepawali and Id to them. She then mentioned about the agenda for the
day i.e., further clause-by-clause consideration of the Communal Violence (prevention, Control and
Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005.
3. She recapitulated on the discussion held in the last meeting and informed the Committee that
clause 1 to 19 alongwith the long title of the said Bill had been adopted by the Committee in its
last meeting. She, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of Ministries of Home Affairs and Law
and Justice for further clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
4. The Committee first took up clause 20 of the Bill:
Clause 20
4.1.0 The clause provides that the scheduled offences shall be cognizable offences for the
purposes of the proposed legislation.
4.1.1 The Committee suggested for deleting the words ‘Executive Magistrate’ and felt that the
Executive Magistrate will not have as much independence as the Judicial clause (3) of clause 20
may be deleted
4.1.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause
4.2.0 The clause provide for declaring any post or place within a communally disturbed area as
police station.
4.2.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 22
4.3.0 The clause empowered the State Government to constitute a Review Committee headed by
an officer of the level of Inspector General of Police (IGP) to review cases of scheduled offences
where the trial ends in acquittal and to issue orders for filing of appeals, wherever required.
4.3.1 The Committee felt that a Law officer should be associated with the Review Committee.
The Committee recommends that Government may bring suitable amendment in sub-clause (1) of
clause 22 for the purpose of associating a law officer of the State, with the Review Committee.
4.3.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 23
4.4.0 The clause provide for the constitution of one or more Special Investigation Teams (SIT)
by the State Government in case the it come to the conclusion that the investigation of offences
committed in a communally disturbed area were not carried out properly in a fair and impartial
manner.
4.4.1 The Committee was of the view that a provision already exists in Cr. P.C. empowering State
Governments to constitute SIT. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 23 may be
deleted.

18
Clause 24
4.5.0. The clause provide that the State Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
establish one or more Special Courts for the trial of scheduled offence committed during the period
of disturbance.
4.5.1 The Committee discussed at length the implications of this clause. At present Central
Government or State Government does not have the power to transfer a case from one High Court
to another High Court. This is the power given to the judiciary. Section 406 of Cr.P.C. provides
that the Supreme Court can transfer a case from one High Court to another High Court. Giving
this power to the Central Government is illegal and takes away the powers of Judiciary. Clause 24
is repugnant to the provisions of Section 406 of Cr.P.C. The Committee was, therefore, of the
strong view that such a power should remain with the judiciary only. The exigencies visualized in
this clause whereunder a State Government may request the Central Government to establish an
additional Special Court outside the State for trial of schedule offences, are impracticable and highly
improbable as no State Government would indulge in self indictment stating that justice cannot be
dispensed within that State. The Committee, therefore, recommended that clause 24 may be re-
looked in the light of Section 406 of Cr. P.C.
4.5.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 25
4.6.0 The Clause provide for composition and appointment of Judges of Special Courts.
4.6.1 The Committee recommended that while framing the rules, endeavour should be made for
providing timely and adequate infrastructure for the Special Courts.
4.6.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 26
4.7.0 The Clause provide for the place of sitting of a Special Court
4.7.1 It was suggested that the proviso to the clause should be deleted in view of the fact that
the Court should decide the place of sitting instead of depending upon the certificate of public
prosecutor. The Committee, therefore, recommended deletion of the proviso to the clause.
4.7.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 27
4.8.0 The clause provide for jurisdiction of Special Courts.
4.8.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 28
4.9.0 The clause provide for powers of Special Courts with respect to other offences.
4.9.1 The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 29
4.10.0 The Clause provide for the appointment of Public Prosecutors. Under the clause, eligibility
for appointment of Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor or Special Public Prosecutor

19
is (i) practice as an Advocate for not less than seven years or (ii) one has held any post in the
State or Centre for not less than seven years requiring special knowledge of law.
4.10.1 The Committee was of the view that a person holding a post in the State or the Central
Government for not less than seven years having special knowledge of law may not prove himself
to be effective prosecutor in cases of communal violence. Special knowledge is different from
practical knowledge. Practical knowledge and experience are very important for dealing with legal
cases. The Committee, therefore, felt that the eligibility for appointment as a Public Prosecutor
should be confined to practice in law for not less than seven years. The Committee also does not
agreed with the explanation of the Home Secretary that the provision for appointment of officers
of the Union or a State having special knowledge of law as public prosecutors had been made to
ease burden on the already over burdened legal practitioners. The Committee, accordingly,
recommended the word ‘or has held any post, for a period of not less than seven years, under
the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law’ may be deleted in sub-clause (2) of
clause 29.
4.10.2 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
Clause 30
4.11.0 The clause provide for procedure and powers of Special Courts.
4.11.1 The Committee held extensive discussion on the clause. The Committee considered the
implications of the clause where under a Special Court may take cognizance of any scheduled
offence without the accused being committed to it for trial and its effect on the right to life and
personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. The Committee apprehended receipt
of complaints by the Special Courts without any police report may lead to a plethora of flimsy
complaints in those Courts. The Committee also took note of the fact that summary trial is well
defined in Chapter XXI of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Committee was, therefore, of the
view that the provision of summary trial should be deleted from the clause.
4.11.2 In the light of the reservations of the Committee on the maintainability of the clause vis-
a-vis Article 21 of the Constitution guaranteeing protection of life and personal liberty of a person
and Chapters XV and XXI of the Cr.P.C., the Committee recommends that the Government may
have a re-look at clause 30 to bring it in harmony with the above-mentioned constitutional and
statutory provisions.
4.11.3 Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
5. The Committee than adjourned 1.40 
P.M. to meet at 11.00 A.M. on 16 November, 2006 to
continue the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

20
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, January 8, 2007 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri T.K. Hamza
10. Shri Raghunath Jha
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
13. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2. Shri P.V. Bhide, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
4. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director (Judicial)
20

21
2. At the outset, the Chairperson extended greetings for the New Year to all the members.
Thereafter, she informed the Committee about the agenda for the day, which included presentation
of the Home Secretary on Cr. PC (Amendment) Bill, 2006 and consideration of the replies of the
Home Secretary on the issues which were raised by the Members on the Sashastra Seema Bal
Bill, 2006.
3. The Chairperson, thereafter, informed the Committee that the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Bill, 2006 had been referred to it by Hon’ble Chairman for examination and report
thereon. She informed that the visit of the Committee to Daman and Dadra and Nagar Haveli
scheduled for 2nd to 10th February, 2007 has been rescheduled from 21st to 25th January, 2007.
4. The Chairperson, then welcomed the Home Secretary and invited him to make presentation
on the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Home Secretary made a power-
point presentation on the various provisions of the Bill. According to the Home Secretary the said
Bill was a step forward in the endeavour of the Government for improving the judicial system of
the country. The concerned Joint Secretary of the Ministry made a detailed presentation on the Bill.
He stated that the concerns expressed in various quarters about the inordinate delay in the disposal
of criminal cases and miscarriage of justice due to witnesses turning hostile were sought to be
addressed in the Bill. He also apprised the Committee that the proposed amendments were based
on the recommendations made in the 154th, 177th and 178th Reports of the Law Commission of
India.
5. The Joint Secretary thereafter explained to the Committee the salient features of the Bill,
through a powerpoint presentation. His presentation focussed on the following themes/issues:
(a) Amendments in law relating to arrest;
(b) Mandatory summary trial for all summons cases;
(c) Compounding of offences;
(d) Victimology;
(e) Protection of women;
(f) Avoidance of adjournments,
(g) Measures to curb witnesses turning hostile;
(h) Use of Technology;
(i) Inquiry and Trial of persons of unsound mind; and
(j) Bail Bonds.
6. The Chairperson and some Members raised certain queries and the Home Secretary clarified
those. Thereafter, Chairperson requested the Home Secretary to  send written replies to the queries/
clarification which remained unanswered.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

22
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, January 9, 2007 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ilyas Azmi
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Raghunath Jha
12. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
13. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
3. Shri G.S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary (BM)
4. Shri V .K. Srivastava, Additional Director-General, SSB
5. Shri S.K. Bhagat, IG (personnel), ITBP
6. Shri Mukesh Sahai, IG (SSB)
7. Shri Manoj Aggarwal, Director (personnel)
22

23
Representatives of the Legislative Department
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri B.P. Singh, JS and Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Home Secretary alongwith his colleagues to
the meeting of the Committee to consider Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006. She briefly recapitulated
the discussion of the Committee in its previous meeting on the Bill and reiterated the main issue
of relevance of the initial role of SSB in the changed scenario raised by the Members. She also
referred to the representation received from the civilian employees of SSB, which was forwarded
to the Ministry.
3. The Home Secretary agreed to the suggestion of the Chairperson that it appears that the
SSB’s role has been totally transformed from stay behind to border guarding force. He referred to
the recommendation of GOM, according to which there would be one force for one border and
stated that on that basis SSB has been assigned Nepal and Bhutan border as a border guarding
force, however it continues to play a composite role. He further mentioned that border-guarding
forces are the first ‘preharis’ on the borders. He added that despite of the primary role of the force
being transformed, the SSB still continues to help, motivate and provide medical and educational
aid to the border populace.
3.1 Regarding the representation of civilian wing, the Home Secretary stated that the non-
combatised people have been given the option to be combatised and assured the Committee that
none of them would be retrenched however there would be no fresh recruitment in the wing. He
also elaborated upon the process of implementation of the policy decision taken by the Ministry
regarding SSB and the sanction of new battalions thus augmenting the force strength to 41
battalions.
3.2 On being asked by the Chairperson about the feelings of the force in its changed role, the
Additional DG, SSB responded that by and large the officers in the force are happy after being
combatised. Elaborating upon it, he said that except few, officers want to get combatised because
they gain in terms of various allowances.
4. Members raised issues such as para whether any consideration/weightage is given to people
residing in border areas in recruitment in BGFs who being familiar with the topography are better
acclimatized and more suited for such forces, whether there are any guidelines for specifying the
area from border on which funds earmarked for development of border areas are to be utilized,
the problems being faced by farmer residing in areas where fencing has been done on International
Border on account of regulated entry/exit to their fields falling on other side of the fencing,
difficulties faced by SSB in effective guarding of some areas on Indo-Nepal border in Bihar due
to intermittent floods in the riverine areas, non availability of mobile phone services in such areas
due to prohibition of installing mobile phone towers upto 10-12 kms from border, illegal migration
of Maoists into India from Nepal through the said border, etc.
5. The Home Secretary and the Additional DG , SSB responded to the queries of the Members
and assured the Committee that the pother matters would be examined in the Ministry.
6. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill as under:
Clause 2
6.1 Clause 2 seeks to define the various expressions used in the Bill. Sub-clause 1 (a) of this
clause defines ‘active duty’ broadly speaking according to this definition, a member of the Force
will be on active duty during the period he is attached to, or forms part of, a unit of the Force:—
(i) Which is engaged in operations against an enemy, or (ii) Which is operating at a picket or

24
engaged on patrol or other guard duty along the borders of India. And includes duty by such
person during any period declared by the Central Government by Order as a period of active duty
with reference to any area in which any person or class of persons subject to this Act may be
serving. Certain offences such as under clauses 18, 22 and 23 are punishable more severely when
committed on active duty. The definition is modeled on the definition of ‘active duty’ in the Indo
Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992.
6.1.1 Sub-clause 1 (i) of the Clause defines enemy and reads “Enemy includes all armed
mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and any person in areas against whom it is the duty
of any person subject to this Act to take Action”. A member observed that this definition of
‘enemy’ is lacking as it does not contain words “to prevent trans-border crimes and unauthorized
entry or exit from the territory of India”, although illegal migration and smuggling are the major
concerns on Indo-Nepal Border.
6.1.2 On the issue of deficient definition of enemy in clause 2 of the Bill, the Home Secretary
accepted the observation that the definition of enemy is deficient and needs to be reconsidered,
however he felt that including illegal migrants in the definition would not be appropriate as it
involve some involve some humanitarian aspects and some international covenants to which India
is a signatory.
6.1.3 The Committee recommended suitable amendment in the clause to make the definition of
enemy more relevant.
6.1.3 Subject to above, the Committee adopts the clause.
Clause 3
6.2 Clause 3 seeks to specify the persons subject to the proposed legislation.
6.2.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 4
6.3 Clause 4 seeks to provide for the constitution of the Sashastra Seema Bal.
6.3.1 The Committee recommended that the Government should reconsider Clause 4 so as to
expand the role of SSB to include the duty of spreading security awareness and security
consciousness among the people of border areas. The Committee feels that in the present
atmosphere the SSB will not be able to do justice with its initial role after its full combatisation.
Hence it recommends that although its combatised wing should be strengthened for border guarding
role, which has been assigned to it on the basis of recommendations of the Group of Ministers
on Reforming National Security System, its non-combatised wing should not be phased out as has
been proposed because in its absence the SSB will not be able to do the great service it was doing
as its stay behind role during external aggression and its peacetime role.
6.3.3 Subject to above, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 5
6.4 Clause 5 seeks to provide for the general superintendence, direction and control of the
Force and appointment of officers of the Force.
6.4.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 6
6.5 Clause 6 seeks to deal with enrolment of persons to the Force.

25
6.5.1 Members expressed serious concerns on the provision of the Bill for enrollment of non-
citizens in the SSB. The Home Secretary clarified the reasons for incorporating the provision such
as the treaty with Nepal and Bhutan for employment of their people in India and others, however
agreed to reconsider the provision either on the lines of what is their in the ITBP Act, 1992 or
by removing it altogether from the Bill.
6.5.2 The Committee recommended that the provision in clause 6(2) of the Bill for enrolling the
non-citizens for a limited period after approval of the Central Government, having regard to the
special services required in the interest of security of the borders of India should be removed. It
also recommended that even if the services of non-citizens are to be obtained the provision should
be on the lines of ITBP Act or these services should be taken by non-citizens without enrolling
them as is being done in RAW and IB.
6.5.3 Subject to above, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 7
6.6 Clause 7 seeks to provide for liability of members of the Force for service in and outside
India.
6.6.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 8 to 12
6.7 Clauses 8 to 12 seek to deal with tenure of service, etc. of members of the Force.
6.7.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 13
6.8 Clause 13 seeks to impose certain restrictions on the rights of members of the Force to
form association and on their freedom of speech etc.
6.8.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 14 and 15
6.9 Clauses 14 and 15 seek to provide for remedy of aggrieved persons including officers.
6.9.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clausea 16 to 48
6.10 Clauses 16 to 48 seek to constitute offences under the proposed legislation and penalize the
members of the Force for the various acts prejudicial to the maintenance of discipline, good order
and efficiency of the Force. These clauses follow subject to certain modifications, the provisions
relating to offences contained in sections 16 to 48 of the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Act,
1992. The modifications relate to inclusion of offences in relation to terrorists.
6.10.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 49 and 50
6.11 Clauses 49 and 50 seek to lay down that all civil offences committed by the members of
the Force within or beyond India shall be deemed to be the offences under the proposed legislation
and shall be triable by a Force Court. Exception under section 50 has, however, been made in

26
respect of the civil offences of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder and rape in
relation to civilians where such offences are committed by the members of the Force while not
on active duty.
6.11.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 51
6.12 Clause 51 seeks to set out the various punishments which may be awarded by Force
Courts.
6.12.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 52
6.13 Clause 52 seeks to enable a Force Court to take into account the nature and degree of the
offence committed and award to the person convicted of any offence under clauses 16 to 48 the
punishment prescribed by the relevant provision or punishment lower in the scale within the
meaning of clause 51.
6.13.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 53
6.14 Clause 53 seeks to set out the punishments which may be awarded in combination by a
Force Court.
6.14.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 54
6.15 Clause 54 seeks to provide that enrolled person sentenced on active duty by a Force Court
to imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, may be retained to serve in the ranks
and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment.
6.15.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 55 to 59
6.16 Clauses 55 to 59 seek to deal with imposition of certain minor punishments for offences
under the proposed legislation without the intervention of a Force Court. Clause 56 seeks to
authorize a commanding officer of and above the rank of Commandant to proceed in the prescribed
manner against any person other than an officer or Subordinate officer and award one or more
punishments specified therein. Clause 57 imposes certain limitations in respect of award of these
punishments. Clause 58 authorises an officer not below the rank of Inspector-General to proceed
in prescribed manner against an officer of or below the rank of Commandant and award one or
more punishment specific in the clause. Clause 59 provides for review of proceedings under clause
58 by the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner.
6.16.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 60
6.17 Clause 60 seeks to provide for imposition of collective fines in case of loss or theft of
weapons or ammunition of a unit upon the subordinate Officers, under-officers and men of such

27
unit considered to be responsible for the loss or theft. To avoid abuse, it has been provided that
the power can be exercised only by an officer not below the rank of commandant of a unit.
6.17.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 61 to 68
6.18 Clauses 61 to 68 seek to provide for deductions that may be made from the pay and
allowances of officers and other persons subject to the proposed legislation.
6.18.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 69 to 74
6.19 Clauses 69 to 74 seek to deal with arrest and proceedings before trial. Clause 69 provides
that any person charged with an offence under the proposed legislation may be taken into Force
custody under the order of a Superior Officer but an officer who is engaged in a quarrel, affray
or disorder may be ordered into Force custody by even an officer inferior in rank. Clause 70
provides for the action that has to be taken after arrest. The charge against every person taken
into Force custody must be investigated within forty-eight hours unless investigation within that
period is impracticable having regard to the public service. In case of delay the matter has to be
reported to superior authorities. Clause 71 provides that in every case where any person who is
not on active duty remains in force custody for a longer period than eight days without a Force
Court for his trial being convened, a special report giving reasons for the delay should be made
by the Commanding Officer and a similar report should be forwarded at intervals of every eight
days until a Force Court is convened or such person is released from custody. Clauses 72 and 73
provide for assistance of magistrates, police officers and other civil authorities in the matter of
apprehension and arrest of persons accused of offences under the proposed legislation and
deserters from the Force. Clause 74 provides for inquiry into absence without leave of a person
subject to the proposed legislation.
6.19.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 75
6.20 Clause 75 seeks to provide for appointment of Force police officers and defines their
functions and duties. The Force police officers are intended to serve as the internal police of the
Force.
6.20.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 76
6.21 Clause 76 seeks to provide for three kinds of Force Courts, namely General Force Courts,
Petty Force Courts and Summary Force Courts, for the trial of offences under the proposed
legislation.
6.21.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 77 to 86
6.22 Clauses 77 to 86 seek to deal with convening of Force Courts, the composition of Force
Courts and their powers.
6.22.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.

28
Clause 87
6.23 Clause 87 seeks to provide that a person subject to the proposed legislation who has been
acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Force Court or a Criminal Court or who has been dealt
with under clause 56 or clause 58 (relating to imposition of minor punishments by certain officers)
shall not be liable to be tried again by a Force Court or dealt with under the said clauses. It thus
prohibits a second trial in respect of the same offence.
6.23.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 88
6.24 Clause 88 seeks to prescribe a three-years period of limitation for trial of all offences under
the proposed legislation except the offences of desertion and mutiny.
6.24.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 89
6.25 Clause 89 seeks to deal with the liability of a person who has ceased to be subject to the
proposed legislation after the commission of an offence thereunder.
6.25.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 90
6.26 Clause 90 seeks to provide for the continued application of the proposed legislation during
the term of sentence.
6.26.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 91
6.27 Clause 91 seeks to deals with place of trial.
6.27.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clauses 92 and 93
6.28 Clauses 92 and 93 seek to deal with choice of forum for the trial of offences in respect
of which both a Force Court and a Criminal Court have concurrent jurisdiction.
6.28.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 94 to 118
6.29 Clauses 94 to 118 seek to deal with the procedure of Force Courts and are based upon
sections 94 to 120 of the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992. In  particular, clause 99
seeks to apply provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 to all proceedings before a Force Court.
6.29.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 119 and 120
6.30 Clauses 119 and 120 seek to provide provision for tendering of pardon to accomplice.
These clauses are on the lines of the provisions, in this regard, contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.

29
6.30.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 121 to 132
6.31 Clauses 121 to 132 seek to deal with confirmation and revision of findings and sentence
of Force Courts. These clauses follow closely the provisions contained in sections 121 to 132 of
Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 and Sections 104 to 114 of the National Security
Guard Act, 1986.
6.31.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clauses 133 to 152
6.32 Clauses 133 to 152 seek to deal with execution of sentences of Force Court, pardon of
persons convicted by such courts, remission or suspension of such sentences, etc. These clauses
follow closely the provisions contained in section 133 to 152 of the Indo Tibetan Border Police
Force Act, 1992.
6.32.1 The Committee adopted the clauses without any change.
Clause 153
6.33 Provides for powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force. This
clause empowers the Central Government to direct exercise of such powers and discharge of such
duties by members of the Force as are exercisable or dischargeable by an officer of the
corresponding or lower rank under any Central Act. This clause also empowers the Central
Government to confer or impose, with the concurrence of a State Government, any powers or
duties under the State Act upon the members of the Force of corresponding rank.
6.33.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 154
6.34 Clause 154 seeks to provide for protection of acts of member of Force.
6.34.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 155
6.35 Clause 155 seeks to deals with the powers of the Central Government to make rules.
6.35.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 156
6.36 Clause 156 seeks to provide that the existing Sashastra Seema Bal shall be deemed to be
the Sashastra Seema Bal constituted under the proposed legislation and makes the necessary and
saving provisions in regard to persons appointed to the existing Sashastra Seema Bal and as to
actions taken and things done in relation to the constitution of the existing Sashastra Seema Bal.
6.36.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 1, The Enacting Formula and the Title
6.37 Clause 1, the enacting formula and the title were adopted without any change.

30
7. The Chairperson then apprised the Committee about a new Bill namely the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 which has been referred to the Committee.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 1.07 P.M.

31
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 22nd February, 2007 in Main Committee
Room ‘A’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri R.K. Dhawan
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Shri N. Jothi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Tapir Gao
9. Shri Raghunath Jha
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Shri Mohan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shri Sachin Bansal
2. Prof. Virendra Bansal
3. Dr. Sudeep
4. Dr. Anupama Singh
5. Mrs. Preeti Goel
6. Mrs. Saroj Rani
Representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director
31

32
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the team of persons representing “Rakshak” and
“498a.org” who have been given their oral evidence on the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
3. The Committee has also considered and adopted the Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006 with
the slight modifications/minor corrections.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.08 
P.M.

33
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
28 JULY , 2006
BILL N O. LXII OF 2006
THE SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL BILL, 2006
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Persons subject to this Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION  OF THE F ORCE AND CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE OF THE
MEMBERS  OF THE F ORCE
4. Constitution of the Force.
5. Control, direction, etc.
6. Enrolment.
7. Liability for service outside India.
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.
9. Tenure of service under the Act.
10. Termination of service by Central Government.
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank by the Director-General and by other officers.
12. Certificate of termination of service.
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc.
14. Redressal of grievances of persons other than officers.
15. Redressal of grievances of officers.
CHAPTER III
O
FFENCES
16. Offences in relation to enemy and punishable with death.
17. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.
35

36
18. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times.
19. Mutiny.
20. Desertion and aiding desertion.
21. Absence without leave.
22. Striking or threatening superior officer.
23. Disobedience to superior officer.
24. Insubordination and obstruction.
25. False information on enrolment.
26. Unbecoming conduct.
27. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.
28. Ill-treating a subordinate.
29. Intoxication.
30. Permitting escape of person in custody.
31. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.
32. Escape from custody.
33. Offences in respect of property.
34. Extortion and exaction.
35. Making away with equipment.
36. Injury to property, etc.
37. False accusations.
38. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.
39. Signing in blank and failure to report.
40. Offences relating to Force Court.
41. False evidence.
42. Unlawful detention of pay.
43. Violation of good order and discipline.
44. Miscellaneous offences.
45. Attempt.
46. Abetment of offences that have been committed.
47. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed.
48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.
49. Civil Offences.
50. Civil offences not triable by a Force Court
CHAPTER IV
P
UNISHMENTS
51. Punishments by Force Courts.
52. Alternative punishments by Force Courts.
53. Combination of punishments.
54. Retention in the force of a person convicted on active duty.

37
55. Punishment otherwise than by Force Courts.
56. Minor Punishments.
57. Limit of punishments under section 56.
58. Punishment of persons of or below the rank of Commandant by Inspectors-General
and others.
59. Cancellation, variation or remittance of sentence.
60. Collective fines.
CHAPTER V
D
EDUCTIONS  FROM PAY AND ALLOWANCES
61. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons subject to this Act.
62. Pay and allowances during trial.
63. Limit of certain deductions.
64. Deduction from public money due to a person.
65. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct.
66. Remission of deductions.
67. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his remitted deductions and pay
and allowances.
68. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war.
CHAPTER VI
A
RREST  AND PROCEEDINGS  BEFORE  TRIAL
69. Custody of offenders.
70. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention.
71. Interval between committal and trial.
72. Arrest by civil authorities.
73. Capture of deserters.
74. Inquiry into absence without leave.
75. Force Police Officers.
CHAPTER VII
F
ORCE  C OURTS
76. Kinds of Force Courts.
77. Power to convene a General Force Court.
78. Power to convene a Petty Force Court.
79. Warrants issued under sections 77 and 78.
80. Composition of a General Force Court.
81. Composition of a Petty Force Court.
82. Summary Force Court.
83. Dissolution of a Force Court.
84. Powers of a General Force Court.

38
85. Powers of a Petty Force Court.
86. Powers of a Summary Force Court.
87. Prohibition of second trial.
88. Period of limitation for trial.
89. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.
90. Application of Act during term of sentence.
91. Place of trial, etc.
92. Choice between criminal court and Force Court.
93. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ROCEDURE  OF F ORCE C OURTS
94. Presiding Officer.
95. Judge Attorneys.
96. Objections.
97. Oath of members, Judge Attorneys and witnesses.
98. V oting by members.
99. General rule as to evidence.
100. Judicial notice.
101. Summoning of witnesses.
102. Documents exempted from production.
103. Commissions for examination of witnesses.
104. Exam ination of a witness on Commission.
105. Conviction for offences not charged.
106. Presumption as to signature.
107. Enrolment paper.
108. Presumption as to certain documents.
109. Reference by accused to Government officer.
110. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.
111. Lunacy of accused.
112. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.
113. Transmission to Central Government of order under section 112.
114. Release of lunatic accused.
115. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.
116. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial.
117. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.
118. Powers of Force Court in relation to proceedings under this Act.
119. Tender of pardon to accomplices.
120. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.

39
CHAPTER IX
CONFIRMATION  AND REVISION  OF PROCEEDINGS
121. Finding and sentence not valid unless confirmed.
122. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Force Court.
123. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Force Court.
124. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.
125. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.
126. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship.
127. Revision of finding or sentence.
128. Finding and sentence of a Summary Force Court.
129. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Force Court.
130. Alternation of finding or sentence in certain cases.
131. Petition against order, finding or sentence of Force Court.
132. Annulment of proceedings.
CHAPTER X
EXECUTION  OF SENTENCES , PARDONS , REMISSIONS , ETC.
133. Execution of sentence of death.
134. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.
135. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.
136. T emporary custody of convict.
137. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.
138. C onveyance of prisoner from place to place.
139. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.
140. Recovery of fine.
141. Informality or error in order or warrant.
142. Pardon and remission.
143. Cancellation of conditional pardons, release on parole or remission.
144. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.
145. Orders pending suspension of sentence.
146. Release on suspension of sentence.
147. Computation of period of sentence.
148. Order after suspension of sentence.
149. Reconsideration of case after suspension of sentence.
150. Fresh sentence after suspension.
151. Scope of power of suspension of sentence.
152. Effect of suspension and remission of sentence on dismissal.

40
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
153. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force.
154. Protection for acts of members of the Force.
155. Power to make rules.
156. Provisions as to existing Sashastra Seema Bal.

41
RAJYA SABHA
ERRATA
TO
THE SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL BILL, 2006
(To be/As Introduced in the Rajya Sabha)
Sl. Page Line(s) For Read
No. No. No.(s)
1 2 14 Criminal Procedure Code Code of Criminal Procedure
2 2 33 means mean
3 5 14 against the against is the
4 8 40 in the other in clauses (d) and (e), to two years,
and in case of the offences specified
in the other
5 9 6 if guilty is guilty
6 10 20 (in Exortion Extortion
marginal
heading)
7 12 33 attempt attempts
8 13 12 as in as is in
9 13 24 as in as is in
10 14 29 punishment punishments
11 14 32 48 award 48 (both inclusive) award
12 14 37 sub-section (I) sub-section (1)
13 22 8 peson person
14 27 3 annual annul
15 28 30 as officer as an officer
16 28 45 into for into or for
17 29 3 demmed deemed
18 29 10 offience offence
19 31 42 other office other officer
July 31, 2006
New Delhi.
41

AS I NTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
BILL N O. LXII OF 2006
THE SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force
of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in Fifty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Sashastra Seema Bal Act,
2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “active duty”, in relation to a person subject to this
Act, means any duty as a member of the Force during the
period in which such person is attached to, or forms part of,
a unit of the Force:—
(i) which is engaged in operations against any
enemy, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on
patrol or other guard duty along the borders of India,
and includes duty by such person during any period
43
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

44
declared by the Central Government by order as a
period of active duty with reference to any area in
which any person or class of persons subject to this
Act may be serving;
(b) “battalion” means a unit of the Force constituted as
a battalion by the Central Government;
(c) “civil offence” means an offence which is triable by
a criminal court;
(d) “civil prison” means any jail or place used for the
detention of any criminal prisoner under the Prisons
Act, 1894, or under any other law for the time being in force;
(e) “commanding officer” means a commandant or any
officer for the time being in command of the unit or any
separate portion of the Force to which such person belongs
or is attached to and discharging his functions under this Act
or the rules made thereunder;
(f) “criminal court” means a court of ordinary criminal
justice in any part of India constituted under the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973;
(g) “Deputy Inspector-General” and “Additional Deputy
Inspector-General” means respectively a Deputy Inspector-
General and an Additional Deputy Inspector-General of the
Force appointed under section 5;
(h) “Director-General” and “Additional Director-
General” mean respectively the Director-General and an
Additional Director-General of the Force appointed under
section 5;
(i) “enemy” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels,
armed rioters, pirates and any person in arms against whom
it is the duty of any person subject to this Act to take action;
(j) “enrolled person” means an under-officer or other
person enrolled under this Act;
(k) “Force” means the Sashastra Seema Bal;
(l) “Force Court” means a Court referred to in section
76;
(m) “Force custody” means the arrest or confinement
of a member of the Force under section 69;
(n) “Inspector-General” means the Inspector-General of
the Force appointed under section 5;
(o) “Judge Attorney-General”, “Additional Judge
Attorney-General”, “Deputy Judge Attorney-General” and
“Judge Attorney” means respectively the Judge Attorney-
General, an Additional Judge Attorney-General, a Deputy
Judge Attorney-General and a Judge Attorney of the Force
appointed under sub-section (2) of section 95;
9 of 1894.
2 of 1974.

45
(p) “member of the Force” means an officer, a
subordinate officer, an under-officer or other enrolled person;
(q) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(r) “Offence” means any act or omission punishable
under this Act and includes a civil offence;
(s) “officer” means a person appointed or in pay as an
officer of the Force, but does not include a subordinate
officer or an under-officer;
(t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(u) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;
(v) “subordinate officer” means a person appointed or
in pay as a Subedar Major or Inspector or Sub-Inspector and
Assistant Sub-Inspector of the Force;
(w) “superior officer”, when used in relation to a
person subject to this Act, means—
(i) any member of the Force to whose
command such person is for the time being subject in
accordance with the rules;
(ii) any officer of a higher rank or class or of a
higher grade in the same class, and includes, when
such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer or
an under-officer of higher rank, class or grade;
(x) “under-officer” means a Head Constable of the
Force;
(y) “unit” includes—
(i) any body of officers and other members of
the force for which a separate authorised establishment
exists;
(ii) any separate body of persons subject to this
Act employed on any service and not attached to a unit
as aforesaid;
(iii ) any other separate body of persons
composed wholly or partly of persons subject to this
Act and specified as a unit by the Central Government.
(2) All words and expressions used and not defined in this Act
but defined in the Indian Penal Code, the Army Act, 1950 or the
National Security Guard Act, 1986, shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Code or those Acts.
(3) In this Act, references to any law not in force in the State
of Jammu and Kashmir shall be construed as references to the
corresponding law in force in that State.
45 of 1860.
46 of 1950.
47 of 1986.

46
3.  ( 1) The following persons appointed (whether on
deputation or in any other manner) in the Force shall be subject to
this Act, wherever they may be, namely:—
(a) officers and subordinate officers; and
(b) under-officers and other persons enrolled under this
Act.
(2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject
until repatriated, retired, released, discharged, removed or dismissed
from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
the rules.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION  OF THE F ORCE AND C ONDITIONS  OF S ERVICE OF THE
MEMBERS  OF THE F ORCE
4. ( 1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called
the Sashastra Seema Bal for ensuring the security of the
borders of India and performing such other duties as may be
entrusted to it by the Central Government.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall
be constituted in such manner as may be prescribed and the
conditions of service of the members of the Force shall be such
as may be prescribed.
5. ( 1) The general superintendence, direction and control
of the Force shall vest in, and be exercised by, the Central
Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of this
Act and the rules made in this behalf, the command and
supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be appointed
by the Central Government as the Director-General of the
Force.
(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge of his
duties under this Act, be assisted by such member of Additional
Directors-General, Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors-
General, Additional Deputy Inspectors-General, Commandants
and other officers, as may be appointed by the Central
Government.
6. ( 1) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode
of enrolment and the procedure for enrolment shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(2) A person other than a citizen of India shall not be
enrolled in the Force except with the approval of the Central
Government, granted for a limited period, having regard to the
special services required in the interest of the security of
borders of India.
7. Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any
part of India as well as outside India.
Persons subject
to this Act.
Constitution of
the Force.
Control,
direction, etc.
Enrolment.
Liability for
service outside
India.

47
8. No member of the Force shall be at liberty,—
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of his
engagement; or
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties
of his appointment, except with the previous permission in
writing of the prescribed authority.
9. Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during
the pleasure of the President.
10. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the
Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any
person subject to this Act.
11. (1) The Director-General, or any Additional Director-
General or Inspector-General, may dismiss or remove from the
service or reduce to a lower grade or rank any person subject to
this Act other than an officer.
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-
General or any prescribed officer may dismiss or remove from the
service any person under his command other than an officer or a
subordinate officer of such rank as may be prescribed.
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section ( 2) may
reduce to a lower grade or rank any person under his command
except an officer or a subordinate officer.
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules.
12. A subordinate officer, or an under-officer or other enrolled
person who is retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed
from the service shall be furnished by the officer, to whose
command he is subject, with a certificate in Hindi or English
language setting forth—
(a) the authority terminating his service;
(b) the cause for such termination;. and
(c) the full period of his service in the Force.
13. ( 1) No person subject to this Act shall, without the
previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the
prescribed authority,—
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with,
any trade union, labour union, political association, or with
any class of trade unions, labour unions or political
associations; or
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with,
any society, institution, association or organisation which is
not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely
social, recreational or religious nature; or
Resignation and
withdrawal from
the post.
Tenure of
service under
the Act.
Termination of
service by
Central
Government.
Dismissal,
removal or
reduction in
rank by the
Director-General
and by other
officers.
Certificate of
termination of
service.
Restrictions
respecting right
to form
association,
freedom of
speech, etc.

48
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to
be published any book, letter or other document except where
such communication or publication is in the bona fide
discharge of his duties or is of a purely literary, artistic or
scientific Character or is of a prescribed nature.
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any
society, institution, association or organisation is of a purely social,
"recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub-section,
the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or
address, any meeting or take part in any demonstration organised by
any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other
purposes as may be prescribed.
14. (1) Any person subject to this Act other than an officer
who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may
complain to the officer under whose command he is serving.
(2) When the officer complained against the officer to whom
any complaint should, under sub-section ( 1), be preferred, the
aggrieved person may complaint to such officer’s next superior
officer.
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as
complete an investigation into it as may be possible for giving full
redress to the complainant, or when necessary, refer the complaint
to a superior authority.
(4) The Director-General may revise any decision made under
any of the foregoing sub-sections, but, subject thereto, such
decision shall be final.
15.  Any officer who deems himself wronged by his
commanding officer or any other superior officer and who, on due
application made to his commanding officer or such other superior
officer, does not receive the redress to which he considers himself
entitled, may complain to the Director-General or the Central
Government through proper channel.
CHAPTER III
O
FFENCES
16. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place
or guard, committed to his charge or which it is his duty to
defend; or
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce
any person subject to this Act or to any other law relating to
military, naval, air force or any other armed force of the
Union to abstain from acting against the enemy or to discourage
such person from acting against the enemy; or
Redressal of
grievances of
persons other
than officers.
Redressal of
grievances of
officers.
Offences in
relation to
enemy and
punishable
with death.

49
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts
away his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment or misbehaves
in such manner as to show cowardice; or
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or
communicates intelligence to, the enemy, terrorist or any
person in arms against the Union; or
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy or terrorist
with money, arms, ammunition, stores or supplies or in any
other manner whatsoever; or
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy or
terrorist, intentionally occasions a false alarm in action, camp,
quarters, or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated.
to create alarm or despondency; or
(g) in time of action leaves his commanding officer or
other superior officer or his post, guard, picket, patrol or
party without being regularly relieved or without leave; or
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a
prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the enemy; or
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy, not being
a prisoner; or
(j) being a sentry in time of active operation against the
enemy or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or
(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the
success of the Force or the military, naval or air force of
India or any forces co-operating therewith or any part of
such forces,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
17. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want
of due precaution or through disobedience of order, or wilful
neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner or so captured
fails to rejoin his service when able to do so; or
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with, or
communicates intelligence to, the enemy or any person in
league with the enemy or having come by the knowledge of
any such correspondence or communication; wilfully omits to
disclose it immediately to his commandant or other superior
officer,
shall on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Offences in
relation to the
enemy and not
punishable with
death.

50
18. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force
to a sentry; or
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of
plunder; or
(c) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post or is
intoxicated; or
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his
guard, picket, patrol or post; or
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false
alarm in camp or quarters, or spreads or causes to be spread
reports calculated to create unnecessary alarm or 30
despondency; or
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or countersign
to any person not entitled to receive it; or knowingly gives a
parole, watchword or a countersign different from what he
received,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court,—
(i) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned;
and
(ii) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty,
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
19. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other
person to cause any mutiny in the Force or in the military,
naval or air force of India or any forces co-operating therewith; or
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his
utmost endeavours to suppress the same; or
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence
of any such mutiny, or of any intention to mutiny or of any
such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information
thereof to his commanding officer or other superior officer; or
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in
the military, naval or air force of India or any forces co-
operating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the Union,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Offences
punishable
more severely
on active duty
than at other
times.
Mutiny.

51
20. ( 1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or
attempts to desert the service shall, on conviction by a Force
Court,—
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or
when under orders for active duty, be liable to suffer death
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) if he commits the offence under any other
circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours
any such deserter shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of
any desertion or attempt at desertion of a person subject to this Act,
does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior
officer, or take any steps in his power to cause such person to be
apprehended, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person deserts,—
(a) if he absents from his unit or the place of duty at
any time with the intention of not reporting back to such unit
or place, or who, at any time and under any circumstances
when absent from his unit or place of duty, does any act
which shows that he has an intention of not reporting to such
unit or place of duty;
(b) if he absents himself without leave with intent to
avoid any active duty.
21. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) absents himself without leave; or
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to
him; or
(c) being on leave of absence and having received
information from the appropriate authority that any battalion
or part thereof or any other unit of the Force, to which he
belongs, has been ordered on active duty, fails, without
sufficient cause, to rejoin without delay; or
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time
fixed at the parade or place appointed for exercise or duty; or
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without
sufficient cause or without leave from his superior officer,
quits the parade or line of march; or
Desertion and
aiding desertion.
Absence without
leave.

52
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any
limits fixed or in any place prohibited, by any general, local
or other order, without a pass or written leave from his
superior officer; or
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without
due cause, absents himself from any school or training
institution when duly ordered to attend there, shall, on
conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
22. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior
officer; or
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer;
shall, on conviction by a Force Court,—
(i) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office
or, if the offence is committed on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
(ii) in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned:
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c),
the imprisonment shall not exceed five years.
23. (1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful
command given personally by his superior officer in the execution
of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by
signal or otherwise, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful
command given by his superior officer shall, on conviction by a
Force Court,—
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty,
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned; and
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active
duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
Striking or
threatening
superior
officer.
Disobediance
to superior
officer.

53
24. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or
disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of inferior rank,
who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to, or
assaults, any such officer; or
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person,
whether subject to this Act or not, in whose custody he is
lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior
officer; or
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend him
or to have him in charge; or
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order;
or
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 75
or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, or when called upon,
refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a Force Police or any
person lawfully acting on his behalf, shall, on conviction by a Force
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend, in the case of the offences specified in the other clauses,
to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
25. Any person having become subject to this Act who is
discovered to have knowingly given at the time of enrolment false
information to any question set forth in the prescribed form of
enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before
whom he appears for the purpose of being enrolled, shall, on
conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned.
26. Any officer or subordinate officer who behaves in a
manner unbecoming of his position and the character expected of
him shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to be dismissed
or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
27. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) if guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel,
indecent or unnatural kind; or
(b) maligns, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity
in himself or intentionally delays his cure or aggravates his
disease or infirmity; or
(c) with intent to render himself or any, other person
unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to himself or that
person,
False
information on
enrolment.
Unbecoming
conduct.
Certain forms
of disgraceful
conduct.
Insubordination
and obstruction.

54
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
28. Any officer, subordinate officer or under-officer, who
uses criminal force to or otherwise ill-treats any person subject to
this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, shall, on
conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
29. (1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state
of intoxication, whether on duty or not, shall, on conviction by a Froce
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be
deemed to be in a state of intoxication if, owing to the influence of
alcohol or any drug whether alone, or any combination with any other
substance, he is unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty
which he may be called upon to perform or, behaves in a disorderly
manner or in a manner likely to bring discredit to the Force.
30. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol,
detachment or post, releases without proper authority,
whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse; any person
committed to his charge, or refuse to receive any prisoner or
person so committed; or
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allow to
escape any person who is committed to his charge, or whom
it is his duty to keep or guard, shall, on conviction by a
Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, and if he
has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
31. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or
confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails to bring his
case before the proper authority for investigation; or
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails
without reasonable cause to deliver at the time of such
committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within
forty-eight hours thereafter, to the officer or other person into
whose custody the person arrested is commited, an account
in writing signed by himself of the offence with which the
person so committed is charged,
Ill-treating a
subordinate.
Intoxication.
Permitting
escape of
person in
custody.
Irregularity in
connection
with arrest or
confinement.

55
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
32. Any person subject to this Act, who, being in lawful
custody, escapes or attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a
Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
33. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the
Government, or to any Force mess, band or institution, or to
any person subject to this Act; or
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own
use any such property; or
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any
such property; or
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in
respect of which any of the offences under clauses ( a), ( b)
and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reasons to
believe the commission of such offences; or
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the
Government entrusted to him; or
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to
cause wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to
another person,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
34. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) commits extortion; or
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person
money, provisions or service,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
35. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away
with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, tools,
clothing or any other thing being the property of the
Government issued to him for his use or entrusted to him; or
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or
Escape from
custody.
Offences in
respect of
property.
Extortion and
exaction.
Making away
with equipment.

56
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or
decoration granted to him, shall, on conviction by a Force
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend, in the case of the offences specified in clause ( a), to
ten years, and in the case of the offences, specified in the
other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
36. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause
(a) of section 35, or any property belonging to any Force
mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act;
or
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or
destruction of, any property of the Government by fire; or
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill-treats or loses,
any animal entrusted to him, shall, on conviction by a Force
Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he
has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
37. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject
to this Act, knowing or having reason to believe such
accusation to be false; or
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to
this Act makes any statement affecting the character of such
person, knowing or having reason to believe such statement
to be false, or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material
facts,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
38. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences,  namely:—
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other
document made or signed a by him, or of the contents of
which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly
makes, or is privy to the making of, any false or fraudulent
statement; or
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in
clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy to the making of, any
omission, with intent to defraud; or
Injury to
property, etc.
False
accusations.
Falsifying
official
documents and
false
declarations.

57
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or
knowingly and with intent to defraud, suppresses, defaces,
alters or makes away with any document which it is his duty
preserve or produce; or
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration
respecting any matter knowingly makes a false declaration; or
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any
pension, allowance or other advantage or privilege by a
statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or by
making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by
making any document containing a false statement, or by
omitting to make a true entry or document containing a true
statement,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
39. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms,
ammunitions, equipment, clothing, supplies or stores, or any
property of the Government fraudulently leaves in blank any
material part for which his signature is a voucher; or
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or
send a report or return which it is his duty to make or send,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
40. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a
witness before a Force Court, wilfully or without reasonable
excuse, makes default in attending; or
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation
legally required by a Force Court to be taken or made; or
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his
power or control legally required by a Force Court to be
produced or delivered him; or
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question
which he is by law bound to answer; and
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Force Court by using
insulting or threatening language, or by causing any
interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such court,
Signing in blank
and failure to
report.
Offences
relating to
Force Court.

58
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
41. Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly
sworn or affirmed before  any Force Court or other court
competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation,
makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, shall, on
conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
42. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who,
having received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully
detains or refuses to pay the same when due, shall, on conviction
by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
43. Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act
or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to
good order and discipline of the Force shall, on conviction by a
Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
44. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, namely:—
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and
receiving a complaint that anyone under his command has
beaten or otherwise maltreated or oppressed any person, or
has disturbed any fair or market, or committed any riot or
trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured
person or to report the case to the proper authority; or
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise,
intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the religious
feelings of, any person; or
(c) attempt to commit suicide, and in such attempt does
any act towards the commission of such offence; or
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when
off duty, appears without proper authority, in or about camp,
or in or about, or when going to, or returning from, any town
or bazaar, carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapon;
or
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to
accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself or for any other
person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring
the enrolment of any person, or leave of absence, promotion
or any other advantage or indulgence for any person in the
service; or
False evidence.
Unlawful
detention
of pay.
Violation of
good order and
discipline.
Miscellaneous
offences.

59
(f) commits any offence against the property or person
of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the country in which he
is serving,
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
45. Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit
any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44 (both inclusive)
and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the
offence shall, on conviction by a Force Court, where no express
provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such attempt,
be liable,—
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is
punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is
punishable with imprisonment, to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one-half of the longest term
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned.
46. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission
of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44 (both
inclusive) shall, on conviction by a Force Court, if the Act of
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no
express provision is made by  this Act for the punishment of such
abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment provided for that
offence or such less punishment as in this Act mentioned.
47. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission
of any of the offences punishable with death, under sections 16, 19
and sub-section ( 1) of section 20 shall, on of conviction by a Force
Court, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.
48. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission
of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44 (both
inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on of conviction
by a Force Court, if that offence be not committed in consequence
of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for
the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term
provided  for that offence or such less punishment as in this Act
mentioned.
49. Subject to the provisions of section 50, any person
subject to this Act who at any  place in or beyond, India commits
Attempt.
Abetment of
offences that
have been
committed.
Abetment of
offences
punishable with
death and not
committed.
Abetment of
offences
punishable with
imprisonment
and not
committed.
Civil offences.

60
any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against
this Act and, if charged therewith under this section shall be liable
to be tried by a Force Court and, on conviction, be punishable as
follows, namely:—
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable
under any law in force in India with death, he shall be liable
to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence, by the
aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned, and
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any
punishment, assigned for the offence by the law in force in
India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
50. A person subject to this Act who commits an offence of
murder or culpable  homicide not amounting to murder against, or
of rape in relation to, a person not subject to this Act shall not be
deemed to be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall not be
tried by a Force Court, unless he commits any of the said
offences—
(a) while on active duty; or
(b) at any place outside India; or.
(c) at any place specified by the Central Government by
notification, in this behalf.
CHAPTER IV
P
UNISHMENT
51. (1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences
committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Force
Courts according to the scale following, namely:—
(a) death;
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or
any other lesser term but excluding imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(c) dismissal or removal from the service;
(d) compulsory retirement from the service;
(e) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months
in Force custody;
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade
or a place in the list of their rank in the case of an under-
officer;
(g) reduction to next lower rank in case of an officer
or subordinate officer:
Provided that no officer shall be reduced to a rank lower than
the one to which he was initially appointed;
Civil offences
not triable by
a Force Court.
Punishments
by Force
Courts.

61
(h) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all
or any part of the service for the purpose of promotion;
(i) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased
payor pension;
(j) fine, in respect of civil offences;.
(k) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of
persons below the rank of an under-officer;
(l) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not
exceeding three months for an offence committed on active
duty;
(m) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to
dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay and
allowances and other public money due to him at the time of
such dismissal;
(n) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved
loss or damage occasioned by the offence for which he is
convicted is made good.
(2) Each of the punishment specified in sub-section ( 1) shall
be deemed to be inferior in degree to every punishment preceding
it in the above scale.
52. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Force Court may,
on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences
specified in sections 16 to 48 award either the particular punishment
with which the offence is stated in the said sections to be
punishable or, in lieu thereof, anyone of the punishments lower in
the scale set out in section 51 regard being had to the nature and
degree of the offence.
53. A Force Court may award in addition to, or without, any
other punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 51 or anyone or more of the punishments
specified in clauses ( f) to ( n) of that sub-section.
54. When on active duty an enrolled person has been
sentenced by a Force Court to imprisonment whether combined
with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that  such
person may be retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall
be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment.
55. Punishments may also be inflicted in respect of offences
committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of
a Force Court in the manner stated in sections 56, 58 and 59.
56. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of section 57, a commanding
officer of and above the rank of commandant may, in the prescribed
manner, proceed against a person subject to this  Act, other than an
officer or a subordinate officer, who is charged with an offence
under this Act and award such person, to the extent prescribed, one
or more of the following punishments, namely:—
Alternative
punishments by
Force Courts.
Combination of
punishments.
Retention in
the Force of a
person
convicted on
active duty.
Punishments
otherwise than
by Force
Courts.
Minor
Punishments.

62
(a) imprisonment in force custody up to twenty-eight
days;
(b) detention up to twenty-eight days;
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty-eight days;
(d) extra guards or duties;
(e) deprivation of any special position or special
emoluments or any acting rank;
(f) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(g) fine up to fourteen days’ pay in anyone month;
(h) deductions from his pay and allowances of any sum
required to make good any loss or damage occasioned by the
offence for which he is punished.
(2) If any unit, training centre or other establishment of the
Force is being temporarily commanded by an officer of the rank of
Second-in-Command or Deputy Commandant, such officer shall have
full powers of a commanding officer specified in sub-section ( 1).
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 57, a Deputy
Commandant or an Assistant Commandant, commanding a company
or a detachment or an outpost, shall have the power to proceed
against a person subject to this Act, other than an officer or a
subordinate officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act
and award such person to the extent prescribed, one or more of the
punishments specified in clauses ( a) to ( d) and ( h) of sub-section
(1) provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded under
each of the clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) shall not exceed fourteen days.
(4) A subordinate officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector
who is commanding a detachment or an outpost shall have the
powers to proceed against a person subject to this Act, other than
a subordinate officer or an under-officer, who is charged with an
offence under this Act and award such person to the extent
prescribed, one or more of the punishments specified under clauses
(c) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1) provided that the maximum limit of
punishment awarded under clause ( c) shall not exceed fourteen
days.
57. (1) In the case of an award of two or more of the
punishments specified in clauses ( a), ( b), ( c) and ( d) of sub-section
(1) of section 56, the punishments specified in clause ( c) or clause
(d) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in
clause ( a) or clause ( b).
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in
clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c
) of sub-section ( 1) of section 56 are
awarded to a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or
more of the said punishments, the whole extent of the punishments
shall not exceed in the aggregate forty-two days.
Limit of
punishments
under section
56.

63
(3) The punishments specified in clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 56 shall not be awarded to any person
who is of the rank of an under-officer or was, at the time of
committing the offence for which he is punished, of such rank.
(4) The punishment specified in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 56 shall not be awarded to any person below the rank of
an under-officer.
58. (1) An officer not below the rank of Inspector-General
may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer of or
below the rank of Commandant who is charged with an offence
under this Act and award one or more of the following
punishments, namely:—
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them
whose promotion depends upon length of service, forfeiture
of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not
exceeding one year, but subject to the right of the accused
previous to the award to elect to be tried by a Force Court;
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(c) deduction from pay and allowances any sum
required to make good any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted.
(2) An officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy
Inspector-General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a
person of or below the rank of Subedar-Major or Inspector who is
charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of
the following punishments, namely:—
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them
whose promotion depends upon the length of service,
forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a
period not exceeding one year, but subject to the right of the
accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a Force
Court;
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum
required to make good any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted.
(3) An officer not below the rank of Commandant may, in the
prescribed manner, proceed against a person of or below the rank
of Subedar-Major or Inspector who is charged with an offence
under this Act and award anyone or both of the following
punishments, namely:—
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(b) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum
required to make good any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted.
Punishment of
persons of or
below the rank
of Commandant
by Inspector-
General and
others.

64
59. (1) In every case in which punishment has been awarded
under section 58, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be
forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer awarding the
punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the
punishment awarded appears to him to be illegal, unjust or
excessive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment and make such
other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the
case.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), a “superior authority”
means:—
(a) any officer superior in command to such officer
who has awarded the punishment;
(b) in the case of punishment awarded by Director-
General, the Central Government.
60. (1) Whenever any weapon or part of weapon or
ammunition, forming part of the equipment of a unit, is lost or
stolen, a commanding officer not below the rank of the
Commandant of that unit may, after making such enquiry as he
thinks fit, impose such collective fine as may be prescribed, upon
the subordinate officers, under-officers and men of such unit, or
upon so many of them as, in his judgment, should be held
responsible for such loss or theft.
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage of the pay of
the individuals on whom it falls.
CHAPTER V
D
EDUCTIONS  FORM PAY AND ALLOWANCES
61. ( 1) The following deductions may be made from the pay
and allowances of an officer, namely:—
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every
day he absents himself without leave, unless a satisfactory
explanation has been given to, and accepted by, the Inspector-
General under whom he is for the time being serving;
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in
custody on a charge for an offence for which he is
afterwards convicted by a criminal court or Force Court or
by an officer exercising authority under section 58;
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any
person subject to this Act which he has unlawfully retained or
unlawfully refused to pay;
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation
for any expenses, loss, damage or destruction occasioned by
the commission of an offence as may be determined by the
Force Court by whom he is convicted of such offence or by
an officer exercising authority under section 58;
Cancellation,
variation or
remittance of
sentence.
Collective
fines.
Deductions
from pay and
allowances of
persons subject
to this Act.

65
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by Force Court;
(f) any sum required to be paid as fine awarded by a
criminal court or a Force Court;
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage
or destruction of public or Force property which, after due
investigation, appears to the Inspector-General under whom
the officer is for the time being serving, to have been
occasioned by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of
the officer;
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the
Central Government if the officer is found by a court of
inquiry constituted by the Director-General in this behalf, to
have deserted to the enemy, or while in enemy hands, to have
served with, or under the orders or; the enemy, or in any
manner to have aided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to
be taken prisoner by the enemy through want of due precaution
or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or
having been taken prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to
rejoin his service when it was possible to do so;
(l) any sum required by order of the Central
Government to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or his
legitimate or illegitimate child or step child or towards the
cost of any relief given by the said Government to the said
wife or child.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 63, the following
deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of a person
subject to this Act, other than an officer, namely:—
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence
either on desertion or without leave or as a prisoner of war
unless a satisfactory explanation has been given and accepted
by his commanding officer and for every day of
imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, Force Court or an
officer exercising authority under section 56;
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in
custody on a charge for an offence of which he is afterwards
convicted by a criminal court or Force Court or on a charge
of absence without leave for which he is afterwards awarded
imprisonment by an officer exercising authority under section 56;
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he
is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical
officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence
under this Act committed by him;
(d) all pay and allowances for every day on which he
is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical
officer attending on him to have been caused by his own
misconduct or imprudence, such sum as may be specified by
the order of the Director-General;

66
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by Force Court or
by an officer exercising authority under any of the sections
56 and 58 to be forfeited or stopped;
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his
being recovered from the enemy and his dismissal from the
service in consequence of his conduct when being taken
prisoner by, or while in the hands of the enemy;
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation
for any expenses, loss, damage or destruction caused by him
to the Central Government or to any building or property or
any private fund of the Force as may be awarded by his
commanding officer;
(h) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a
criminal court, Force Court exercising jurisdiction under
section 49 or an officer exercising authority under any of the
sections 56 and 60;
(i) any sum required by order of the Central
Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for the
maintenance of his wife, or his legitimate or illegitimate child
or step child or towards the cost of any relief given by the
said Government to the said wife or child.
(3) For computation of time of absence or custody under this
section,—
(a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody
for a day unless the absence or custody has lasted, whether
wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another
for six consecutive hours or upwards;
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be
reckoned as absence or custody for a day, if such absence or
custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty as
member of the Force which was thereby thrown upon some
other person;
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or
upwards may be reckoned as absence or custody for the
whole of each day during any portion of which the person
was absent or in custody;
(d) a period of absence, or imprisonment, which
commences before, and ends after, midnight may be reckoned
as a day.
62. In the case of any person subject to this Act who is in
custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence,
the prescribed officer may direct that the whole or any part of the
pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the
result of his trial on the charge against him, in order to give effect
to the provisions of clause ( b) of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of
section 61.
Pay and
allowances
during trial.

67
63. The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a
person made under clauses ( e) and ( g) to ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 61 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal or
removal, exceed in any one month one-half of his pay and
allowances for that month.
64. Any sum authorised by this Act to be deducted from the
pay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any
other mode of recovering the same, be deducted from any public
money due to him other than a pension.
65. Where the conduct of any person subject to this Act
when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of, the enemy,
is to be inquired into under this Act or any other law, the Director-
General or any officer authorised by him may order that the whole
or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be
withheld pending the result of such inquiry.
66. Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this
Act may be remitted in such manner and to such extent, and by
such authority, as may from time to time be prescribed.
67. (1) In the case of all persons subject to this Act, being
prisoners of war, whose pay and allowances have been forfeited
under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) or clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2)
of section 61 but in respect of whom a remission has been made
under section 66, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or
the Director-General, when so authorised by the Central
Government, to make provisions in respect of pay and allowances
for any dependants of such persons and any such remission shall in
that case be deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter
remaining of such pay and allowances.
(2) It shall be lawful for the Central Government or the
Director-General, when so authorised by the Central Government, to
make provisions for any dependants of any person subject to this
Act who is a prisoner of war, or is missing, in respect of his pay
and allowances.
68. For the purposes of section 67, a person shall be deemed
to continue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of any
inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in section 65 and if
he is dismissed from the service in consequence of such conduct,
until the date of such dismissal.
CHAPTER VI
A
RREST AND PROCEEDINGS  BEFORE TRIAL
69. ( 1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with
any offence may be taken into Force custody under the order of
any superior officer.
Limit of certain
deductions.
Deduction from
public money
due to a person.
Pay and
allowances of
prisoner of war
during inquiry
into his
conduct.
Remission of
deductions.
Provision for
dependants of
prisoner of war
from his
remitted
deductions and
pay and
allowances.
Period during
which a person
is deemed to be
a prisoner of
war.
Custody of
offenders.

68
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), an
officer may order into Force custody any other officer, though such
other officer may be of a higher rank, if he engages in a quarrel,
affray or disorder.
70. (1) It shall be the duty of every commanding officer to
take care that a person under his command when charged with an
offence is not detained in custody for more than forty-eight hours
after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him,
without the charge being investigated, unless investigation in the
prescribed procedure, within that period seems to him to be
impracticable having regard to the public service.
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody
beyond a period of forty-eight hours, and the reasons therefor, shall
be reported by the commanding officer to the next higher officer or
such other officer to whom an application may be made to convene
a Force Court for the trial of the person charged.
(3) In reckoning the period of forty-eight hours specified in
sub-section (1), Sundays and other public holidays shall be
excluded.
(4) The manner in which and the period for which any person
subject to this Act may be taken into and detained in Force custody,
pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence
committed by him, shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
71. In every case where any such person as is mentioned in
section 69 and as is not on active duty, remains in such custody for
a longer period than eight days without a Force be Court for his
trial being convened, a special report giving reasons for the delay
shall be made by his commanding officer in the manner prescribed,
and a similar report shall be forwarded at intervals of every eight
days until a Force Court is convened or such person is released
from custody.
72. Whenever any person, subject to this Act, who is accused
of an offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any
magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or police officer shall
aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such
person upon receipt of a written application to that effect signed by
his commanding officer or an officer authorised by the commanding
officer in that behalf.
73. (1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the
commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs or is attached,
shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, in
his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of
the deserter; and such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the
apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he were a
person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a
magistrate, and shall deliver the deserter, when apprehended, into
Force custody.
Duty of
commanding
officer in
regard to
detention.
Interval
between
committal and
trial.
Arrest by civil
authorities.
Capture of
deserters.

69
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person
reasonably believed to be subject to this Act, and to be a deserter
or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him without
delay before the nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to
law.
74. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent
from duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a court
of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, be appointed by such
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed; and such court
shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed manner,
inquire in respect of the absence of the person, and the deficiency,
if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to his care, or
in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or
accessories; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due
authority or other sufficient cause, the court shall declare such
absence and the period thereof and the said deficiency, if any, and
the commanding officer of the unit to which the person belongs or
is attached, shall make a record thereof in the prescribed manner.
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards
surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the purposes of this
Act, be deemed to be a deserter.
75. (1) The Director-General or any prescribed officer
may appoint persons (in this Act referred to as Force Police)
for discharging the functions specified in sub-sections ( 2) and
(3).
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub-section ( 1)
are to take charge of persons confined for any offence, to
preserve good order and discipline and to prevent breaches of
the same by persons serving in, or attached to the Force.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 69, a
person appointed under sub-section ( 1) may, at any time, arrest
and detain for trial any person subject to this Act who
commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may also carry
into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a
sentence awarded by a Force Court or by an officer exercising
authority under section 56 but shall not inflict any punishment
on his own authority:
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained
otherwise than on the order of another officer.
CHAPTER VII
F
ORCE C OURTS
76. For the purposes of this Act, there shall be three kinds of
Force Courts, namely :—
(a) General Force Courts;
(b) Petty Force Courts; and
Inquiry into
absence without
leave.
Force Police
Officers.
Kinds of Force
Courts.

70
(c) Summary Force Courts,
which shall be convened in the manner prescribed.
77. A General Force Court may be convened by the Central
Government or the Director-General or by any officer empowered
in this behalf by warrant of the Director-General.
78. A Petty Force Court may be convened by an officer
having power to convene a General Force Court or by an officer
empowered in this behalf by warrant of any such officer.
79. A warrant issued under section 77 or section 78 may
contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer
issuing it may think fit.
80. A General Force Court shall consist of not less than five
officers.
81. A Petty Force Court shall consist of not less than three
officers.
82. (1) A Summary Force Court may be held by the
commanding officer of any unit and he alone shall constitute the
Court.
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two
other persons who shall be officers or subordinate officers or one
of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.
83. ( 1) If a Force Court after the commencement of a trial
is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by this
Act, it shall be dissolved.
(2) If, on account of the illness of the concerned Judge
Attorney or, as the case may be, Deputy Judge Attorney-General or
Additional Judge Attorney-General or of the accused before the
finding, it is impossible to continue the trial, the Force Court shall
be dissolved.
(3) The authority or officer who convened a Force Court may
dissolve the same if it appears to him that the exigencies of the
service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or
inexpedient to continue the said Force Court.
(4) Where a Force Court is dissolved under this section, the
accused may be tried again.
84. A General Force Court shall have the power to try any
person subject to this Act  for any offence punishable thereunder
and to pass any sentence authorised thereby.
85. A Petty Force Court shall have the power to try any
person subject to this Act other than an officer or a subordinate
officer for any offence made punishable thereunder and to pass any
sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death or
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.
Power to
convene a
General Force
Court.
Power to
convene a
Petty Force
Court.
Warrants
issued under
sections 77
and 78.
Composition
of a General
Force Court.
Composition
of a Petty
Force Court.
Summary
Force Court.
Dissolution of
a Force Court.
Powers of a
General Force
Court.
Powers of a
Petty Force
Court.

71
86.  ( 1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), a
Summary Force Court may try any offence punishable under this
Act.
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and
reference can without detriment to discipline be made to the officer
empowered to convene a Petty Force Court for the trial of the
alleged offender, an officer holding a Summary Force Court shall
not try without such reference any offence punishable under any of
the sections 16, 19 and 49, or any offender against the officer
holding the Court.
(3) A Summary Force Court may try any person subject to
this Act and under the command of the officer holding the Court,
except an officer or a subordinate officer.
(4) A Summary Force Court may pass any sentence which
may be passed under this Act, except the sentence of death or
of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub-
section ( 5).
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be,—
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Force Court
holds the rank not below that of a Commandant;
(b) three months, in any other case.
87. (1) When any person, subject to this Act has been
acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Force Court or by a
criminal court or has been dealt with under section 56 or section
58, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by
a Force Court or dealt with under the said sections.
(2) When any person, subject to this Act, has been acquitted
or convicted of an offence by a Force Court or has been dealt with
under section 56 or section 58, he shall not be liable to be tried
again by a criminal court for the same offence or on the same
facts.
88. (1) Except as provided by sub-section ( 2), no trial by a
Force Court of any peson subject to this Act for any offence shall
be commenced after the expiration of a period of three years from
the date of such offence.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial
for an offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in
section 19.
(3) In the computation of the period of time mentioned in
sub-section ( 1), any time spent by such person in evading arrest
after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded.
89. (1) Where an offence under this Act had been committed
by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so
subject, he may be taken into and kept in Force custody and tried and
punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject.
Powers of a
Summary Force
Court.
Prohibition of
second trial.
Period of
limitation for
trial.
Trial, etc., of
offender who
ceases to be
subject to this
Act.

72
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his
trial commences within six months after he had ceased to be subject
to this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply
to the trial of any such person for an offence of desertion or for
any of the offences mentioned in section 19 or shall affect the
jurisdiction of a criminal court to try any offence triable by such
court as well as by a Force Court.
90. (1) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a
Force Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the
term of his sentence, though he is dismissed from the Force, or has
otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be kept,
removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject
to this Act.
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Force
Court to death, this Act shall apply to him till the sentence is carried
out.
91. ( 1) Any person subject to this Act who commits any
offence under this Act may be tried and punished for such offence
at any place.
(2) The persons by whom an accused may be defended in a
trial and appearance of such persons thereat may be as prescribed.
92. When a criminal court and a Force Court have each
jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of
the Director-General, Additional Director-General or the Inspector-
General or the Deputy Inspector-General or the Additional Deputy
Inspector- General within whose command the accused person is
serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before
which court the proceedings shall be instituted, and if that officer
decides that they shall be instituted before a Force Court, then he
may direct that the accused person shall be detained in Force
custody.
93. (1) When a criminal court having jurisdiction is of opinion
that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any
alleged offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer
referred to in section 92 at his option, either to deliver over the
offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according
to law, or to postpone proceedings, pending a reference to the
Central Government.
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver
over the offender in compliance with the requisition, or shall
forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the
proceedings are to be instituted, for the determination of the Central
Government whose order upon such reference shall be final.
Application of
Act during
term of
sentence.
Place of trial,
etc.
Choice
between
criminal court
and Force
Court.
Power of
criminal court
to require
delivery of
offender.

73
CHAPTER VIII
PROCEDURE  OF F ORCE C OURTS
94. At every General Force Court or Petty Force Court, the
senior member shall be the presiding officer.
95. (1) Every General Force Court shall, and every Petty
Force Court may be  attended by a Judge Attorney or a Deputy
Judge Attorney-General or an Additional Judge Attorney-
General, or, if no such officer is available, an officer approved
by the Judge Attorney-General or by any officer authorised in
this behalf by the Judge Attorney-General.
(2) The recruitment and conditions of service of Judge
Attorney-General, Additional Judge Attorney-General, Deputy
Judge Attorney-General and Judge Attorney shall be such as
may be prescribed.
96. (1) At all trials by a General Force Court or by a Petty
Force Court, as soon as the Court is assembled, the names of the
presiding officer and members shall be read over to the accused,
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by
any officer sitting on the Court.
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and
also the reply thereto of the officer objected to shall be heard and
recorded, and the remaining officers of the Court shall, in the
absence of the challenged officer decide on the objection.
(3) If the objection is allowed by one-half or more of the
votes of the officers entitled to vote, the objection shall be allowed,
and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be
filled in the prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the
same right of the accused to object.
(4) When no objection is made, or when an objection has
been made and disallowed, or the vacancy of an officer has been
filled by another officer under sub-section ( 3) to which no objection
is made or allowed, the Court shalI proceed with the trial.
97. ( 1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed manner shall
be administered to every member of the Force Court and to the
Judge Attorney, or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney-
General or the Additional Judge Attorney-General or the officer
approved under section 95, before the commencement of the trial.
(2) Every person giving evidence before a Force Court shall
be examined after being duly sworn or affirmed in the prescribed
form.
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) shall not apply where
the witness is a child under twelve years of age and the Force
Court is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of
speaking the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or
affirmation.
Presiding
officer.
Judge Attorneys.
Objections.
Oath of
members, Judge
Attorneys and
witnesses.

74
98. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3),
every decision of a Force Court shall be passed by an absolute
majority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes on either
the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the
accused.
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Force
Court without the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the
members of the Court.
(3) In matters other than an objection or the finding or
sentence, the presiding officer shall have a casting vote.
99. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Force Court.
100. A Force Court may take judicial notice of any matter within
the general knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.
101. ( 1) The convening officer or the presiding officer of a
Force Court or the Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, the
Deputy Judge Attorney-General or the Additional Judge Attorney-
General or the officer approved under section 95 or the
commanding officer of the accused person may, by summons under
his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned
in the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to
produce any document or other thing.
(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this Act or any
other Act relating to the armed forces of the Union, the summons
shall be sent to his commanding officer and such officer shall serve
it upon him accordingly.
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be
sent to the magistrate within whose jurisdiction he may be, or
resides, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if
the witness were required in the court of such a magistrate.
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular or
other thing in his possession or power, the summons shall describe
it with reasonable precision.
102. (1) Nothing in section 101 shall be deemed to affect the
operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
or to apply to any letter, postcard, telegram or other document in
the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any
District Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Court of Sessions or High Court wanted for the purpose
of any Force Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the
postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to deliver such
document to such person as such Magistrate or Court may direct.
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other
magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police or District
Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may
V oting by
members.
General rule as
to evidence.
1 of 1872.
Judicial notice.
Summoning of
witnesses.
Documents
exempted from
production.
1 of 1872.

75
require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to
cause such search to be made for, and to detain such document
pending the orders of any such District Magistrate, Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Sessions
or High Court.
103. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Force Court,
it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is
necessary for the ends of justice, and that the attendance of such
witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be
unreasonable, such Court may address the Judge Attorney-General
in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witness
may be issued.
(2) The Judge Attorney-General may then, if he thinks
necessary, issue a commission to any Metropolitan Magistrate or
Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction such witness resides, to take the evidence of such
witness.
(3) The Magistrate to whom the commission is issued, or, if
he is the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or Chief Judicial Magistrate,
or such Metropolitan Magistrate, or Judicial Magistrate, as he
appoints in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or
proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down his
evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the
same powers, as in the trials of warrant-cases under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place
outside India, the commission may be issued in the manner specified
in Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
104. (1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any case
in which a commission is issued under section 103 may respectively
forward any interrogatories in writing which the court may think
relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate executing the commission
shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before
such Magistrate by counsel, or, except in the case of an accused
person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross-examine and
re-examine, as the case may be, the said witness.
(3) After a commission issued under section 103 has been
duly executed, it shall be returned, together with the deposition of
the witness examined thereunder to the Judge Attorney-General.
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition returned
under sub-section (3), the Judge Attorney-General shall forward the
same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or,
if such Court has been dissolved, to any other Court convened for
the trial of the accused person; and the commission, the return
thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the
Commission for
examination of
witnesses.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Examination of
a witness on
commission.

76
prosecutor and the accused person, and may, subject to all just
exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the prosecutor
or the accused, and shall form part of the proceedings of the Court.
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under
section 103, the trial may be adjourned for specified time reasonably
sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.
105. A person charged before a Force Court with—
(a) desertion may be found guilty of attempting to
desert or of being absent without leave;
(b) attempting to desert may be found guilty of being
absent without leave;
(c) using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;
(d) using threatening language may be found guilty of
using insubordinate language;
(e) anyone of the offences specified in clauses ( a), ( b),
(c) and ( d) of section 33 may be found guilty of any other
of these offences with which he might have been charged;
(f) an offence punishable under section 49 may be
found guilty of any other offence of which he might have
been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 were applicable.
(g) any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof
of an offence having been committed in circumstances
involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the
same offence as having been committed in circumstances
involving a less severe punishment;
(h) any offence under this Act may be found guilty of
having attempted or abetted the commission of that offence,
although the attempt or abetment is not separately charged.
106. In any proceeding under this Act, any application,
certificate, warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed
by an officer in the service of the Government shall, on production,
be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and
in the character in which it purports to have been signed, until the
contrary is shown.
107. ( 1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an
enrolling officer shall, in  proceedings under this Act, be evidence
of the person enrolling having given the answers to questions which
he is therein represented as having given.
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the
production of the original or a copy of this enrolment paper
purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the office having the
custody of the enrolment paper or service record;
Conviction for
offences not
charged.
2 of 1974.
Presumption as
to signatures.
Enrolment
paper.

77
108. (1) A letter, return or other document respecting the
service of any person in, or the dismissal, removal or discharge of
any person from, any unit of the Force, or respecting the
circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to,
any unit of the Force, if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of
the Central Government or the Director-General, or by any
prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such
letter, return or other document.
(2) A Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by
authority shall be evidence of the status and rank of the officers,
subordinate officers therein mentioned, and of any appointment held
by them and of the battalion, unit, or branch of the Force to which
they belong.
(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance
of this Act or of any rules made thereunder or otherwise in the
discharge of official duties, and purports to be signed by the
commanding officer or by the officers whose duty it is to make such
record, such record shall be evidence of the facts therein stated.
(4) A copy of any record in any office of the Force
purporting to be certified to be true copy by the officer having
custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a
charge of desertion or of absence without leave, and such person
has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other
person, subject to this Act, or any unit of the Force, or has been
apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate purporting to
be signed by such officer, or by the commanding officer of the unit
to which such person belongs or is attached, as the case may be,
and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or
apprehension, and the manner in which he was dressed shall be
evidence of the matters so stated.
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a
charge of desertion or of absence without leave and such person
has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been
apprehended by, a police officer not below the rank of an officer in
charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed by
such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such
surrender or apprehension and the manner in which he was dressed
shall be evidence of the matters so stated.
(7) ( a) Any document purporting to be a report under the
hand of a Government scientific expert to whom this sub-section
applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for
examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding
under this Act, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Act.
(b) The Force Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine
any such expert as to the subject matter of his report.
Presumption as
to certain
documents.

78
(c) Where any such expert is summoned by a Force Court
and he is unable to attend personally, he may, unless the Court has
expressly directed him to appear personally, depute an officer who
is conversant with the facts of the case to depose in the Court on
his behalf.
(d) This sub-section applies to the Government scientific
expert, for the time being specified in sub-section ( 4) of section 293
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
109. (1) If at any trial for desertion or absence without leave,
over-staying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the
accused person states in his defence any sufficient or reasonable
excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof
to any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appears that
any such officer is likely to prove or disprove the said statement in
the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn the
proceedings until his reply is received.
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if
signed by him, be received in evidence and have the same effect as
if made on oath before the Court.
(3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply
or if the Court omits to comply with the provisions of this section,
the convening officer may, at his discretion, annual the proceedings
and order a fresh trial.
110. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been
convicted by a Force Court of any offence, such Force Court may
inquire into, and receive, and record evidence of any previous
convictions of such person, either by a Force Court or by a
criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under section
56 or section 58, and may further inquire into and record the
general character of such person and such other matters as may be
prescribed.
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral,
or in the shape of entries in, or certified extracts from, books of
Force Courts or other official record; and it shall not be necessary
to give notice before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his
previous convictions or character will be received.
(3) At a Summary Force Court, the officer holding the trial
may, if he thinks fit, record any previous convictions against the
offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be
prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to
be proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.
111. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Force Court,
it appears to the Court that the person charged is by reason of
unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or that he
committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of
mind incapable of knowing the nature of the act or knowing that it
was wrong or contrary to law, the Court shall record a finding
accordingly.
Reference by
accused to
Government
officer.
2 of 1974.
Evidence of
previous
convictions
and general
character.
Lunacy of
accused.

79
(2) Thc presiding officer of the Court, or, in the case of a
Summary Force Court, the officer holding the trial, shall forthwith
report the case to the confirming officer, or to the authority
empowered to deal with its finding under section 129, as the case
may be.
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported
under sub-section (2) may, if he does not confirm the finding, take
steps to have the accused person tried by the same or another
Force Court for the offence with which he was charged.
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary Force
Court is reported under sub-section ( 2) and a confirming officer
confirming the finding in any case so reported to him shall order the
accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and
shall report the case for the orders of the Central Government.
(5) On receipt of a report under sub-section ( 4), the Central
Government may order the accused person to be detained in a
lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.
112. Where any accused person, having been found by reason
of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is
in custody or under detention under section 111, any officer
prescribed in this behalf, may—
(a) if such person is in custody under sub-section ( 4)
of section 111, on the report of a medical officer that he is
capable of making his defence, or
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub-section
(5) of section 111, on a certificate of the Inspector-General of
Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum
under the said sub-section, on a certificate of any two or
more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in
any other place under that sub-section, on a certificate of the
prescribed authority, that he is capable of making his defence,
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another
Force Court for the offence with which he was originally
charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal
court.
113. A copy of every order made by an officer under section
112 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central
Government.
114. Where any person is in custody under sub-section ( 4) of
section 111 or under detention under sub-section ( 5) of that section,—
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub-
section (4), on the report of a medical officer, or
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub-
section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the authorities
mentioned in clause ( b) of section 112 that in the judgment of
Subsequent
fitness of
lunatic accused
for trial.
Transmission to
Central
Government of
order under
section 112.
Release of
lunatic accused.

80
such officer or authority such person may be released without
danger of his causing injury to himself or to any other
person,
the Central Government may order that such person be released or
detained in custody or transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he
has not already been sent to such an asylum.
115. Where any relative or triend of any person who is in
custody under sub-section ( 4) of section 111 or under detention
under sub-section ( 5) of that section desires that he should be
delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may,
upon application by such relative or friend and, on his giving
security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person
delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing
injury to himself or to any other person, and be produced for the
inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the
Central Government may direct, order such person to be delivered
to such relative or friend.
116. When any property regarding which any offence appears
to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for
the commission of any offence, is produced before a Force Court
during a trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for
the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the
trial, and if the property is subject to speedy or natural decay may,
after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order it to be
sold or otherwise disposed of.
117. (1) After the conclusion of a trial before any Force
Court, the Court or the office confirming the finding or sentences
of such Force Court, or any authority superior to such officer, or,
in the case of Summary Force Court whose finding or sentences
does not require confirmation, as officer not below the rank of
Additional Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the
trial was held, may make such order as it or he thinks fit for the
disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person
claiming to be entitled to possession thereof, or otherwise, of any
property or document produced before the Court or in its custody,
or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or
which has been used for the commission of any offence.
(2) Where any order has been made under sub-section ( 1) in
respect of property regarding which an offence appears to have
been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the
authority making the same may, whether the trial was held within
India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose jurisdiction such
property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall
thereupon cause the order to be carried into effect as if it were an
order passed by him under the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
(3) In this section the term “property” includes, in the case
of property regarding which an offence appears to have been
Delivery of
lunatic accused
to relatives.
Order for
custody and
disposal of
property
pending trial.
Order for
disposal of
property
regarding
which offence
is committed.
2 of 1974.

81
committed, not only such property as has been originally in the
possession or under the control of any person, but also any
property into for which the same may have been converted or
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange
whether immediately or otherwise.
118. Any trial by a Force Court under the provisions of this
Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Force
Court shall be deemed to be a Court within the meaning of sections
345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
119. (l) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person
supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy
to an offence triable by a Force Court other than a Summary Force
Court under this Act, the commanding officer, the convening officer
or the Force Court, at any stage of investigation or inquiry into or
the trial of, the offence, may tender a pardon to such person on
condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of
the circumstances within his knowledge relating to the offence and
to every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in
the commission thereof.
(2) The commanding officer or the convening officer who
tenders pardon under sub-section ( 1) shall record,—
(a) his reasons for so doing;
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the
person to whom it was made, and shall, on application made
by accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of
cost,
(3) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under
sub-section ( 1)—
(a) shall be examined as a witness by the commanding
officer of the accused and in the subsequent trial, if any;
(b) may be detained in Force custody until the
termination of the trial.
120. (1) Where, in regard to a person who has accepted a
tender of pardon made under section 119, the Judge Attorney, or as
the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney-General, or the
Additional Judge Attorney-General, or the officer approved under
section 95, certifies that in his opinion such person has, either by
wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence,
not complied with the conditions on which the tender was made,
such person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the
pardon was so tendered or for any other offence of which he
appears to have been guilty in connection with the same matter, and
also for the offence of giving false evidence:
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any
of the other accused.
Powers of Force
Court in
relation to
proceedings
under this Act.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Tender of
pardon to
accomplices.
Trial of person
not complying
with conditions
of pardon.

82
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender
of pardon and recorded by his commanding officer or Force Court
may be given in evidence against him at such trial.
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he
has complied with the condition upon which such tender was made;
in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the
condition has not been complied with.
(4) At such trial, the Force Court shall, before arraignment,
ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the
conditions on which the tender of pardon was made.
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the
plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, before giving its finding
on the charge, find whether or not the accused has complied with
the conditions of the pardon, and, if it finds that he, has so
complied, it shall give a verdict of not guilty.
CHAPTER IX
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  OF PROCEEDINGS
121. No finding or sentence of a General Force Court or a
Petty Force Court shall be valid except so far as it may be
confirmed as provided by this Act.
122. The findings and sentences of General Force Courts may
be confirmed by the Central Government or by any officer
empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government.
123. The findings and sentences of a Petty Force Court may
be confirmed by an officer having power to convene a General
Force Court or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant
of such officer.
124. A warrant issued under section 122 or section 123 may
contain such restrictions, reservations or condition as the authority
issuing it may think fit.
125. Subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions,
as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 122 or
section 123, a confirming authority may, when confirming the
sentence of a Force Court, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby
awarded or commute that punishment for any punishment or
punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 51.
126. When any person subject to this Act is tried and
sentenced by a Force Court while on board a ship, the finding and
sentence so far as not confirmed and executed on board the ship,
may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such person
had been tried at the port of disembarkation.
Finding and
sentence not
valid unless
confirmed.
Power to
confirm finding
and sentence of
General Force
Court.
Power to
confirm finding
and sentence
of Petty Force
Court.
Limitation of
powers of
confirming
authority.
Power of
confirming
authority to
mitigate, remit
or commute
sentences.
Confirming of
findings and
sentences on
board a ship.

83
127. (1) Any finding or sentence of a Force Court which
requires confirmation may be once revised by order of the
confirming authority and on such revision, the Court, if so directed
by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.
(2) The Court on revision, shall consist of the same officers
as were present when the original decision was passed unless any
of those officers are unavoidably absent.
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof
shall be duly certified in the proceedings and the Court shall proceed
with the revision provided that, in the case of a General Force Court
it consists of five officers and in the case of a Petty Force Court,
of three officers.
128. The finding and sentence of a Summary Force Court
shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out forthwith.
129. The proceedings of every Summary Force Court shall be
forwarded without delay to the officer not below the rank of
Additional Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the
trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer, or the
Director-General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf
may, for reasons based on the merits of the case, but not on merely
technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce the sentence
to any other sentence which the Court might have passed.
130. (1) Where a finding of guilty by a Force Court, which
has been confirmed or which does not require confirmation, is
found for any reason to be invalid or cannot be supported by the
evidence, the authority which would have had power under section
142 to commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the
finding had been valid may substitute a new finding and pass a
sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such
finding could have been validly made by the Force Court on the
charge and unless it appears that the Force Court must have been
satisfied of the, facts establishing the said offence.
(2) Where a sentence passed by a Force Court which has
been confirmed, or which does not require confirmation, not being
a sentence passed in pursuance of a new finding substituted under
sub-section ( 1), is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority
referred to in sub-section ( 1) may pass a valid sentence.
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall not be higher in the scale of
punishments that, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the
sentence for which a new sentence is substituted under this section.
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under
this section shall, for the purposes of this Act and the rules, have
effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of
a Force Court.
Revision of
finding or
sentence.
Finding and
sentence of a
Summary Force
Court.
Transmission of
proceedings of
Summary Force
Court.
Alteration of
finding or
sentence in
certain cases.

84
131. (1) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself
aggrieved by any order passed by any Force Court may present a
petition to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any
finding or sentence of such Force Court, and the confirming
authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary to
satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order
passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the order
relates.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself
aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any Force Court which has
been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government,
the Director-General or any prescribed officer superior in command
to the one who confirmed such finding or sentence, and the Central
Government, the Director-General, or the prescribed officer, as the
case may be, may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.
132. The Central Government, the Director-General or any
prescribed officer may annul the proceedings of any Force Court on
the ground that they are illegal or unjust.
CHAPTER X
E
XECUTION  OF SENTENCES , PARDONS, REMISSIONS , ETC.
133. In executing a sentence of death, a Force Court shall, in
its discretion direct that the offender shall suffer death by being
hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall suffer death by being
shot to death.
134. Whenever any person is sentenced by a Force Court
under this Act to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall,
whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned of to commence on
the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the
presiding officer, or in the case of a Summary Force Court, by the
Court:
Provided that if for any reason beyond the control of the
commanding officer or superior officer, the sentence of
imprisonment cannot be executed in full or in part, the convict shall
be liable to undergo the whole or unexpired portion of sentence, as
the case may be, when it becomes possible to carry out the same:
Provided further that the period of detention or confinement,
if any, undergone by an accused person during the investigation,
inquiry or trial of the case in which he is sentenced and before the
date of which the original proceedings were signed shall be set off
against the term of his sentence and the liability of such person to
undergo imprisonment shall be restricted to the remainder, if any of
the term of his sentence.
135. (1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is passed
under this Act by a Force Court or whenever any sentence of death
is commuted to imprisonment, the confirming officer or in case of
a Summary Force Court the officer holding the Court or such other
Petition
against order,
finding or
sentence of
Force Court.
Annulment of
proceedings.
Execution of
sentence of
death.
Commencement
of sentence of
imprisonment.
Execution of
sentence of
imprisonment.

85
office as may be prescribed shall, save as otherwise provided in
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4), direct that the sentence shall be carried
out by confinement in a civil prison.
(2) When a direction has been made under sub-section ( 1),
the commanding officer of the person under sentence or such other
officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the
prescribed form to the officer in charge of the prison in which such
person is to be confined and shall arrange for his despatch to such
prison with the warrant.
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period
not exceeding three months and passed under this Act by a Force
Court, the appropriate officer under sub-section ( 1) may direct that
the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in Force custody
instead of in a civil prison.
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be
carried out by confinement in such place as the officer not below
the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector-General within whose
command the person sentenced is serving or any prescribed officer
may from time to time appoint.
136. Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be
undergone in a civil prison, the convict may be kept in Force
custody or in any other fit place till such time as it is possible to
send him to a civil prison.
137. Whenever, in the opinion of an officer not below the
rank of Additional Deputy Inspector-General within whose command
the trial is held, any sentence or portion of a sentence of
imprisonment cannot for special reasons conveniently be carried out
in Force custody in accordance with the provisions of section 135,
such officer may direct that such sentence or portion of sentence
shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit
place.
138. A person under sentence of imprisonment may during his
conveyance from place to place or when on board a ship, aircraft,
or otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is necessary for his
safe conduct and removal.
139. Whenever an order is duly made under this Act setting
aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any
person is confined in a civil prison, a warrant in accordance with
such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or
his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the
officer in charge of the prison in which such person is confined.
140. When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Force Court
under section 49, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by
the confirming officer, or where no confirmation is required, by the
officer holding the trial may be sent to any magistrate in India, and
such magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.
Temporary
custody of
convict.
Conveyance of
prisoner from
place to place.
Communication
of certain
orders to prison
officers.
Recovery of
fine.
2 of 1973.
Execution of
sentance of
imprisonment in
sepecial cases.

86
141. Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment
under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or
manner in which he might be confined under a lawful order or
warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person
shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or
error in, or as respects the order, warrant or other document, or the
authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was
brought into, or, is confined in any such place, and any such order,
warrant or document may be amended accordingly.
142. When any person subject to this Act has been convicted
by a Force Court of any offence, the Central Government or the
Director-General or, in the case of a sentence, which he could have
confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not
below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector-General within whose
command such person at the time of conviction was serving, or the
prescribed officer may,—
(a) either with or without conditions which the person
sentenced accepts, pardon the person or remit the whole or any part
of the punishments awarded; or
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or
punishments mentioned in this Act; or
(d) either with or without conditions which the person
sentenced accepts, release the person on parole.
143. (1) If any condition on which a person has been
pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted
is, in the opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release
or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may cancel the pardon,
release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall
be carried into effect as if such pardon, release or remission had
not been granted.
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into
effect under the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall undergo such
imprisonment only for the unexpired portion of his sentence.
144. (1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced by
a Force Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the
Director-General or any officer empowered to convene a General
Force Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the offender
has already been committed to prison or to Force custody.
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub-section ( 1) may,
in the case of an offender so sentenced direct that until the orders
of such authority or officer have been obtained, the offender shall
not be committed to prison or to Force custody.
(3) The powers conferred by sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be
exercised in the case of any such sentence which has been
confirmed, reduced or commuted.
Informality or
error in order
or warrant.
Pardon and
remission.
Cancellation
of conditional
pardons release
on parole or
remission.
Suspension of
sentence of
imprisonment

87
145. ( 1) Where the sentence referred to in section 144 is
imposed by a Force Court other than a Summary Force Court, the
confirming officer may, when confirming the sentence, direct that
the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody until
the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 144 have
been obtained.
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a
Summary Force Court, the officer holding the trial may make the
direction referred to in sub-section ( 1).
146. Where a sentence is suspended under section 144, the
offender shall forthwith be released from custody.
147. Any period during which the sentence is under
suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.
148. The authority or officer specified in section 144 may, at
any time while a sentence is suspended, order—
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the
unexpired portion of the sentence; or
(b) that the sentence be remitted.
149. (1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case may
at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be
reconsidered by the authority or officer not below the rank of an
Additional Deputy Inspector-General duly authorised by the authority
or officer specified in section 144.
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so
authorised, it appears to him that the conduct of offender since his
conviction has been such as to justify a remission of sentence, he
shall refer the matter to the authority or officer specified in section
144.
150.  Where an offender, while a sentence on him is
suspended under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence,
then—
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this
Act, the two sentences shall run concurrently;
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three
months or more and is not suspended under this Act, the
offender shall also be committed to prison or Force custody
for the unexpired portion of the previous sentence, but both
sentences shall run concurrently; and
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than
three months and is not suspended under this Act, the
offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the
previous sentence shall, subject to any order which may be
passed under section 148 or section 149, continue to be
suspended.
Orders pending
suspension of
sentence.
Release on
suspension of
sentence.
Computation of
period of
sentence.
Order after
suspension of
sentence.
Reconsideration
of case after
suspension of
sentence.
Fresh sentence
after suspension.

88
151. The powers conferred by sections 144 and 148 shall be
in addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation,
remission and commutation.
152.  ( 1) Where in addition to any other sentence the
punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a Force Court, and
such other sentence is suspended under section 144, then, such
dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or
officer specified in section 144.
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 148, the
punishment of dismissal shall also be remitted.
CHAPTER XI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
153. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special
order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order, any
member of the Force may exercise or discharge such of the powers
or duties under any Central Act as may be specified in the said
order, being the powers and duties which in the opinion of the
Central Government, an officer of the corresponding or lower rank
is by such Central Act empowered to exercise or discharge for the
said purposes.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order
published in the Official Gazette, confer or impose, with the
concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers
or duties which may be exercised or discharged under a State Act
by a police officer upon a member of the Force who, in the opinion
of the Central Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the
order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
154. (1) In any suit or proceeding against any member of the
Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of
a competent authority, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act
was done by him under the authority of such warrant or order.
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the
warrant or order directing the act, and if it is so proved, the
member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in
Scope of
power of
suspension of
sentence.
Effect of
suspension and
remission of
sentence on
dismissal.
Powers and
duties
conferrable
and imposable
on members of
the Force.
Protection for
acts of
members of
the Force.

89
respect of the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the
jurisdiction of the authority which issued such warrant or order.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, any legal proceeding (whether civil or
criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the
Force for anything done or intended to be done under the powers
conferred by, or in pursuance of any provision of this Act or the
rules, shall be commenced within three months after the act
complained of was committed and not otherwise, and notice in
writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be given
to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before
the commencement of such proceeding.
155. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for—
(a) the manner of constitution of the Force and
conditions of service of its members under section 4;
(b) superintendence, direction and control of the Force
under section 5;
(c) the persons to be enrolled to the Force, mode of
enrolment and procedure thereof under section 6;
(d) the authority, to whom resignation to be submitted
and the permission for withdrawal from duty to be obtained
from, under section 8;
(e) the dismissal, removal and reduction in rank of
persons under sections 11;
(f) the authority and other matters required to be
prescribed under section 13;
(g) the amount and the incidence of fine to be imposed
under section 60;
(h) the manner and extent of deductions from pay and
allowances and the authority therefor under section 66;
(i) the procedure of investigation of an offence and the
manner and period of detention of persons under section 70;
(j) the manner of making the report by the commanding
officer in respect of delay in convening Force Court under
section 71;
(k) the authority to appoint the court of inquiry and the
manner of appointment thereof under section 74;
(l) the manner of convening Force Courts under
section 76;
(m) the persons by whom an accused may be defended
in a trial and appearance of such persons under section 91;
Power to make
rules.

90
(n) the recruitment and conditions of service of the
Judge  Attorney-General, Deputy Judge Attorney-General,
Additional Judge Attorney-General and Judge Attorney under
section 95;
(o) the officer to annul proceedings of the Force Court
under section 132; and
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be, or may
be, made by the rules.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
156. (1) The Sashastra Seema Bal in existence at the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Force
constituted under this Act.
(2) The members of the Sashastra Seema Bal in
existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
have been appointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as such
under this Act.
(3) Anything done or any action taken before the
commencement of this Act in relation to the constitution of the
Sashastra Seema Bal referred to in sub-section ( 1), in relation
to any person appointed or enrolled, as the case may be,
thereto, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such
thing or action was done or taken under this Act:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any
person guilty of any offence in respect of anything done or
omitted to be done by him before the commencement of this
Act.
Provisions as
to existing
Sashastra
Seema Bal.

91
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Special Service Bureau (SSB) was raised in 1963 under the Cabinet
Secretariat in the back drop of Chinese aggression. The organitisation was
initially functional in the region of the then North East Frontier , North Assam,
North Bengal, hills of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu.
Subsequently, its activities were extended to other border areas in Manipur,
Tripura, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Mizoram, South Bengal,
Nagaland and some areas of Kashmir valley. In January, 2001, on transfer of the
Special Service Bureau from Cabinet Secretariat to Ministry of Home Affairs, the
Special Service Bureau was assigned with the new role of border guarding force
on Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders. The name of Special Service Bureau
was changed to Sashastra Seema Bal with effect from 27th March, 2004.
Considering the nature and purpose of the Force and experience gained during
the last four decades, it has been felt that the Force should be regulated by a
separate self-contained statute which will provide for its special needs of
efficiency and discipline.
2. As the Sashastra Seema Bal is charged with the guarding of the Indo-
Nepal and Indo-Bhutan borders, the Bill seeks to ensure that the standards of
efficiency and discipline of the Force are of a high order.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIVRAJ PATIL.
The 23rd May, 2006.
91

92
92
Notes On Clauses
Clause 2  defines the various expressions used in the Bill.
Sub-clause (1)(a) of this clause defines ‘active duty’. Broadly speaking,
according to this definition, a member of the Force will be on active duty during
the period he is attached to, or forms part of, a unit of the Force—
(i) which is engaged in operations against an enemy, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other
guard duty along the borders of India,
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central
Government by Order as a period of active duty with reference to any area in
which any person or class of persons subject to this Act may be serving;
Certain offences such as under clauses 18, 22 and 23 are punishable
more severely when committed on active duty. The definition is modelled on the
definition of ‘active duty’ in the Indo Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992.
Clause 3 specifies the persons subject to the proposed legislation.
Clause 4 provides for the constitution of the Sashastra Seema Bal.
Clause 5 provides for the general superintendence, direction and control
of the Force and appointment of officers of the Force.
Clause 6 deals with enrolment of persons to the Force.
Clause 7 provides that members of the Force shall be liable to serve in
and outside India.
Clauses 8 to 12 deal with tenure of service, etc., of members of the
Force.
Clause 13 seeks to impose certain restrictions on the rights of members
of the force to form association and on their freedom of speech, etc.
Clauses 14 and 15 provide for remedy of aggrieved persons including
officers.
Clauses 16 to 48 provide for offences under the legislation and the
penaltises therefor, for the various acts prejudicial to the maintenance of
discipline, good order and efficiency of the Force.
Clauses 49 and 50 seek to provide that all civil offences committed by
the members of the Force within or beyond India shall be deemed to be the
offences under the proposed legislation and shall be tribale by a Force Court.
Exception under section 50 has, however, been made in respect of the civil
offences of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder and rape in
relation to civilians where such offences are committed by the members of the
Force while not on active duty.

93
Clause 51 lays down the various punishments which may be awarded by
Force Courts.
Clause 52 enables a Force Court to take into account the nature and
degree of the offence committed and to award to the person convicted of any
offence under clauses 16 to 48 the punishment prescribed by the relevant
provision or alternative punishment lower in the scale under clause 51.
Clause 53 sets out the punishments which may be awarded in
combination by a Force Court.
Clause 54 provides that enrolled person sentenced on active duty by a
Force Court to imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, may be
retained to serve in the ranks and such service shall be reckoned as part of his
term of imprisonment.
Clause 55 to 59 deal with imposition of certain minor punishments for
offences under the proposed legislation without the intervention of a Force
Court. Clause 56 seeks to authorise a commanding officer of and above the rank
of Commandant to proceed in the prescribed manner against any person other
than an officer or subordinate officer and award one or more punishments
specified therein. Clause 57 imposes certain limitations in respect of award of
these punishments. Clause 58 authorises an officer not below the rank of
Inspector-General to proceed in the prescribed manner against an officer of or
below the rank of Commandant and award one or more punishments specified
in the clause. Clause 59 provides for review of proceedings under clause 58 by
the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner.
Clause 60 provides for imposition of collective fines in case of loss or
theft of weapons or ammunition of a unit upon the subordinate officers, under-
officers and men of such unit considered to be responsible for the loss or theft.
To avoid abuse, it has been provided that the power can be exercised only by
an officer not below the rank of Commandant of a unit.
Clauses 61 to 68 provide for deductions that may be made from the pay
and allowances of officers and other persons subject to the proposed legislation.
Clauses 69 to 74 deal with arrest and proceedings before trial. Clause 69
provides that any person charged with an offence under the proposed legislation
may be taken into Force custody under the order of a superior officer but an
officer who is engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder may be ordered into
Force custody by even an officer inferior in rank. Clause 70 provides for the
action that has to be taken after arrest. The charge against every person taken
into Force custody must be investigated within forty-eight hours unless
investigation within that period is impracticable having regard to the public
service. In case of delay the matter has to be reported to superior authorities.
Clause 71 provides that in every case where any person who is not on active
duty remains in Force custody for a longer period than eight days without a
Force Court being convened for his trial, special report giving reasons for the
delay should be made by the commanding officer and a similar report should be
forwarded at intervals of every eight days until a Force Court is convened or
such person is released from custody. Clauses 72 and 73 provide for assistance
of magistrates, police officers and other civil authorities in the matter of
apprehension and arrest of persons accused of offences under the proposed

94
legislation and deserters from the Force. Clauses 74 provides for inquiry into
absence without leave of a person subject to the proposed legislation.
Clause 75 provides for appointment of Force police officers and defines
their functions and duties. The Force police officers are intended to serve as the
internal police of the Force.
Clause 76 provides for three kinds of Force Courts, namely General
Force Courts, Petty Force Courts and Summary Force Courts, for the trial of
offences under the legislation.
Clauses 77 to 86 deal with convening of Force Courts, the composition
of Force Courts and their powers.
Clause 87 provides that a person subject to the proposed legislation who
has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Force Court or a Criminal
Court or who has been dealt with under clause 56 or clause 58 (relating to
imposition of minor punishments by certain officers) shall not be liable to be
tried again by a Force Court or dealt with under the said clauses. It thus
prohibits a second trial in respect of the same offence.
Clause 88 prescribes a three-years period of limitation for trial of all
offences under the proposed legislation except the offences of desertion and
mutiny.
Clause 89 deals with the liability of a person who has ceased to be
subject to the proposed legislation after the commission of an offence
thereunder.
Clause  90 provides for the continued application of the proposed
legislation during the term of sentence.
Clause 91 deals with place of trial
Clauses 92 and 93 deal with choice of forum for the trial of offences
in respect of which both a Force Court and a Criminal Court have concurrent
jurisdiction.
Clauses 94 to 118 deal with the procedure of Force Courts. In particular,
clause 99 seeks to apply provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 to all
proceedings before a Force Court.
Clauses 119 and 120 make provision for tendering of pardon to
accomplice and trial of such persons not complying with conditions of pardon.
These clauses are on the lines of the provisions, in this regard, contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clauses 121 to 132 deal with confirmation and revision of findings and
sentence of Force Courts.
Clauses 133 to 152 deal with execution of sentences of Force Court,
pardon of persons convicted by such courts, remission or suspension of such
sentences, etc.
Clause 153 provides for powers and duties conferrable and imposable on
members of the Force. This clause empowers the Central Government to direct
exercise of such powers and discharge of such duties by members of the Force

95
as are exercisable or dischargeable by an officer of the corresponding or lower
rank under any Central Act. This clause also empowers the Central Government
to confer or impose, with the concurrence of a State Government, any powers
or duties under the State Act upon the members of the Force of corresponding
rank.
Clause 154 provides for protection of acts of members of Force.
Clause 155 deals with the powers of the Central Government to make
rules.
Clause 156 provides that the existing Sashastra Seema Bal shall be
deemed to be the Sashastra Seema Bal constituted under the proposed legislation
and makes the necessary and saving provisions in regard to persons appointed
to the existing Sashastra Seema Bal and as to actions taken and things done in
relation to the constitution of the existing Sashastra Seema Bal.

96
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the
Sashastra Seema Bal. Clause 5 provides for appointment of certain
officers of the Force. Clause 6 provides for enrolment of persons
to the Force. Clause 75(1) deals with appointment of officers of the
Force and clause 95 deals with appointment of Judge Attorney-
General and other officers of Force Court.
2. The Sashastra Seema Bal in existence at the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Force
constituted under clause 4 of the Bill.
3. All expenses incurred in connection with the administration
of this Force would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India.
As the Force is already in existence, no additional expenditure of a
non-recurring nature is likely to be involved when the Bill is enacted
and brought into force. The expenditure on the administration of the
Force during 2005-2006 was of Rs. 612.92 crores.
4. No expenditure of a non-recurring nature is involoved.
96

97
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 155 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying into effect the provisions of the proposed
legislation. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made
include the constitution, governance, command and discipline of the
Force, the appointment and conditions of service (including
deductions from pay and allowances) of members of the Force, the
convening, constitution, adjournment, dissolution and sitting of
Force Courts, the procedure to be followed by such Courts and
other matters relating thereto, the constitution, procedure and
practice of courts of inquiry, recruitment and conditions of service
of Judge Attorney-General and other officers of his set-up, etc.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under
clause 155 are essentially matters of detail or procedure and are
merely ancillary to the proper implementation of the legislation. The
delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal character.
97

98
98
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for ensuring the
security of the borders of India and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

99
ANNEXURE-II
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE
PREPARED BY THE SECRETARIAT ON THE BILL
(i) Question:–
Whether the original role of the SSB for which it was constituted still exists? if not,
reasons therefor and if yes than who is performing that role/function?
Answer:–
The role of SSB has changed from a “stay behind role” in the event of external aggression
under the Cabinet Secretariat to a ‘Border Guarding Force’ under the Ministry of Home Affairs in 2001.
Pursuant to the acceptance of the recommendations of Group of Ministers (GoM) on
Reforming National Security System administrative control of the SSB was transferred to Ministry
of Home Affairs from Cabinet Secretariat with effect from 15.1.2001. The GoM recommended the
principle of one Border, one Force for better accountability and also recommended the necessity
of comprehensive Border management including management of Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan
Border. Accordingly Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has entrusted the SSB with the task of
guarding Indo-Nepal border stretching over 1751 kms in the States of Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim and Indo-Bhutan border stretching over 699 kms in the States of
Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh and also designated it as the Lead Intelligence
Agency (LIA) in the areas of deployment.
(ii) Question:–
What were the experiences of the Force and what deficiencies were noticed during
the last four decades, which led Ministry to consider the proposed legislation?
Answer:–
SSB till date has no Act of its own and is currently governed under the provisions of the
CRPF Act and Rules by way of administrative arrangements. Now that the role of the Force has
been changed to a Border Guarding Force (BGF), it is administratively required to clothe it with
an independent Act of its own which is similar to the other BGFs. The proposed legislation is
intended to provide to SSB statutory backing and equip it with a separate and independent identity
at par with the other BGF’s and administrative/disciplinary structure. As SSB was not a BGF in
the past, the two situations cannot be compared.
(iii) Question:-
What is the import of the previous and the present nomenclature of the force? what
are the changes in the charter of duties of the SSB before and after its restructure? please
furnish comparative details.
Answer:–
SSB was raised on the philosophy that security of the country’s borders was not the sale
responsibility of armed forces but also required a well-motivated and trained border population,
hence was entrusted the task or promoting national integration and security consciousness among
border population. With the motto of Service, Security and Brotherhood SSB was given
99

100
nomenclature as Special Service Bureau. Under the Cabinet Secretariat SSB was a covert
organization. After having been assigned the role of a Border Guarding Force, the Special Service
Bureau was renamed as Sashastra Seema Bal w.e.f. March 27, 2004.
The normal peace time activities of the SSB are geared to the objective of getting closer
to the people in the remote border areas, win over their confidence, bring them into the mainstream
of national life and prepare them for a grave national emergency of the kind that threatened the
country in 1962.
Upon transfer of the administrative control of Special Service Bureau from the Cabinet
Secretariat to the Ministry of Home Affairs and having been assigned the role of a Border Guarding
Force, Sashastra Seema Bal is now manning the Indo-Nepal and the Indo-Bhutan Border. It is also
the Lead Intelligence Agency in the areas of deployment. The charter of duties of SSB after
restructuring is as under:–
(i) to promote a sense of security among the people living in the border areas;
(ii) to prevent trans-border crimes and unauthorized entry into or exit from the territory
of India; and
(iii) to prevent smuggling and any other illegal activities.
(iv) Question:–
What are the reasons for earmarking the force for two borders? whether the number
of the personnel in the Force is sufficient for guarding these two borders?
Answer:–
Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders have been unmanned by any Border Guarding Force
in the past. Keeping in view the continuity and similarity of these two borders MHA assigned the
task of guarding these Borders to SSB. The Indo-Bhutan Border also happens to be much smaller,
stretching 699 kms as compared to 1751 kms of Indo-Nepal Border. Additional manpower of 20
Bns have been sanctioned to SSB to enable it to man these two borders.
(v) Question:–
Whether any other CPMF personnel are also being deployed on these two SSB
guarded Borders? If so, how it is being co-ordinated?
Answer:–
SSB is the only CPMF deployed on Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Borders for guarding these
borders.
(vi) Question:–
Whether the services of the SSB personnel are treated as service in Field Areas? If
so, what are the criteria?
Answer:–
The SSB personnel are performing border guarding duties which is considered as service
in the field area on the same lines and pattern of personnel of BSF and ITBP.
(vii) Question:–
(a) What provisions have been made for the residential accommodation and other field
facilities for the personnel of the Force?
Answer:–

101
Consequent upon the deployment along Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Border, SSB has
undertaken the task of acquisition of land and building of infrastructure in right earnest.. In cases
where land has been taken into possession residential accommodation is being provided in the form
of pre-fabricated structure and semi-permanent structures to begin with. SSB have developed a
five-year work plan for construction of residential and non-residential buildings at all Field
formations. Regarding other field facilities for the personnel of the Force same are being provided
on the pattern of BSF, ITBP etc.
(b) Whether any field allowance has been contemplated for these personnel?
Answer
At present, no field allowance is admissible for SSB personnel. However, SSB personnel are
entitled for other allowances, as admissible to other Border Guarding Forces, at comparable locations.
Question:–
Clause 6 provides for enrolment of a non-citizen for a limited period in the Force
with the approval of the Central Government.
(a) What is the rationale for this provision particularly when there is no such provision
in other Border Guarding Forces?
(b) Whether the citizens can perform those special services which have been
contemplated for non-citizens for incorporating this provisions?
(c) What special inputs are envisaged from the non-citizens?
Answer:–
In this connection it is worthwhile to mention here that the SSB Draft Bill 2006 has been
framed on the basis of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act-l992 in which enrolment has been
defined in clause-6 which is as follows:–
“6. Enrolment—The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment, and the
procedure of enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed”.
In the process of finalization of the SSB Draft Bill, 2006 a thorough examination of the
instant clause was conducted and it was observed that clause-6 of the ITBPF Act-1992 provides
a scope for enrolment of non-citizens as per policy of the Government of India in vogue which
envisages that citizens of Nepal and Bhutan can be appointed to posts in Central Government.
In view of the deployment of SSB on the Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan Border it was
considered appropriate not to induct citizens of Nepal and Bhutan in SSB contemplating that such
enrolment may create problems in the effective vigil of these borders. Taking into consideration the
above said administrative aspects and that no such provision exists in BSF Act 1968 and ITBPF
Act,1992 it was felt necessary to incorporate an additional sub-clause to clause — 6 in the SSB
Draft Bill, 2006 as below:–
“(2) A person other than a citizen of India shall be enrolled in the Force except
with the approval of the Central Government, granted for a limited period, having regard
to the special services required in the interest of the security of Borders of India”.
It is worthwhile to mention that the aforesaid addition to the clause was made with an
intention to exercise an administrative check on recruitment of non-citizens, simultaneously keeping
the possibilities of such enrolment through specific permission of the Central Government for a
limited period. It is an exception and not the rule.
However, there is no objection even if the clause of recruiting/enrolling non-citizens for a
limited period is deleted.

102
Reply to the supplementary Questionnaire on Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Report on the 98th Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the Demands for Grants
(2003-04) had stated that reorganization of the SSB has not affected the service conditions of the
existing civilian personnel of the force.
(i) Question:–
Whether it has affected their promotional avenues? if so, to what extent and what
step Ministry has taken in that regard?
Answer:–
Consequent upon shifting of administrative control of SSB from Cabinet Secretariat to MHA
and change in the role of SSB to a Border Guarding Force, SSB has been reorganized as a Border
Guarding Force (BGF), which has led to the reorganization of the department for rationalization of
command structure.
Despite the decision to phase out the non-combatised cadres, they are being allowed
promotions within their own cadre as hitherto. Further, in order to ensure that the promotion of
non-combatised personnel do not suffer as a result of rationalization of the posts in SSB, the
Government has already decided to give them an opportunity to opt for combatisation.
(ii) Question:–
Whether mobility of personnel of SSB from organizational to Battalion and vice versa
was allowed before it was transferred from Cabinet Secretariat to MHA?
Answer:–
No. There was no such administrative/operational requirement.
(iii) Question:–
Whether any option of choosing combatised and non-combatised cadre was offered to
all personnel of SSB at the time of its re-organization. If so the details thereof.
Answer:–
No such option for choosing combatised and non-combatised cadre was offered to the
personnel of SSB Organization at the time of its reorganization. The personnel are continuing in
their respective streams with the entitlement of all the perks and allowances as hitherto including
the promotions within the respective cadres. Only the personnel of non-combatised streams can opt
for combatisation.
(iv) Question:–
Whether there had been any case of  junior combatised officer supervising a non-
combatised officer senior to him. If so, the details thereof and action taken in that regard.
Answer:–
There is no such case.
(v) Question
Whether the GoM on internal security and the Padamanabhaiah Committee had
categorically recommended for abolishing the civilian and executive cadres of SSB? If so,
what reasons were cited for their decisions? if not, what were the reasons for doing so.

103
Answer:–
Group of Ministers on the Internal Security and the Padmanabhaiah Committee had not
recommended the abolition of the civilian and executive cadres of SSB. However, in view of the
change in the role of SSB as a Border Guarding Force, it has been decided to make the fresh
recruitments in combatised categories only. The willing/eligible civilian personnel are also being
given an opportunity to opt for combatisation. Remaining civilian personnel will continue in their
respective grades and enjoy the existing perks/promotional avenues till they are phased out.
(vi) Question:–
A comparative chart of the cadre structures of Special Service Bureau before and
after restructuring may be supplied alongwith the maximum and minimum time taken by
the officers to get promotions? Please furnish the number and other details of the
personnel affected by new cadre structure.
Answer:–
Cadre structure of Battalion Officers is as under:–
Name of post Sanctioned Time taken for promotion
(in yrs.)
Before As on date Maximum Minimum
15.1.2001
A C 189 329 – –
DC 47 131 12 6
2 I/c 18 42 16 11
Commandant 39 61 18 15
Cadre structure of Organizational Officers is as under:–
Name of post Sanctioned Time taken for promotion
(in yrs.)
Before As on date Maximum Minimum
15.1.2001
CO 182 182 — —
SAO 126 126 14 4
Joint Area 25 25 29 21
Organiser
Area Organiser 37 37 34 24
It is worthwhile to mention that both Area Organizers and Commandants of SSB are eligible
for promotion to the rank of DIG. Total authorized post of DIG in SSB is 19, out of which, 11
have been earmarked for cadre officers and 08 for IPS Officers. Out of 11 posts earmarked for
cadre officers, 07 have been allocated to the combatised stream (Commandant) whereas 04 to the
civil stream (Area Organizer).

104
Further total authorized post of I.G. in SSB are 08 out of which 03 are cadre post and
remaining have been allotted to IPS Officers.
(vii) Question:–
Whether the executive cadre officials of SSB were deployed on UN Mission before its
re-organization in 2001? if so, furnish reasons therefore.
Answer:–
Yes, the Executive Officials of SSB were being deployed on UN Mission before its re-
organization in 2001 because both the combatised and the non-combatised officials were
undergoing the same training/courses even upto 2003, both the officers of Executive cadre
(Organizational and Battalion cadre) have undergone similar training/courses and have similar
profiles. Non-combatised executive officers were sponsored for UN Mission as they fulfilled the
eligibility conditions. Now they are not being deployed in view of MHA order dated 4.2.2003 which
stipulates that only combatised officers will be nominated for UN Mission.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.