 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2020/Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
223 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MARCH, 2020) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5TH  MARCH, 2020) 
…..………NOVEMBER
….…NO

Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
C.S. (H.A.)-438 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2019 
 
                                     
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MARCH, 2020) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5TH MARCH, 2020) 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2020/Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                (i) – (ii) 
2.  ACRONYMS (iii) 
3.  PREFACE (iv) – (v) 
4.  REPORT      1 - 67 
 CHAPTER -1 1 - 5 
 CHAPTER-2 6  
 CHAPTER-3 7 - 45 
 CHAPTER-4 46 - 67 
5.  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE – 
AT A GLANCE 
68 -75 
6.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 77 - 91 
7.  ANNEXURES  92 -  
 (i) Constitution (One Hundred Twenty-fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 92 - 102 
 (ii) Article 275 of the Constitution of India 103 - 104 
 (iii) Article 280 of the Constitution of India 106 
 (iv) Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India  107- 124 
 (v) Consolidated Comments of Ministry of Home Affairs on representations received 125 - 297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Manish Gupta 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. *Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi 
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
29. Shri Ravneet Singh 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
____________________________ 
* Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e .f. 4 th February, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by resigna tion of  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas, MP , 
Rajya Sabha  from Committee w.e.f. 31st January, 2020. 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Ms. Naina Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

  
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ANVC Achik National Volunteers' Council  
ADCs Autonomous District Councils  
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission  
ATCs Autonomous Territorial Councils  
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education  
DHAATC Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council  
BTC Bodoland Territorial Council  
CADC Chakma Autonomous District Council  
CCPA Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs  
DHATC Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council  
DRDA District Rural Development Agency 
DHD Dima Halam Daogah  
ECI Election Commission of India  
GHADC Garo Hills Autonomous District Council  
IPF Indigenous People's Forum  
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services  
ICDP International Child Development Programme 
JHADC Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council  
JHATC Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council  
KAAC Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council  
KAATC Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council  
KHADC Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council  
KHATC Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council  
LADC Lai Autonomous District Council  
MADC Mara Autonomous District Council  
MDC Member of the District Council 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoSs Memorandum of Settlements  
NCHAC North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council  
NCRWC National Commission to Review the Working of Constitution  
PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions  
SDO (C) Sub Divisional Officer  (Civil) 
TTAADC Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council  
TTAATC Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council  
TTC Territorial Council 
TASC Tripura Autonomous State Council  
UPDS United People’s Democratic Solidarity  
UGC  University Grants Commission 
 
 
(iii) 

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred 
Twenty Third  Report
 of the Committee on  'The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth 
Amendment) Bill, 2019 '.  
2.  In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of 
States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, referred * the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019,
 as 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 6 th February, 2019, (Annexure-I)  to the Committee  on the 19 th 
February, 2019 for examination and report  within two months i.e. by 18 th April, 2019. However, the 
Committee could not consider the Bill and present its Report within the prescribed time limit due to 
General Election to the 17 th Lok Sabha. Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha granted extension of time for 
presentation of Report on the Bill till three months onwards from the date of reconstitution of the DRSC 
on Home Affairs after constitution of  17 th Lok Sabha which came upto 12 th December, 2019. Further, 
extensions upto 12th January, 2020, last day of part one of Budget Session, 2020, and last day of the first 
week of second part of Budget Session, 2020 were also granted.   The Committee heard the views of the 
Chief Secretaries, Autonomous District Councils and other tribal organisations of Assam, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram and Tripura. 
3.
 The Committee undertook study visit to the Shillong and Guwahati from 18th to 21st January, 2020. 
In the meeting held at Shillong on 18 th January, 2020, the Committee heard the views of tribal 
organizations and other stakeholders alongwith Chief Secretary/representatives of the State Government 
of Meghalaya and on 20 th January, 2020 at Guwahati the Committee heard the views of tribal 
organizations and  other stakeholders alongwith Chief Secretaries/representatives of the State 
Governments of Mizoram, Assam and Tripura on Bill. 
 
4.  In order to give wider publicity and obtain the views of affected people/stakeholders, a Press 
Communiqué in print and electronic media of the four states was also issued on                       8th 
November, 2019. It was requested therein to furnish written Memoranda within 15 days of its publication 
i.e. by 22 nd November, 2019. In response thereto around 10 memoranda were received. In total 
73 
memoranda were received which include representations received during the study visit of the Committee.  
5.  The Committee held 4 sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, i.e., on 30 th September, 
10th October, 30 th October, 2019 and 04 th March, 2020. In its sitting held on 30 th September, 2019 the 
Home Secretary made a presentation on the Bill.  Thereafter, in the meeting held on 10 th October, the 
Committee heard the views of Chief Secretaries of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura and in the 
meeting  held on 30 th October, 2019, the Committee  heard the views of the representatives of 
                                                           
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 58708, dated 20 th February, 2019. 
(iv) 
 

Autonomous Territorial/District Councils along with representatives of Governments of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura and other stakeholders.  
6.  The Committee in its sitting held on 4 th March, 2020, considered the draft 223 rd Report on the Bill and 
adopted the same. 
7.  The Committee relied on the following documents in finalizing its Report:-  
(i) 'The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019;  
(ii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;  
(iii) The Constitution of India; 
(iv) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidence of Home Secretary and senior officials of Ministry 
of Home Affairs;  
(v) Memoranda received on the Bill from various bodies/associations/organizations/experts and replies 
of the Ministry on the memoranda selected by the Committee for examination; 
(vi) Recommendation of National Commission to Review the Working of Constitution (NCRWC);  
(vii) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the Bill; and  
(viii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questions/queries raised by Members 
during the meetings on the Bill. 
8.   On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by those 
who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable suggestions to the Committee 
through their written submissions.  
9.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee  
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
4th March, 2020 
New Delhi 
Phalguna 14, 1941 (Saka) 
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                          
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-1 
1.1 Introduction 
1.1.1 The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 inter-alia seeks to 
amend the Article 280 of the Constitution of India to enable the Finance Commission to recommend 
measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of States of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Tripura. This will supplement resources of Sixth Schedule Autonomous Councils, Village Councils and 
Municipal Councils.  
1.2 Background 
 
1.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs through its background note informed the Committee that though 
Part X of the Constitution of India relates to the Scheduled and Tribal Areas but in terms of Article 244(2) 
the administration of the tribal areas in four states viz. Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura is as per 
the provisions of the Sixth Schedule. The Autonomous Councils constituted for the administration of 
tribal areas under the Sixth Schedule comprises of elected and nominated members and these Councils 
exercise legislative, executive as well as judicial powers. The following Autonomous Councils/District 
Councils in the four states are functioning under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India: 
 
Assam 
 
i) Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) 
ii) North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NCHAC) 
iii) Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) 
Meghalaya 
 
i) Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council (KHADC) 
ii) Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council (JHADC) 
iii) Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) 
 
Mizoram 
 
i) Lai Autonomous District Council (LADC) 
ii) Mara Autonomous District Council (MADC) 
iii) Chakma Autonomous District Council (CADC) 
 
Tripura 
 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) 
 
1.2.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that some recent developments 
require that the existing provisions pertaining to the Sixth Schedule needs to be amended to suit 
contemporary requirements to strengthen the Councils under Sixth Schedule. The reasons and basis that 
proposed the amendments are as under:- 

2 
 
 
(i) The Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA) had approved signing of 
Memorandum of Settlements (MoSs) with United People ’s Democratic Solidarity (UPDS) and the 
factions of Dima Halam Daogah (DHD) on 25 th November, 2011 and 8 th October, 2012 
respectively. It was aimed at enhancing autonomy of the existing Autonomous Councils set up 
under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India and to provide special package for the 
speedier socio-economic development of the Council areas. The Government of India has initiated 
action for the implementation of various clauses of the MoSs signed with UPDS and factions of 
DHD.  The two MoSs, inter alia, provided as under:-  
 
a) renaming of existing Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) as the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC). Similarly, renaming  of North 
Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NCHAC) as the Dima Hasao Autonomous 
Territorial Council (DHATC); 
b) the KAATC shall have 50 members (44 to be elected and 6 nominated by the 
Governor of Assam) against existing 30 members in the Council;   
c) Increasing the members of the DHATC is agreed in principle; 
d) effect of the increase of members in the Council will be given prospectively, and 
will have no effect on the term of existing District Councils;  
e) conducting elections to the Autonomous Councils by State Election Commission 
and setting up of State Finance Commission;  
f) transfer of additional 30 subjects
 from State Government of Assam to the 
Autonomous Councils under paragraph 3A of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution as agreed in the MoS devolving legislative and executive powers;  
 
(ii) Article 280 will provide for augmenting the Consolidated Fund of respective States to 
supplement resources of the Sixth Schedule Autonomous Councils. 
 
(iii) Further, the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA) on 28 th February, 2014 had 
approved signing of Memorandum of Settlement (hereinafter referred to as MoS-3) with Achik 
National Volunteers' Council (ANVC) in Meghalaya for enhancing autonomy of the Garo Hills 
Autonomous District Council (GHADC). The increase in number of members of the Council was 
agreed in principle. Further, after consultation with the Government of Meghalaya, it was decided 
to increase the number of members of the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council from 30 to 42, 
Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council from 30 to 40 and that of Jaintia Hills Autonomous 
District Council from 30 to 34.    
 
(iv) Representations were also received requesting enhanced autonomy, Central Funding to 
Autonomous District Councils (ADCs), etc.   
 
(v) The 73 rd and 74 th Amendments to the Constitution, which do not apply to the Sixth 
Schedule Areas, brought in considerable devolution of powers to local bodies (Panchayats and 
Municipalities) in the rest of the country.  
 
(vi) A review of the provisions of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution in the backdrop of 
provisions of the 73 rd and 74 th Constitution Amendments indicates certain deficiencies in 
provisions of the Sixth Schedule. These are as follows:- 
 

3 
 
a) At present, the establishment of elected Village Councils is based on  universal 
adult suffrage and reservation for women are not mandatory in the Sixth Schedule 
areas; 
b) there is no provision for the recommendations of the Finance Commission set up 
under Article 280 of the Constitution to provide separate funds for the ADCs in 
Sixth Schedule areas on the pattern of Panchayati Raj Institutions resulting in 
inadequate socio-economic infrastructure in the ADCs areas; 
c) Setting up of the State Finance Commission for States having Sixth Schedule areas.  
In some cases, States which are smaller in terms of area and population in 
comparison to the area of some of the Autonomous Councils are getting much 
higher resource allocation per capita; 
 
(vii)  Besides, ADCs are not getting adequate funds for meeting their non-plan requirements. The 
Councils have been demanding direct funding from Central Government to ADCs for a plan and a 
non-plan projects and also for centrally sponsored schemes. A separate budget for ADCs needs to 
be provided in the State Plan.   
 
(viii) Besides, the National Commission to Review the Working of Constitution (NCRW C) made 
certain recommendations vide its recommendation No. 9.23 (i) to (iii), to devolve political powers 
with precautions to maintain traditional institutions in the Sixth Schedule areas. It also 
recommended entrustment of subjects enumerated in Eleventh Schedule, already given to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, to the Councils set up under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution for 
their administration, evolving a process of central funding for Plan expenditure to the Council 
directly, instead of routing all funds through the State Governments, safeguards for minority and 
micro minority, protection of traditions, bringing in gender representation and adult franchise, etc. 
Implementation of centrally funded projects from various Departments of the Union Government 
should be entrusted to the Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) and revived Village Councils 
with a strict audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. These recommendations have 
been accepted by the Government for implementation. 
 
(ix) The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in its Seventh Report (February, 
2008) entitled 'Capacity building for Conflict Resolution' has dealt with 'Conflicts in the North 
East (NE)'. The Commission has, inter alia,  focused on Autonomous District Councils.  The 
recommendations made by the ARC include setting up of a State Finance Commission for 
distribution of funds between the State and the Council and also setting up of State Election 
Commission as provided in the Panchayati Raj System for conducting the election to the Councils. 
 
(x) To implement Memoranda of Settlement signed with United People Democratic Solidarity 
(UPDS) and Dima Halam Daogah (DHD) in Assam and with Achik National Volunteer Council 
(ANVC) in Meghalaya as approved by Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA) and 
keeping in view the recommendations made by the NCRWC and ARC, it has been proposed to 
amend Article 280 and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India for strengthening of 
democratic institutions at the grassroots level in the Sixth Schedule areas. These amendments are 
based on Inter-Ministerial discussions and consultations with the State Governments. The 
amendments were further discussed in a meeting taken by Union Home Minister on 20 th 
September, 2018 with Chief Ministers of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram.    

4 
 
 
1.3 OBJECTIVES OF THE BILL 
1.3.1 The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 inter-alia seeks to 
achieve the following objectives:– 
(a) to amend article 280 of the Constitution enabling the Finance Commission to recommend measures 
needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of the States, to supplement resources of the Sixth Schedule 
Autonomous Councils, Village Councils and Municipal Councils; 
(b) to rename the existing autonomous District Councils; 
(c) to increase the number of seats in the District Councils; 
(d) to provide for reservation of at least two seats for women in the District Councils; 
(e) to transfer additional subjects to Karbi Anglong and Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Councils; 
(f) to constitute the State Finance Commissions in the States having the Sixth Schedule areas; 
(g) to conduct elections to all Autonomous Councils by the State Election Commission; 
(h) for providing disqualification of elected members on account of defection. 
 
1.4 Impact of the Proposed Amendment on ADCs 
 
1.4.1 The Ministry also apprised the Committee of the Impact of the proposed amendment on the 
existing Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) which are as follows: 
(i) The most significant impact of the proposed amendment will be in the form of augmentation of 
financial resources and administrative powers of the Autonomous District Councils of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Tripura, fulfilling long-standing aspirations of the tribal population in 
these North Eastern States.  This is in line with the recommendations of the National Commission 
to Review the Working of Constitution (NCRWC) and Second Administrative Reforms 
Commission (ARC).    
 
(ii) The Finance Commission constituted by the Union of India, under Article 280 of the 
Constitution of India, will now be specifically mandated to recommend the measures needed to 
augment the consolidated fund of State to supplement the resources of the ten Autonomous District 
Councils as well as the Village Councils and Municipal Councils in Sixth Schedule areas. It will 
substantially enhance the funds available to these local government institutions for undertaking 
development works in these tribal areas. The amendment also provides for the constitution of the 
State Finance Commission in these States.    
  
(iii)  The transfer of additional 30 subjects including Public Works Department, Forests, Public 
Health Engineering, Health & Family Welfare, Urban Development, and Food & Civil Supply  to 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC) and Dima Hasao Autonomous 
Territorial Council (DHAATC) in Assam greatly strengthens the Autonomous Councils and give 
them a major role in the day to day governance and developmental activities.  

5 
 
 
(iv) The village and municipal councils will be empowered for preparation of plans for economic 
development and social justice including those relating to agriculture, land improvement, 
implementation of land reforms, minor irrigation, water management, animal husbandry, rural 
electrification, small scale industries and social forestry.   
 
(v) There will be State Election Commissions for holding elections to the Autonomous Councils, 
village and municipal councils in the areas of Assam, Mizoram, and Tripura which will ensure 
gras-root level democracy.  There will also be reservations of at least one-third of seats for women  
in the village and municipal councils in the Sixth Schedule areas of Assam, Mizoram, and Tripura 
and at least two of the nominated members in all autonomous councils in the North East Sixth 
Schedule areas.  This will ensure election based on adult suffrage and gender justice in the form of 
participation of women in all District Councils.  
 
(vi)   Meghalaya has for the time being kept out of the purview of the provision for the elected 
village and municipal councils and one-third reservations for women.  
 
(vii) The amendments will fulfill the commitments made under tripartite Memorandum of 
Settlements signed by the Government of India, State Governments of Assam & Meghalaya, 
United People's Democratic Solidarity (UPDS), Dima Halam Daogah (DHD) and Achik National 
Volunteer's Council (ANVC).  
 
(viii) The amendments propose to rename the existing autonomous councils as Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Territorial Council (KAATC), Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council 
(DHATC), Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council (GHATC), Khasi Hills Autonomous 
Territorial Council (KHATC), Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council (JHATC) and Tripura 
Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council (TTAATC) as the present jurisdiction of these 
Councils extend to more than one district. 
 
(ix) There will also be an increase in seats in KAATC, DHATC, GHATC, KHATC, and JHATC.   
 

6 
 
CHAPTER-2 
 
2.1 Committee Meetings on ‘The Constitution (One Hundred And Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019’  
 
2.1.1 The Committee in its sitting held on 30 th September, 2019 was briefed by the Home Secretary on 
some major provisions of the Bill regarding Autonomous District Councils in the States of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram and that the Bill intends to augment the powers and functions of ADCs 
by increasing their membership and transferring more subjects. He stated that this was being done after a 
long period of settlements and MoUs that were signed to transfer some of the grants to a further lower 
level i.e., at the level of Village Councils, to be established under the District Councils.  
 
2.1.2 In the next meeting held on 10 th October, 2019 the Committee heard the representatives of State 
Government of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram and one of the Members of Parliament, Lok 
Sabha from Meghalaya along with representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs. While being apprised 
about the reasons and basis for the proposed amendments, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs that before finalizing the Constitution Amendment Bill, the matter had been discussed with 
the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura and also that the Bill was discussed by the 
previous Home Minister with the Chief Ministers of these States. Accordingly, based on these discussions 
the Constitution Amendment Bill had been drawn.  
 
2.1.3 In the meeting held on 30 th October, 2019, the Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs; Ministry of Law and Justice, State Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Tripura, Member of Meghalaya Legislative Assembly and Autonomous District Councils. 
 
2.1.4 The Committee undertook study visit to the Shillong and Guwahati from 18 th to 21st January, 2020. 
In the meeting held at Shillong on 18 th January, 2020, the Committee heard the views of tribal 
organizations and  other stakeholders alongwith Chief Secretary/representatives of the State Government 
of Meghalaya and on 20 th January, 2020 at Guwahati the Committee heard the views of tribal 
organizations and  other stakeholders alongwith Chief Secretaries/representatives of the State 
Governments of Mizoram, Assam and Tripura on the Bill. 
  
2.1.5 The Committee also issued advertisements in local newspapers and electronic media of concerned 
states inviting suggestions/memoranda on the Bill. The Committee received 73 memoranda in response to 
its Press Communique and in its meeting at Delhi, Shillong and Guwahati.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-3 
 
Clause by clause Consideration 
The Committee in its meeting held on 4 th March, 2020 took up consideration of the draft 223 rd 
Report on the Bill. The Committee after deliberations have suggested various amendments on clauses of 
the Bill which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1 Clause 2 of the Bill 
 
3.1.1 Clause 2 proposes to amend Article 280 of the Constitution by inserting the following sub-clause 
after sub-Clause (c) in Clause 3:- 
 
"(ca) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the 
resources of the District Councils including Village Councils and Municipal Councils in the 
tribal areas within the States referred to in clause (2) of Article 244 based on the 
recommendations made by the Finance Commissions of the said States;". 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendment will remove the existing 
deficiency in the Constitution by bringing in uniformity and consistency in dealing with 
Municipal/Panchayat bodies and the Councils of the Sixth Scheduled areas.  This will also enhance the 
resources of the ADCs, Village Councils and Municipal Councils. 
 
3.1.3 It will strengthen the District Councils as a lot of powers are being delegated through this 
Amendment to the District Councils, including their better finances through the Finance Commission and 
transfer of subjects. 
Views of the State Governments: 
3.1.4 The State Governments of  Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura are in broad agreement with 
the proposed amendment to Clause 2 of the Bill. 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
3.1.5 Assam 
 The Committee was suggested that another clause as (cb) may be inserted after 
proposed clause (ca) in Clause 3 in Article 280 of the Constitution for direct fundi ng 
by the Union to the Council– 
“(cb) the measures needed to augment the ‘District & Regional Funds ’ under 
paragraph 7 to supplement the resource of the Autonomous Council constituted under 
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India by the Union” 
 Since Traditional Village Councils of the Scheduled Tribes, such as, Ser Van Kep of 
Karbis, Dorbar Shnong of Khasis, Salaiyaro of Dimasas, Tulsong Vaisa of Hmars-
Kukis and so on, are equal to the Panchayats under the Sixth Schedule and also under 
Article 243(d) of the Constitution, the phrase “and Traditional Village Councils of the 

8 
 
Scheduled Tribes ‘by whatever name called ’ can be inserted between “Panchayat” 
and “in the State” in sub clause (bb) of clause (3) of Article 280. 
3.1.6 Meghalaya 
 Amendment of Article 280 envisages to supplement the resources of the future 
Autonomous Territorial Councils (ATCs) as part of the expanded terms of reference 
of the Finance Commission at the Centre and, therefore, Committee was requested to 
include the following proviso in Article 280 to make the recommendation of Finance 
Commission all-encompassing for the State of Meghalaya given the unique 
traditional institutions: 
“Provided that for the State of Meghalaya, the measures needed to augment the 
Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils will also include Village Councils and Traditional Institutions of 
Self Governance and Town Committees duly constituted by the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils (ATCs) in the Tribal Areas within the State referred to in Clause 
(2) of Article 244 and Para 20 of the Sixth Schedule based on the recommendations 
made by the Finance Commission of the said State." 
3.1.7 Mizoram 
 The Committee was suggested that in Article 280 of the Constitution, in sub-clause 
(ca) of clause (3), the following proviso shall be added- 
"Provided that at least one representative of each Autonomous District 
Councils/Autonomous Territorial Councils shall be appointed as a member of State 
Finance Commission by the Governor of a state." 
 The Committee was suggested to insert the following proviso under Article 280- 
“Provided that separate allocation of fund for the District Councils shall be 
earmarked by the Government of India on the recommendation of the Finance 
Commission of the Union.”  
3.1.8 Tripura 
 It was suggested to the Committee that for undertaking all-round developmental 
activities, the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) should 
be given share of funds under the Article 280 & 275 of the Constitution of India and 
Article 280 of the Constitution of India should be amended  to ensure that the 
Government of India makes separate allocation of funds for the Autonomous 
Territorial/ State Councils while releasing grants- in-aid to the State and such funds 
are released either by the Central Government or the State Government to the 
Autonomous Territorial Councils in time and without any delay.  
 The Committee was also suggested that in addition to the insertion of sub-Clause 
(ca), after sub-Clause (c), under Clause (3) of Article 280 of the Constitution, a 
provision of direct funding to the Autonomous Council may also be incorporated in 
this amendment Bill for “Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council ” to strengthen 
economy and autonomy. 
 

9 
 
Comments of the Ministry 
3.1.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that presently Finance Commission is not making 
recommendations for augmenting the resources of District, Village, and Municipal Councils under Sixth 
Schedule areas as is being done for these institutions in rest of the country after 73 rd and 74 th 
Constitutional Amendments which introduced democratic functioning of grass root institutions. To make 
the Finance Commission make recommendations for these institutions in Sixth Schedule areas, the 
amendment to Article 280 is being introduced. It will also considerably increase the resources of ADCs 
including the Village and Municipal Councils for undertaking developmental activities.  
3.1.10  This amendment was agreed upon by the Government of Meghalaya in response to the 
draft circulated and in a meeting under Dy. CM at Shillong on 25 th May, 2018. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs further stated that the 
proposed suggestion from Meghalaya  is not tenable as by introducing these 
provisions, they will be agreeing to continuation of the traditional institutions of Meghalaya without 
introducing democratic elements in it. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.11 The Committee feels that direct funding of ADCs by the centre will not only be against the 
existing Constitutional scheme but al so would unnecessarily affect the relations of ADCs vis-à-vis 
state governments adversely.  The very purpose of amending article 280 of Constitution is to make 
an institutional provision for augmenting the resources of ADCs through State Finance 
Commission.  The said provision is on the lines of article 243-I and 243Y meant for P anchayats and 
Municipalities and 73rd and 74th Constitution Amendment Acts. 
 
3.1.12 The Committee therefore agrees to the proposed amendment to article 280 and does not 
suggest any amendment. 
 
Clause 3 
 
3.2 Clause 3(a)(i): In paragraph 2 (i) in sub paragraph (1) after the proviso, proposes to insert 
the following proviso in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution: 
 
"Provided further that the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than fifty members, of whom six members including at least two women members 
shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest of the members shall be elected based on 
adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than forty members, of whom four members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be elected 
based on adult suffrage: 
Provided also that Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than forty-two members, of whom thirty-six members shall be elected based on adult 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate six members of whom at least two members shall be 
women and at least four members shall be from the unrepresented tribes: 
Provided also that Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than forty members, of whom thirty-six members shall be elected based on adult 

10 
 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate four members of whom at least two members shall be 
women and at least two members shall be from the unrepresented tribes: 
Provided also that Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than thirty-four members, of whom four members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be elected 
based on adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the Lai, Chakma, and Mara Autonomous District Councils and 
the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council each of which shall consist of not 
more than thirty members, of whom four members including at least two women members 
shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be elected based on 
adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the increase in the number of members of the said Autonomous 
Territorial Councils under the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh provisos shall 
have no effect on the term of the Councils existing on or before the commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Act, 2019, but shall apply to the 
elections to be held in those Councils after the expiry of their respective terms on or after 
such commencement." 
 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the  increase in the number of seats in respect of the 
Councils of Assam and Meghalaya has been done to implement the Memorandum of Settlement (MoSs ) 
signed with UPDS, DHD, and ANVC and in consultation with the State Governments of Assam and 
Meghalaya.  As regard the representation of women members and unrepresented tribes in the nomina ted 
seats, this has been done in order to bring the provisions of women reservations as applicable in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the Sixth Schedule areas and to ensure that the Councils are  
representative of all sections of the tribal areas. 
3.2.2 While clarifying the term "unrepresented tribes" for the state of Meghalaya,  the MHA informed 
that there are several minor tribes who will never get elected to the Councils on the basis of their 
numerical strength they have. To give representation to such tribes th is provision has been introduced. In 
Bodoland Territorial Autonomous Council, there is already a provision of the nomination of people from 
unrepresented communities/tribes. 
   
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
Assam 
3.2.3 The State Government of Assam stated that the number of seats in the Councils should be 
determined on the basis of population in the villages and Municipal Councils. 
Meghalaya 
 
3.2.4 Government of Meghalaya proposed some changes to Clause 3 of the Bill. It was proposed that for 
Garo and Khasi Hill Autonomous Territorial Councils the proviso may be amended as follows: - 
(i) 'Provided also that Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not more 
than forty members, of whom thirty-six shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. The 
Governor will nominate four members of whom at least two shall be women.’  Therefore, the word 

11 
 
‘unrepresented tribes’ should be excluded'. 
(ii)  ‘Provided also that Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not more 
than forty members, of whom thirty-six shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. The 
Governor will nominate four members of whom at least two shall be women.’  
3.2.5 The State Government of Meghalaya further stated as under: 
“Sir, as far as the Jaintia Hills are concerned, the present Act does not provide for 
unrepresented tribes. It provides for unrepresented tribes only in Garo Hills and Khasi 
Hills. Sir, in Jaintia Hills, there is an MDC from the Vaity community. The unrepresented 
tribe has not been defined yet. But, if we take unrepresented tribes as the tribes which are 
less in number, then, also the Vaity community which is very small in number is 
represented. Sir, that is why the State Government is of the view that we need not have 
unrepresented tribes in this Act because they are already getting elected in any case.” 
 
Mizoram 
3.2.6 The State Government of Mizoram is in broad agreement with the proposed amendment  to Clause 
3 of the Bill. 
 
Tripura 
 
3.2.7 The State Government of Tripura stated that presently there are 30 (thirty) members in the District 
Council out of which 28 members are directly elected & 2 Members are nominated by the Governor from 
the un-represented Tribes. The management of resources after increasing the number of seats would be 
managed out of the resources of State funds as well as the Finance Commission as and when needed. The 
constituency of each MDC (Member of the District Council) is spread over two-third sub-divisions only. 
The population of the Tripura Tribal Area Autonomous District Council is 12,65,838 in numbers with an 
area of 7132.56 sq. km. There are 587 Village Committees, 5 Zonal Development Offices & 33 Sub-Zonal 
Offices. Considering all the above circumstances it is necessary to increase the seats of MDCs in the 
Council area. Further, the numbers of the elected members in the Councils shall consist of not more than 
fifty members instead of proposed thirty members, of whom six members including at least three women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor. 
3.2.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs in the meeting held on 20 th January, 2020 at Guwahati has agreed to 
their suggestion and stated that an increase in seats as proposed by the Government of Tripura could be  
considered. 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 
3.2.9 Assam 
 The Committee was suggested:  
In the proposed first proviso of paragraph 2(i), after the words “nominated by the 
Governor”, the words “from the indigenous tribes and Karbi sub-trib es” may be 
inserted. 

12 
 
 The number of seats in the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council must be increased but 
increased seats must not be reserved for any particular community and there must be 
reservation of seats for women in Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council for their 
development. 
 In Paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (1), after the proviso, the following provisos shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
Provided also that the Dima Hasao Autonomous Council shall consist of not more 
than forty members, of whom four members including at least two members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and the rest of the members shall be elected on the basis 
of adult suffrage. 
 
 North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NCHAC) is a Political Administrative Set-
up primarily for the Hill Tribes of Dima Hasao District guaranteed by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution of India, but without the provision of reservation of all 
the seats for the Hill Tribes. Therefore taking the above points into consideration all 
the seats be reserved only for the Hill tribes and Nomination of the Member in the 
proposed Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council be made only to Hill Tribes. 
Hence, the provision of reservation of all the seats only for the Schedule Tribe (Hills) 
should be incorporated in this Bill. 
 
3.2.10  The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that there is no proposal to restrict nomination 
in the manner as suggested and the said suggestions regarding the increase in seats and reservation for 
women, has already been incorporated in the Bill. 
 
3.2.11  Meghalaya 
 
 After the words "Governor will", the words "immediately after expiry of fourteen 
days after the formation of the Executive Committee of the Council" may be inserted. 
 After the words “adult suffrage”, the words “of whom six shall be reserved for the 
less populated indigenous Scheduled Tribes of the Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council” may be inserted. 
 For the words “unrepresented tribes”, the words “unrepresented indigenous tribes of 
the Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council having the same rights and privileges 
as other members, including voting rights” may be substituted. 
 After the words "unrepresented tribes", the words "having the same rights and 
privileges as other members, including voting rights" may be inserted. 
 Reduce the number of seats from 40 to 31 in the Khasi Hills Autonomous District 
Council. 
 In the Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council, the filling up of four seats by 
nomination is without a basis as nominated members do not necessarily reflect the 
wishes and aspirations of the people. Therefore only two seats in the Council by the 
nomination of Members, including one woman, is sufficient to meet the intention of 
the proposed amendment.  

13 
 
 Remove the words “Un-represented Tribes ” from the proposed amendment as the 
term is anomalous and its inclusion will open a Pandora's box of contradictions and 
misunderstanding. Inclusion of this term will open the door for defeated candidates 
from indigenous tribes eligible to stand for election in the three future ATCs to claim 
"un-represented status" and thus, nomination.  
 For Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council, the Governor will nominate six 
members of whom at least two shall be women on the advice and recommendation of 
the Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not more than thirty-one 
members, of whom twenty-nine shall be elected based on adult suffrage. The 
Governor will nominate two members of whom at least one shall be a woman on the 
advice and recommendation of the Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not more than thirty-
Four members, of whom thirty shall be elected based on adult suffrage. The Governor 
will nominate two members of whom at least one shall be a woman on the advice and 
recommendation of the Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 Include the provision of the nomination of the Unrepresented Tribes in the Jaintia 
Hills Autonomous District Council (JHADC).  
 Provided also that Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than thirty seven members, of whom thirty-five shall be elected on the basis of 
adult suffrage. The Governor will nominate two members of whom at least one shall 
be women on the advice and recommendation of the Khasi Hills Autonomous 
Territorial Council. 
Provided also that Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than thirty member, of whom twenty nine shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate one member on the advice and 
recommendation of the Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 The Hajongs are recognized as the scheduled tribe of Meghalaya right from the 
creation of the state along with the Khasi, Jaintia and Garo. But because of the nature 
of settlement in a scattered manner throughout the state, during the election to State 
Assembly and the Autonomous District Council, they are unable to elect their 
representatives. They are recognized scheduled tribe but are economically, 
educationally and socially still very backward compared to the other scheduled tribes 
of the state. Make the provision in the amendment bill to nominate members in the 
Autonomous District Council from their Hajong (Scheduled Tribe) community.    
 Uunrepresented Tribe  in paragraph 3 and 4 of Clause 3 which provided that only  the 
unrepresented Tribes of the State shall be nominated as member of KHADC and 
GHADC need to be deleted. 
 Provided also that the Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than thirty two members of whom two members including at least one 
woman member shall be nominated by the Governor on the advice and 

14 
 
recommendations of the Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council and rest of the 
members shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. 
Provided further that the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial  Council shall 
consist of not more than fifty members, of whom six members including at least two 
women members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall 
be elected on the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less than 
one-third seats for women. 
Provided also that the Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than forty members, of whom four members  including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be 
elected on the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less than one-
third seats for women. 
Provided also that Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than forty-two members, of whom thirty-six shall be elected on the basis of 
tribal adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less than one-third seats for women. 
The Governor will nominate six members of whom at least two shall be women and at 
least four shall be from the indigenous unrepresented tribes. 
Provided also that Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than forty members, of whom thirty-six shall be on the basis of tribal adult 
suffrage subject to reservation of not less than one-third seats for women. The 
Governor will nominate four members of whom at least two shall be women and at 
least two shall be from the unrepresented indigenous tribes. 
Provided also that Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than thirty-four members of whom four members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be 
elected on the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less than one-
third seats for women. 
Provided also that the Lai, Chakma and Mara Autonomous District Council and the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council each of which shall consist of 
not more than thirty members, of whom four members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be 
elected on the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less than one-
third seats for women. 
Provided also that the increase in the number of members of the said Autonomous 
Territorial Councils under the second, third, fourth and fifth provisos shall have no 
effect on the term of the Councils existing on or before the commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019, but shall apply 
to the elections to be held in those Councils after the expiry of their respective terms 
on or after such commencement. 
 There is an anomaly in the provision for the nomination of the members to the ADCs 
from ‘unrepresented tribes’ as there are seventeen unrepresented tribes in the State of 
Meghalaya under the 1950 Presidential Order.  As Khasi Hills Autonomous District 
Council has Khasi as its official language, if other tribes are nominated to the 
Council then it may dilute the value of Khasi language which is not even included in 
the Eighth Schedule.   

15 
 
 A resolution has been passed in the House of the District Council that they want only 
37 seats – 35 elected and 2 nominated and this resolution has been discussed with 
the Minister in-charge and subsequently submitted to the State Government. 
 Seats should be increased to 40 in GHADC- 36 elected and 2 nominated to women 
and 2 nominated by the District Council on advice of the Governor. 
3.2.12  Mizoram 
  Insert the following proviso after the proviso in subparagraph (1) of paragraph 2 -  
Provided also that the Chakma, Mara, and Lai Autonomous Territorial Council and 
the Tripura tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial  Council each of which shall 
consist of not more than thirty-four members, of whom four members including at 
least two women members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the 
members shall be elected based on adult suffrage. 
 Provided also that the Lai, Mara and Chakma Autonomous Territorial Council and 
the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council each of which shall 
consist of not more than thirty members, of whom four members including at least 
two women members shall be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members 
shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. 
3.2.13  Tripura 
 
Reservation for women should not be less than one-third of the total seats in the 
District Council. 
 The existing strength of 28 (Twenty-eight) elected members and 2 (Two) nominated 
members to be doubled i.e. 56 elected members and 4 (Four) nominated members. 
 The following proviso may be included in paragraph 2 of sub-paragraph (1)- 
Provided further that Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than 50 (fifty) members, of whom 5 (five) including at least 2 (two) women 
members from unrepresented tribe/ communities shall be nominated by the 
Governor and rest of members shall be elected from Schedule Tribe only based on 
adult Suffrage.  
Provided further that 'Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council' shall consist of not 
more than 50 (fifty) members for ST category of whom six members including at 
least three women members shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall 
be elected based on adult suffrage.  
Provided further that 'Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council' shall consist of not 
more than 50 (fifty) members of whom six members including at least 4 (four) 
women members shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected 
based on adult suffrage.  
Provided further that Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of not 
more than 50 (fifty) members, of whom 5 (five) including at least 2 (two) women 
members from unrepresented tribe/ communities shall be nominated by the 

16 
 
Governor and rest of members shall be elected from Scheduled Tribe only based on 
adult suffrage.  
Provided further that 'Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council' shall consist of not 
more than 50 (fifty) members of whom six members including at least 3 (three) 
women members shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected 
based on adult suffrage. 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council shall consist of not more than 
thirty-two (32) members of whom four members including two women members shall 
be nominated by the Governor and rest of the members shall be elected based on 
adult franchise.        
  The number of members may be increased from the present 30 to 44 out of which 40 
members will be selected based on adult suffrage and 4 members will be nominated 
by the Governor from amongst the unrepresented communities in the case of ADC 
of Tripura. 
  One-third of total seats in the Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council should be 
reserved for tribal women. 
  The TTAADC members should be increased to 56. Out of 56 members, 3 should be 
nominated from unrepresented minority tribal communities and 3 members should 
be nominated from tribal women and 50 members should be elected by adult voters. 
  Increase the number of seats to not more than 'forty' members of whom four 
members including at least two women members shall be nominated by the 
Governor and the rest of the members shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. 
 
Comments of the Ministry 
 
3.2.14 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its comments stated that the powers and the functioning of the 
office of the Governor have been laid down by the Constitution of India. There is no proposal to amend 
paragraph 2(1) to provide for reservation of seats. Reservation is in respect of the nomination by the 
Governor. For the rest of the seats to be elected based on adult suffrage, there is no provision for 
reservation. The 'Unrepresented Tribes' will be nominated by the Governor and their rights and privileges 
will be in accordance with the existing scheme prevalent in the ADCs.  
 
3.2.15 In Para 2.5 of the Settlement signed by the Government of India, Government of Meghalaya and 
Achik National Volunteer Council (ANVC), it was agreed to increase the number of members of the 
Council in principle. Further,  the National  Commission on review of working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC) in its report dated 31 st March, 2002, in Para 209 (2), as regards Meghalaya, has mentioned that 
'the number of seats in each Autonomous District Councils in Meghalaya should be increased by 10 seats 
i.e. to a total number of 40 seats. Of the 10 additional seats, having regard to the non-representation of 
women and non-tribals, the Governor may nominate up to five members from these categories to each of 
the ADCs'. 

17 
 
3.2.16 The proposed amendment was also discussed in a meeting of the State Government under Dy. CM 
and elected office-bearers of these Councils at Shillong on 25 th May, 2018 and in a meeting under Union 
Home Minister with the Chief Ministers of the States.  
3.2.17 As regards reducing nominated members in Jaintia Territorial Council, the MHA clarified that the 
Constitution scheme has been for 4 nominated members out of 30 members. The proposed amendment 
while considering the democratic element, has restricted nominated members at 4 out of 34 proposed 
strength of the Council. 
3.2.18 With respect to unrepresented Tribes in Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) and 
Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council (KHADC), the the population composition of these two ADCs 
is relevant. The numeric dominance of the two tribes makes the possibility of less numeric tribes getting 
elected extremely difficult and to give them representation in ADCs, seats are proposed to be reserved for 
unrepresented tribes. The same principle of the nomination of unrepresented communities already exists in 
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) where seats are reserved for unrepresented communities as 
nominated members. This provision will ensure equity and justice in GHADC and KHADC.  
 
3.2.19 The MHA also clarified that for nomination of Members from unrepresented communities there 
were representations to the Ministry that in view of over-whelming numbers of Khasi, Garo and Jaintia 
tribes in the State, the tribes with lesser number did not have the possibility of getting elected in the 
District Council. 
 
3.2.20 Based on these representations and the precedence of the Bodoland Territorial Council which has 
provisions of Six Council Members being nominated by the Governor from amongst the unrepresented 
communities of the District was incorporated in the Bill after approval of the Union Cabinet. 
3.2.21 The proposed representation from the unrepresented communities is to ensure the fair possibility 
of non-numeric tribal communities other than Khasi and Garo in KHADC & GHADC being represented 
in their justification for the nomination of unrepresented communities in these Councils as is being done 
in respect of Bodoland Territorial Council. 
3.2.22 It has also been proposed that in Autonomous Territorial/District Councils, at least two women are 
nominated to ensure that there is gender equity in these Councils as per the recommendations of the 
National Commission to Review the Working of Constitution.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
Assam 
3.2.23 Paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution provides for not less than thirty 
members for each of the autonomous District Councils with four members to be nomin ated by 
Governor of concerned State. There are 10 ADCs 3 each in Assam, Meghalaya and M izoram and 
one in Tripura.   In the present Amendment Bill, membership of 9 Councils has been changed.  
Membership of Bodoland Territorial Council has already been changed previously.  The Committee 
thus feels that the existing para 2(1) of the Schedule has become redundant.  The Committee feels 
that since membership of all the 10 ADCs has been changed,  therefore, instead of providing proviso 
to paragraph 2(1) of the  Sixth Schedule provisions of membership made for eac h ADC, may be 
incorporated in paragraph 2(1) of the Sixth Schedule.  

18 
 
 
3.2.24 In para 20 of the Schedule in the Table, the 10 Autonomous District Councils have been 
listed in the following order:- 
1. North Cachar Hills District Council 
2. The Karbi and Anglong District Council 
3. The Bodoland territorial Area District Council 
3.2.25 Similarly, in para 2 of the Table in respect of Meghalaya, the order of Autonomous District 
Councils is as under:- 
1. Khasi Hills District 
2. Jaintia Hills District 
3. Garo Hills District 
3.2.26 The Committee finds that the said order has been changed in the proposed Ame ndment Bill 
as Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Councils has been placed first in the proviso follow ed by 
Dima Hasao Autonomous Councils. Whereas the Dima Hasao is first in the Table.    Similarly, Garo 
Hills Autonomous Council has been cited first followed by Khasi and Jaintia while in the T able they 
are ordered Khasi Hills followed by Jaintia Hills and Garo Hills.  The Committee finds that no 
reason has been stated for changing the said order.  Therefore, Committee f eels that the order of 
these Autonomous Councils in the proviso after, sub para 1 and para 2 may be in the sam e order as 
in the Table of the Sixth Schedule. 
3.2.27 The Ministry has stated that increase in the membership of different Councils has been as 
per the discussion held with various State Governments.  Therefore, there is no logic or rationale 
like the population, area etc. vis-a-vis the number of membership of these Councils. The Committee 
finds it rather arbitrary.  Since there is no logic followed in determining the me mbership of these 
Autonomous Councils as a result there are so many suggestions for changing the membership o f 
these Councils.  In the absence of rational criteria there will always be some dispute s or demand for 
changing the membership of these councils.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
membership of these Councils should be based on some rational criteria instead of deciding on the 
basis of an agreement/demand to obviate any subsequent demand to change the same. 
  
Meghalaya 
 
3.2.28 In the Bill it is proposed to change the membership of  Garo Hills AD C to 42, Khasi Hill 
ADC to 40 and Jaintia Hills ADC to 34 with nomination of 6,4 and 4 respectively by Governor with 
at least 2 women each. The Committee presumes that these number of mem bership have been 
proposed in the Bill on the basis of agreement with the State Government of M eghalaya.  But now, 
Government of Meghalaya through it interaction with the Committee informed that they want to 
change these numbers.  It has been suggested that for Garo Hills strength of ADC should be at 40 
instead of 42 and for Khasi Hill at 40 same as proposed in the Bill but without any nomination  of 
unrepresented tribes.  The State Government of Meghalaya has suggested that ther e should not be 
any nomination of unrepresented tribes.  The Committee in this regard fe els that inclusive 
participation of all the tribes is not only desirable but is a sine quo non in a democratic  setup.  
Therefore, Committee recommends that there should be representation of  unrepresented tribes in 
the ADCs.  It may be with a rider that only those tribes will be nominated in the nomination 

19 
 
category which could not get elected in the election.  Moreover, these nominations may be o n the 
basis of some reasonable criteria and on rational basis, to obviate any arbitrariness.  Rega rding 
replacing the word of ‘unrepresented tribes’ with ‘unrepresented indigenous tribes’, the Committee 
feels once a rationale criterion is fixed for nominating unrepresented tribes, the said  suggestion will 
be taken care of.  
 
Mizoram 
 
3.2.29 Suggestion for increasing the strength of Lai, Chakma and Mara ADCs has been rece ived by 
the Committee.  The Committee feels that in case of Mizoram too if a rationale c riterion is 
formulated for fixing the strength of ADCs, then strength of there ADCs could also be fixed 
accordingly. 
 
Tripura 
 
3.2.30 Besides increasing the strength of Tripura ADC, suggestion has also been received for  
changing its name as Tipraland.  The Committee feels that changing the name of Tr ipura ADC to 
Tipraland may be considered by the MHA. As regards, increasing the strength of membership of 
Tripura ADC from 30 as proposed in the Bill to 50 to which even the Ministry seems to be 
agreeable, the Committee is of the view that some criteria should be fixed failing which  the demand 
for increasing or decreasing the Membership will continue to arise.  Once the criterion is fixed, it 
can be explained to those demanding the change in membership.  
 
3.3 Clause 3 (a) (ii): In paragraph 2 in sub-paragraph (3) after the proviso, proposes to substitute the 
following proviso in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution 
  
“Provided that- 
(a) the District Council constituted for the Karbi Anglong District shall be called the 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council; 
(b) the District Council constituted for the Dima Hasao District shall be called the Dima 
Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council;  
(c) the District Council constituted for the Garo Hills District shall be called the Garo 
Hills Autonomous Territorial Council; 
(d) the District Council constituted for the Khasi Hills District shall be called the Khasi 
Hills Autonomous Territorial Council; 
(e) the District Council constituted for the Jaintia Hills district shall be called the Jaintia 
Hills Autonomous Territorial Council; and 
(f) the District Council constituted for the Tripura Tribal Areas shall be called the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council.”; 
 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.3.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the renaming of the Councils in respect of Assam was 
being done to implement the Memorandum of Settlement signed with United People Democratic 
Solidarity (UPDS) and Dima Halam Daogah (DHD). As regard s other ADCs, the renaming is being done 

20 
 
to bring in uniformity in Autonomous Councils jurisdiction which extends to more than one revenue 
district.  This has been discussed with the State Governments concerned. 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.3.2 The State Governments of  Assam, Meghalaya and Mizoram are in broad agreement with the 
proposed amendment to Clause 3(a)(ii) of the Bill. 
 
Tripura 
 
3.3.3 The State Government of Tripura has informed that there are 8 (eight) administrative revenue 
districts.  The Territorial Jurisdiction of Tripura Tribal Aras Autonomous District Council (TT AADC) 
extends over to all the 8 (eight) districts.  As such the name of Tripura Autonomous District should be 
changed.  In conformity with the peoples demand and since its jurisdiction covers all the districts of the 
State, the State Government of Tripura is of the opinion that Tripura Tribal Area Autonomous District 
Council may be re-named as “Tipra Territorial Council”. 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 
3.3.4 Mizoram 
 The Committee was suggested that the Chakma, Mara and Lai District Councils may 
be called the Chakma, Mara and Lai Autonomous Territorial Councils respectively. 
3.3.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that as the jurisdiction of Lai, Mara and Chakma 
Autonomous Councils are within one Revenue District of the State of Mizoram; it is not desirable to call 
them Autonomous Territorial Councils. 
 
3.3.6 Tripura 
 
 It was suggested to change the nomenclature of “Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous 
District Council (TTAADC) to Tripura Territorial Council (TTC) or Tripura 
Autonomous State Council (TASC)” 
 Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council ” be renamed as “Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council” or “Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 'Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council' shall be substituted as 
‘Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council’. 
 Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council should be renamed as the 
Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council may be changed to “Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council (TATC)”. 
 TTAADC covers all the 8 Districts of the State of Tripura & 19 tribes and it is a 
unique institution unlike other District Council of States of Assam, Meghalaya and 

21 
 
Mizoram, which are basically a particular tribal community based. Therefore, 
nomenclature be changed from "Tripura Tribal Area Autonomous District Council 
(TTAADC)" to "Tipra Autonomous State Council (TASC)".  
 TTAADC though denotes to District but it covers the entire state.  It should be 
renamed Tripura Tribal Area Autonomous Territory Council. 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
3.3.7 The Committee takes notes of the suggestion of the State Government of Tripura for 
renaming the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) as "Tipra Territorial 
Council" for the reason that the territorial jurisdiction of TTAADC extends over to all the  8(eight) 
administrative/revenue Districts. The Ministry of Home Affairs seems to be agreeable to the 
suggestion but needs to discuss with State Government.   The Committee, as observed rather, 
recommends that renaming of TTAADC as “Tipra Territorial Council ” may be considered by the 
Ministry in consultation with State Government of Tripura. 
 
3.4 Clause 3 (a) (iii): proposes insertion of new clause  (da) after clause (d) in sub-paragraph (6), in 
paragraph 2 in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution providing for the disqualification of members of 
such Councils on the ground of defection as under: 
 
"(da) the disqualification of members of such Councils on the ground of defection;"; 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.4.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that this disqualification clause was not there in the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution. To incorporate this provision, the amendment in the Sixth Schedule has been 
discussed and agreed upon by the State Governments.  
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.4.2 The State Governments of  Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura are in broad agreement with 
the proposed amendment. 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 3.4.3 Mizoram 
 The Committee was suggested that  in clause (d) of sub-paragraph (6), between the 
word “qualifications” and the words “for being elected ” the words “and 
disqualifications” shall be inserted: 
3.4.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestion is not tenable. 
 
3.4.5 Tripura 
 
 Disqualification on defection may be made applicable to the member of the Council 
as per the provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 

22 
 
3.4.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that disqualification on defection as suggested is as per 
the provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3.4.7 The Committee notes that the provision of 
disqualification was not there in the Sixth 
schedule and insertion of this provision will bring ADCs at par with the Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
The State governments are in agreement to the amendment.  As regards, the suggestion for 
insertion of the word “qualifications” in sub para (d) of para 6 of the Sixth Schedule, the Committee 
recommends that it may be considered by the MHA because there might be some qualification for 
the Territorial Members. 
 
3.5 Clause 3 (a) (iv): proposes insertion of the  following proviso after the second proviso in sub-
paragraph (6A), in paragraph 2 in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution: 
 
“Provided also that where an elected member of the District Council is chosen as a Member 
in either House of Parliament or in the House of the Legislature of a State, his seat in the 
District Council shall become vacant after the expiration of a period of fourteen days from 
the date of publication of the declaration in the Gazette of India or in the Official Gazette of 
the State, that he has been so chosen.”; 
 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.5.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that this proviso is being inserted to ensure that an elected 
member of the ADC does not simultaneously become Member of Parliament or a State Legislature. The 
Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 (M/o Law Notification No. 46/50-C dated 
26.09.1950) formulated under Article 101 and 190 of Constitution of India provides tha t “The period at 
the expiration of which the seat in Parliament of a person  who  is chosen a member both of Parliament 
and of a  House  of Legislature  of  a State specified in the First Schedule  to  the Constitution  of India 
(hereinafter referred to as "the Constitution") shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his 
seat in the Legislature  of  such State, shall be fourteen days from the  date  of publication  in the Gazette 
of India or in the Official Gazette of the State,  whichever  is  later, of the declaration that he has  been  so 
chosen.” In view of this, the amendment was proposed and agreed upon by the concerned State 
Governments. 
 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.5.2 The State Governments of  Assam, Mizoram and Tripura are in broad agreement with the proposed 
amendment. 
 
3.5.3 The State Government of Meghalaya stated that the wordings be made tighter so that the vice-
versa is also not allowed and the objective is to allow a member to be a member of only one of the eithe r 
house. 
 
 

23 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 3.5.4 Assam 
 The Committee was suggested that the proviso of sub-paragraph 6A may be amended 
by inserting the words “on the advice and recommendation of the District Council ” 
after the words “be extended by the Governor”. 
3.5.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggested change is not possible. As per the 
Constitutional provisions, the Governor is to act on the aid and advice of the State Government or in his 
discretion any capacity, if provided specifically in the Constitution.  
 
3.5.6 Meghalaya  
 
 Provided also that where a elected member of the District Council is chosen as a 
Member in either House of Parliament or in the House of the Legislature of a State, 
his seat in the District Council shall become vacant after the expiration of a period of 
Sixty day from the date of publication of the declaration in the Gazette of India or in 
the Official Gazette of the State, that he has been so chosen. 
 Provided further, that this proviso shall have no effect on the term of the Councils 
existing on or before the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2019. 
 
3.5.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed amendment is in line with “The 
Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 ” formulated under Article 101 and 190 of 
Constitution of India and the suggestion is, therefore, not tenable. 
 
Observation  
 
3.5.8 The Committee notes that this provision is being inserted to ensure that an elected  member 
of the ADC does not simultaneously become Member of Parliament or a State Legislature and is in 
consonance with the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 (M/o Law Notifi cation 
No. 46/50-C dated 26.09.1950) formulated under Article 101 and 190 of Constitution of India.  The 
Committee observes that 
this proviso shall have no effect on the term of the Councils existing on or 
before the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fif th Amendment) Act, 
2019, The Committee is thus in agreement to the proposed amendment. 
 
3.6 Clause 3 (a) (v): proposes insertion of the  following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (7) in 
paragraph 2 in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution: 
“(8) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and 
the conduct of, all elections to the District Council, Regional Council, Village Council and 
Municipal Council shall be vested in the State Election Commission appointed by the 
Governor for that State: 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and Municipal 
Council in the State of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of that State.” 
 

24 
 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
3.6.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendment was introduced to bring the 
Sixth Scheduled areas at par with the Panchayati Raj Institutions and to bring in uniformity as rega rd to 
the electoral machinery. The concerned State Governments except Meghalaya have accepted the proposal. 
 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.6.2 The State Governments of  Assam, Mizoram and Tripura are in broad agreement with the proposed 
amendment. 
 
Meghalaya 
 
3.6.3 The State Government of Meghalaya stated that since elections to the ADCs in Meghalaya are 
conducted on the basis of adult suffrage through the Deputy Commissioners and SDO © as 
returning officers under the provision of the Assam and Meghalaya Autonomous Districts 
(Constitution of District Council) Rules, 1951. In view of the Standing objections and 
reservations expressed by the District Councils from time to time in respect of the conduct of 
elections on the basis of adult suffrage to the institutions at the lower tiers of governance like 
the village Dorbar/Councils etc, the extant arrangements may continue.  
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 
3.6.4 Assam 
 The State Election Commission should supervise every conduct of the election 
process. 
 The power of the Autonomous Councils to make laws for conduct and preparation of 
voters lists for elections of the members of the Autonomous Councils and for conduct 
of elections of all Municipal Boards, Town Committees, Village Councils, Regional 
Councils, Boards and Co-operative Societies, is fundamental power of the 
Autonomous Councils under the Sixth Schedule and basic structure of the 
constitution of India.  It cannot be amended to take it away from the Autonomous 
Councils.  The insertion of “(with the approval of the Governor)” by an amendment at 
Paragraph 2, Sub-paragraph 7 in 1970, is unconstitutional, because it violates the 
basic structure of the constitution. This amendment must be repealed. 
 It was further stated that the Hon ’ble Gauhati High Court in PIL No.9/2017 in their 
judgement dated 18th May, 2018 has directed the Karbi Anglong Autonomous council 
to make a law for conduct of elections and preparation of voters lists of the 
Autonomous Council within six months and the time for which was extended to 13 th 
January, 2020 on petition from the Autonomous Council.  The draft law is with the 
Assam government.  The Judgement of the Hon’ble Gauhati High Court applies to all 
Autonomous Councils under the Sixth Schedule.  Therefore, the proposed 
amendment of Paragraph 2, Sub Paragraph 7, marked point 20, “(8) The 

25 
 
Superintendence, direction and …….. State of Meghalaya until approved b y the 
Governor of that State” must be cancelled.  
3.6.5 Meghalaya 
 
 Omit the proviso -   
Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of that 
State. 
 
 Change the following- 
Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya and the prevailing customary practices 
relating to traditional institutions at grassroot level of local self governance shall 
continue to function. 
Provided also that in the state of Meghalaya the term Village Councils shall mean the 
traditional Village Dorbars and Gitim Nokmas within the Autonomous District 
Council. The term Elaka councils shall mean the Dorbar Hima of the particular 
Elaka whether a Hima, Dalloiship or Nokmaship. The Raiij Councils shall mean the 
Dorbar Raid. Any other reference shall be interpreted as per the prevailing 
customary practices or relevant Acts and Rules of the respective Autonomous 
Territorial Councils in Meghalaya. The term Municipal Council shall mean Town 
Council or Town Committee. 
 No exemption should be provided to Meghalaya and the following change to be 
included: 
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for 
and the conduct of, all elections to the District Council, Regional Council, Village 
Council and Municipal Council otherwise known as Dorbar Shnongs or any other 
local names shall be vested in a State Election Commission appointed by the 
Governor for that State. 
3.6.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed Bill gives relaxation to the Sixth 
Scheduled Councils in Meghalaya for not having elected Village and Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same and this has been done in consultation with the State Government of Meghalaya. 
3.6.7 Mizoram 
 The following sub-paragraphs may be inserted after sub-paragraph (7) - 
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of, all elections to the District Council and Regional Council shall be 
vested in a State Election Commission or Regional Commissioner appointed under 
Article 324 (4) of the Constitution of India. 

26 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of that 
state. 
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of, all elections to the Village Council, Municipal Council and the 
Town Committee shall be vested in the  Autonomous Territorial Councils’ concerned. 
Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of that 
state. 
 The Autonomous District Council may be empowered to make laws with respect to 
all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the District Council, 
Municipal council, Town Committee or Council and village Councils as it will ensure 
free and fair elections of the District Councils. 
3.6.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed amendment is in line with Article 
243K relating to elections to the Panchayats. Hence, the suggestion is not tenable. 
3.6.9 Tripura 
 
 Insert the following- 
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of elections to the Territorial Council should be vested to the 
Election Commission of India. 
However, Elections to the Regional Councils, Zonal Council, Sub-Zonal Council, 
Village Council & Municipal Council shall be vested in a State Election Commission 
appointed by the Governor for that State. 
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral roll for, and 
the conduct of, elections to District Council shall be vested in the Election 
Commission of India and Regional Council, Village Council and Municipal Council 
shall be vested in the State Election Commission appointed by the Governor for that 
State. 
 
3.6.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed amendments are as per discussion 
with the State Governments and accordingly Village and Municipal Councils are exempted. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
3.6.11 An exemption through a proviso has been provided to the State of Meghalaya for applicat ion 
of this provision.  The relaxation has been granted in consultation with the State Government of 
Meghalaya. The State Government of Meghalaya has suggested that existing practice of Village  
Dorbar/Councils which recurs are not elected by adult suffrage. The Committee f eels that this goes 
against the very basic norms of democratic principles. Customs/practices however , sacrosanct they 
may be, should not override the democratic principles.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that Ministry prescribe a time limit for lifting this relaxation/operation of this exemption to 
Meghalaya. Since it is a constitutional amendment Bill, providing exemption to a state without any 
reasonable cause or any time limit may not be tenable. 

27 
 
 
3.7 Clause 3 (b): proposes insertion of the  following paragraph after paragraph 2 in the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution:  
 
“2A. (1) Within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2019, each District Council shall establish 
Village Councils for a village or a group of villages in the rural areas and Municipal 
Councils for an urban area or an agglomeration of such urban areas of the District. 
 
(2) The District Council may, by law, provide for - 
 
(a) the number of Village Councils and Municipal Councils to be formed, their 
composition, the number of seats in each such Council in such manner that their numbers 
remain the same throughout the district; 
(b) the manner of allocation of seats in such Councils subject to reservation of not less 
than one-third seats for women; 
(c) the delimitation of territorial constituencies for the purpose of election to the Village 
Council and the Municipal Councils on the basis of adult suffrage; 
(d) the qualification for voting at election to such Councils; 
(e) the qualifications for being elected as members of such Councils; 
(f) the term of office of members which shall not be less than five years; 
(g) the grounds for disqualification of members; 
(h) the powers to be exercised and functions to be performed by such Councils; and 
(i) any other matter relating thereto. 
Provided that nothing in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to the State of Meghalaya 
until approved by the Governor of that State.”; 
 
(3)  Each District Council shall also constitute a District Planning Committee for the 
district consisting of such number of elected members from the District Council or Regional 
Council and from each of the Village Councils and the Municipal Councils, as it deems 
necessary, for the purpose of consolidating plans prepared by each such Council and to 
prepare a development plan for the district as a whole and such other matters relating 
thereto. 
 
(4) All laws made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor 
and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.” 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
3.7.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendments were made to incorporate the 
elements of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the Sixth Schedule areas. This will ensure the democracy at 
grass root level. The concerned State Governments except Meghalaya have accepted this amendment. 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.7.2 The State Governments of  Assam and Mizoram are in broad agreement with the proposed 
amendment. 
 
 

28 
 
Meghalaya 
 
3.7.3 The State Government of  Meghalaya expressed its reservation to the proposal for establishment of 
Village Councils and Municipal Councils by insertion of the new paragraph 2A and the constitution of a 
District Planning Committee under paragraph 2A (3) read with the proposed substitution of sub-paragraph 
(2) in paragraph 6 which outlines the various subjects proposed to be entrusted to the District Councils, 
the Village Councils and the Municipal Councils. In this connection, it was mentioned that the State 
Government and the Autonomous District Councils share the same geographical jurisdiction and only a 
small portion of the State capital of Shillong is outside the Sixth Schedule areas. Unlike the other States, 
the District Councils in Meghalaya do not merely cover the minority tribal groups but they represent 
almost the entire population of the State barring those living in a small area in the State capital which is 
outside the area under the jurisdiction of the District Council. As the State of Meghalaya was created fro m 
erstwhile undivided State of Assam coinciding/covering the whole jurisdiction of both the United Khasi 
Jaintia Hills ADC and Garo Hills ADC, almost the whole area of the State is Sixth Schedule areas and 
thus 55 out of total of 60 Legislative Assembly constituencies are reserved only for the Scheduled tribes to 
protect the interest of tribals. Therefore, the protection of tribal rights here has a different picture. 
Accordingly, the proposed amendment is bound to result in some conflict between the State Government 
and the ADCs. Further, the majority of the people in Meghalaya still have a special attachment to the 
existing traditional institutions of the Village administration. The idea of Village Council and holding of 
elections to such bodies by adult suffrage still not readily acceptable to the people of the State. 
 
3.7.4 Two modifications were proposed in respect of Para 2, sub-para 3, of the proposed Bill, “the 
proviso that nothing in the sub-paragraph shall apply to the State of Meghalaya until approved by the  
Governor of that State, to be inserted at the end of the above cited paragraph. 
 
Tripura  
 
3.7.5 The State Government of  Tripura proposed that a Territorial Planning Committee should be 
constituted for the entire territorial council area consisting of members of the Territorial Council, 
Chairmen of the Municipal Councils and the Block Councils as members. Officials should also be 
included as members of the said Territorial Planning Committee as having District Planning Committees 
at the level of Revenue Districts is not feasible in the case of Tripura. 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 3.7.6 Assam 
 Include the following change under Para-2A- 
Provided further that nothing in sub-paragraph (1) & (2) shall apply to the state of 
Meghalaya and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council, Haflong (Dima Hasao 
District) in the State of Assam, until approved by the Governor of that State. 
Provided that nothing in Sub-paragraph (1) an (2) of the proposed New paragraph 
2A after paragraph 2 should be applied in Dima Hasao District until approved by the 
proposed Dima Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 Tribal people's traditional Village Council system is an intrinsic and instrumental part 
of our Tribal society and has been in existence since time immemorial. The 
establishment of the Village Council by adopting a participatory Democratic system 

29 
 
on the basis of adult franchise will erode the bedrock of the traditional practice and 
Cultural system. It was on the recognition of the Uniqueness in Structure and form of 
inherent Cultural, Tradition, Custom and Village Administrative System of the Tribal 
people, the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India was added in the Constitution 
of India, to protect, preserve and promote its uniqueness. Therefore, the proposed Bill 
is an infringement on Cultural Rights which is the Fundamental Rights enshrined in 
the Constitution of India. 
3.7.7 Meghalaya 
 
 The Committee was suggested to maintain the autonomy of the new Autonomous 
Territorial Councils in the State of Meghalaya and to insert the following proviso to 
Paragraph 2A- 
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the State of Meghalaya except 
with the consent of the Autonomous Territorial Councils in that State. 
3.7.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestion 
to the Committee as regards to 
Paragraph 2A of the Bill being applicable to State of Meghalaya except with the consent of Autonomous  
Territorial Council (ATC) in the State is not tenable because the executive powers of the State and under 
Sixth Schedule vest with the Governor and not with ATC. 
 Provided in Meghalaya each Territorial Council shall also constitute a Territorial 
Planning Committee for the district consisting of not more than fifty members of such 
members from the Territorial Council or Regional Council and such members as 
deems necessary, for the purpose of consolidating plans prepared by each such 
Council and to prepare a development plan for the district as a whole and such other 
matters relating thereto. 
 In the first line of Paragraph 3(1)(a) the word “transfer” to be followed by a comm a 
“(,)” shall be inserted before the word “allotment” and after the words “of the land” to 
be followed by the words “including land records and codification, of land holding 
system” be inserted. 
 After sub-paragraph (3) of Paragraph 3 a proviso be inserted namely”-  
Provided that when a Bill has been passed by the Autonomous Council in Session, it 
shall be submitted to the Governor and the Governor shall within a period of sixty 
days declare either that he assents to the Bill or that be withholds assent therefore or 
that he reserves the Bill for reconsideration. 
 Provided further that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the submission to 
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with a message requesting that the 
Council will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, 
will consider the desirability of introducing any such Bill or amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Council shall 
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Council with or 
without amendment and on resubmission to the governor for assent, the Governor 
shall not withhold assent therefrom. 

30 
 
3.7.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestions of Khasi Hills Autonomous 
District Council (KHADC), Jaintia Hills Autonomous District council (JHADC), Garo Hills 
Autonomous District Council (GHADC)
 regarding time limit of the Governor regarding the Bill 
passed by Autonomous Councils are not tenable. 
 Insertion of sub-paragraphs of (1) and (2) of 2A, after paragraph 2, 
The proviso “Providing that nothing in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to the 
State of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of that State.” be omitted.  
3.7.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed Bill gives relaxation to the Sixth 
Scheduled Councils in Meghalaya for not having elected Village and Municipal Councils till the 
Governor approves the same and this has been done in consultation with the State Government of 
Meghalaya. 
 Formation of Village Councils is important as it will help the different tribes and 
localities who reside in Khasi Hills and Jaintia Hills district to voice their grievances 
through the Village Councils. 
 When the Village Council is formed they will become the member or be the part of 
the Committee in government delivering system or in allocation of Government 
Scheme and accordingly the member who represent the Village Council can raise 
their grievances or place their demand in the committee and accordingly the scheme 
or project can be equally distributed or allotted to each and every village localities 
equally without bias. 
 Non-consideration of forming the Village Council will lead to unequal distribution of 
public schemes. 
 If this is not fulfilled, then many genuine citizens or communities will be deprived of 
equal allocation of the government scheme and government projects and many 
unrepresented tribes or communities will suffer and only a few communitie s and 
influential people or villages or localities and communities will be benefitted through 
the government project. 
3.7.11 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the views are welcome and respect the 
democratic functioning of grass root institutions. However, the State Government and the Councils 
are not agreeable to the formation of Village Councils at present. 
 
3.7.12 Mizoram 
 Add the following proviso after the proviso “All laws made under this paragraph shall be 
submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.”: 
“Provided that the power to make laws, as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be stalled at the State level 
for year, while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution and relevant Union and State Laws.” 
3.7.13  The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestion is not tenable. 

31 
 
 To insert the following proviso in paragraph 2A(1)- 
Provided that Establishment of Municipal councils for an urban area shall not apply 
to the Autonomous District/Territorial Council of Mizoram until approved by the 
Governor of that state. 
3.7.14 Tripura 
 
 Constitution of Zonal Councils and Sub-Zonal Councils of Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council may be inserted. 
 In 2A(2)2(c), In respect of Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council, Zonal Council 
and Sub Zonal Council to be added. 
3.7.15 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that there is no proposal to insert Zonal/Sub-Zonal 
Councils in the proposed amendment. 
 At present, the District Planning Committee (DPC) is constituted with the District 
Magistrate and Collectors and the concerned members of the Zilla Parishad (District 
Panchayat). There is no representative from the existing 
Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council  (TTAADC) in the District Planning Committee. In 
other words, the TTAADC has no role in formulation of plans and programs for the 
development of the District. It is therefore proposed to the Committee that District 
Planning Committee should be constituted for each District with the District 
Magistrate & Collector as well as the Chairman of the Zonal Council, Sub Zonal 
Council and Municipal Council of the Territorial Council should be included as 
members of the DPC. 
3.7.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed District Planning Committee 
would consist of the elected members from the District Council or Regional Council and from each 
of the Village Councils and the Municipal Councils. 
 In Tripura, 587 elected Village Committees (Council) covering all revenue Districts 
are presently functioning and elected in every five years interval since the year 2006. 
In addition to that there are 33 Sub-Zonal Level Committees (nominated) and above 
these there are four Zonal Development Committees (nominated) are also functioning 
to supervise and implement the Council's programs as well as transferred schemes of 
the State Government.  It was demanded to include in the amendment proposal, the 
'sub-zonal council" in the intermediate level above Village Committees (Councils) 
and 4(four) "Zonal Councils" above Sub-Zonal Councils i.e. as good as, District level 
Councils within the District Council areas. There are 591 Gram panchayats (almost 
similar 587 Village Committees), 35 Intermediate panchayats and 8 District 
panchayats in the rural areas of the State. 
These Zonal Councils Sub-Zonal Councils and Village Committees (Councils) would 
be under District Council since TTAADC is not confined to one or two districts and it 
cuts across all 8(eight) revenue District of the State. As such it is justified to 
constitute Zonal councils and Sub-Zonal Councils under the District or as proposed 
Territorial Council. Alternatively, these provisions may also be inserted after 
paragraph 3(1)(e) for Tripura. 

32 
 
Therefore, suitably insert in the proposed amendment in Sl. No. (b)"2A(1) ad 
(2)(a),(b),(c) before the word "village Councils" as at page No. 3 and then the District 
Council can discharge similar functions as in the Panchayats in the State. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.7.17 The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the proposed amendments have been mad e to 
bring in elements of Panchayati Raj Institution in the Sixth Schedule areas.  This will strengthen the 
democracy at the grass root level, i.e. village level.  The Committee feels that providing any 
exception to the said provisions as has been done in the case of Meghalaya goes against the eth os of 
democracy particularly at the grass root level. Demand for this exception may also arise from other 
States too.  Therefore, the very purpose of bringing this amendment may get d efeated if relaxation 
is given to any State. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that for strengthening democracy at 
the grass root level, this provision should be applicable to all States without any exception.  Though, 
it is good to make laws on the basis of consultation with the concerned State Governments.  But 
providing democratic rights without exception to people particularly at village level is in the spirit 
of our Constitution and democratic values. The exception to Meghalaya may be for a 
transitional/specified period till the state is ready for the said provision, but providing it for  an 
indefinite time, needs to be reconsidered.   
 
3.8 Clause 3 (c):  proposes amendment in sub-paragraph (1) in paragraph 3A in the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution: 
(i) in clause (c), for the word "preservation", the word "animal husbandry and veterinary, 
that is to say, preservation" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
"(d)   education, that is to say, primary and secondary education, higher secondary 
education including vocational training, adult education, college 
education(general);"; 
(iii) in clause (n), - 
(a) after the words “libraries, museums ”, the word “,archaeology” shall be 
inserted; 
(b) the word “and”, occurring at the end shall be omitted; 
(iv) after clause (o), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 
(p)    forests (other than reserved forest);  
(q)    public works relating to the Public Works Department; 
(r)     sericulture; 
(s)     cultural affairs; 
(t)     soil conservation; 
(u)    co-operation; 
(v)    handloom and textile; 
  (w)   health and family welfare; 
   (x)    public health engineering; 
  (y)    social welfare; 
  (z)    sports and youth welfare; 
(za)  weight & measures subject to the provisions of entry 50 of List 1 of the Seventh 
Schedule; 
(zb)  food and civil supplies; 

33 
 
(zc)  publicity and public relation; 
(zd)  printing and stationery; 
 (ze)  tourism;  
(zf)   urban development including town and country planning;  
(zg)  tribal research institute controlled and financed by the State Government; 
(zh)  land and revenue, land reforms; 
(zi)   planning & development; 
(zj)   Municipal Corporation or Boards, improvement trust, district boards and other local 
authorities; 
(zk)  welfare of tribes living in hilly areas; 
(zl)   markets and fairs; 
(zm)  lotteries subject to provisions of entry 40 of List I of the Seventh Schedule;  
(zn)  statistics; 
(zo)  intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives subject to the provisions of entry 84 of List I 
of the Seventh Schedule; 
(zp)   labour and employment; 
(zq)   registration of births and deaths; 
(zr)    small, cottage & rural Industry; 
(zs)  rural development including District Rural Development Agency.”, 
  
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
3.8.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendment is meant for the Karbi Anglong 
Hills Autonomous Council (KAAC) and North Cachar Hills Autonomous District Council (NCHAC) in 
Assam to implement the Memorandum of Settlements (MoSs) signed with United Peoples ’ Democratic 
Solidarity (UPDS) and Dima Halam Daogah (DHD), respectively.   
 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
Assam 
 
3.8.2 The State Government of Assam has commented only on the issue pertaining to the transfer of 
land. The State Government justified that land is a transferred subject and suggested one proviso to be 
inserted in para 3 of sub-para 1(a) of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution which is as under: 
"Provided that land once entrusted, nothing in this law will prevent the State Government from 
taking over land for projects of a State Government and the Central Government from the 
Councils." 
3.8.3 Many projects like hydroelectric projects, national highways, railways, etc., are location specifi c.  
There could be a situation where these things have to be done in the North Eastern Region for strategic or 
other reasons expeditiously.  So, the State Government should have overriding powers over the Council 
and be authorized to take land only for projects meant for the State Government and the Central 
Government which are area specific. 
3.8.4 In the Eleventh Schedule and the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution the powers were delegated 
to the Panchayati Raj System through the 73rd and 74th Amendments and Entry 2 in the Eleventh Schedule 

34 
 
mentions land improvement, implementation of land reforms.  Therefore, the provision is exactly what has 
already been given as this has been done all over India minus the Sixth Schedule Areas through the  73 rd 
Amendment and thus will bring the Sixth Schedule Areas at par with the rest of India. 
Meghalaya 
3.8.5 The State Governments of  Meghalaya is in broad agreement with the proposed amendment. 
 
Mizoram 
 
3.8.6 The State Government of Mizoram proposed to transfer technical education along with secondary 
education to the ADCs.  
Tripura 
3.8.7 The State Government of Tripura stated that the same power should be devolved to Tripura as 
there is in Karbi Anglong and North Cachar Hills. 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 3.8.8 Assam 
 Another clause after the proposed clause (zs) in sub-paragraph 1 of paragraph 3 - 
“(zt) Mines & Minerals Development (subject to the provision of list 1 with respect 
of regulation and development under the control of the Union)” may be included.     
 The subject “Technical & Higher Education ” instead of “College Education 
(General)” in clause (d) of Paragraph 3A may be incorporated. 
 The proposed clause (p) of paragraph 3A “Forest (other than reserved forest)” may be 
replaced with “(p) forest, ecology, wildlife and environment.” 
3.8.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the subject of Mines & Minerals development is in 
the Union List and there is no proposal to change this. The Ministry further stated that with regard to 
inclusion of technical and higher education in Para 3A of the Sixth Schedule, the suggestion is not tenable 
as this subject is enumerated at entry 66 of List I and entry 25 of List III of the Seventh Schedule  and with 
regard to inclusion of ecology, wildlife and environment, the suggestion is not possible as this was not in 
the Memorandum of Settlement with United People's Democratic Solidarity (UPDS).  
 The Committee was requested to transfer more powers for the benefit of people and 
to include additional subjects under 
Paragraph 3A as under- 
As the subject of land alienation is already contained in Paragraph 3A Sub-paragraph 
(o) the proviso of Paragraph 3 Sub-paragraph 1(a) may be deleted. 
 As the State Government has failed to make financial rules for Karbi Anglong the 
power of which was delegated to the Governor by the Sixth Schedule amendment 
effected by the Assam Reorganisation Act, 1969, the power to make financial rules 
must be restored to the Council in Paragraph 7. 

35 
 
 As the subject of revenue is already included in the proposed additions to Paragraph 
3A, the provision of Paragraph 8 Sub-paragraph 1 may be rationalized in respect of 
Karbi Anglong by replacing the words "the principles for the time being followed by 
the Government of the State in assessing lands" with the words "the principles for the 
time being adopted by the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council". 
 A proviso may be inserted in Paragraph 13 with the words "Provided that th e 
Autonomous Council shall prepare the annual budget of all departments under its 
administrative control taking into account the special needs, physical resources and 
priorities required for the Council area as per the intended allocation set earlier by the 
State and the Union government for that year". 
 To end constant administrative conflict in the Higher Education Sector between the 
Council and the State Education Department, since college education is included in 
Paragraph 3A Sub-paragraph ii(d) the words "higher education" may be added. 
 The main revenue base of the Council has been revenue collected from minor 
minerals (scheduled 'x' and 'y' items) which has been taken over by the State 
Government through the enactment of Assam Minor Mineral Concession Rules 2013.  
This must be restored to the Council by adding the item "Mines and Minerals" to the 
list in Paragraph 3A as Clause (zt). 
 Reject the State Government proposal on land acquisition in the instant Bill to 
preserve and protect the tribal indigenous rights over their land as Sixth Schedule 
Councils must continue to retain guardianship of the tribal land to avoid the imminent 
danger of trifling and trampling with the tribal rights over their land.
 
3.8.10 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed amendments incorporate the 
Memorandum of Settlement with UPDS and enhances powers of the Councils.  
 
3.8.11 Meghalaya 
 On page 5 in sub section (d) a further sub section (iii) should be added and it should 
read: 
Mandatory social audit to be implemented by Village Council/ dorbar shnong 
 On page 6 sub section (b) a further sub section (iii) should be added and it should 
read : 
Mandatory social audit to be implemented by Municipal Council 
 
That nothing dealing with cases regarding Crimes against women shall be taken up 
by District council/Village Council/Tradition Chief’s court. 
 
 Transfer more subjects to the Councils and add additional provision in Para 3(1) to 
promote global ethnic language and to protect the ethnic identity of indigenous 
people, the basis of which sixth schedule was formed.  
 
 

36 
 
3.8.12 Mizoram 
 Following paragraph may be inserted after Clause 3B in the proposed amendment in 
its application to the State of Mizoram: 
3C. Additional powers of the Chakma Autonomous District Council, Lai 
Autonomous District Council and Mara Autonomous District Council to make laws. 
3.8.13 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that at this stage, it is not possible to agree to the 
suggestion regarding additional powers to Chakma, Lai and Mara Autonomous District Councils as 
additional powers to District Councils have to be done in consultation with the concerned State 
Government. The proposed amendment to increase the powers of Karbi Anglong and Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Districts are as agreed in Memorandum of Settlements with UPDS and DHD and has been 
agreed by the State Government of Assam. 
 
3.8.14 Tripura 
 
 Constitution of Zonal Councils and Sub-Zonal Councils of Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council” and “Establishment of:- 
Tipraland Universities (Both General & Technical) under UGC, AICTE 
Referral Hospitals 
 Introduction of Anglo Roman script in the education sectors from primary to 
University level. 
3.8.15 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the provision of the proposed amendment is 
not applicable to Tripura. The proposed amendment to increase the powers of Karbi Anglong and 
Dima Hasao Autonomous Districts are as agreed in Memorandum of Settlements with UPDS and 
DHD and has been agreed to by the State Government of Assam. 
 
 In paragraph 3A in sub-paragraph (1), (iv) after clause (o), the following shall be 
inserted, namely in clause (p) of the said Amendment Bill, the words “forests (other 
than reserved forests” should be substituted by the words “ forests including reserved 
forest” and in clause (zh); the Entry 18 and 45 of List-II of          7th Schedule should 
be inserted with a view to provide land protection rights to the tribal people 
particularly who are residing within the territory of TTAADC. 
 In paragraph 3, in sub-paragraph, (1) after entry (j), the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“(k) traditional occupations of the tribals including occupations relating to mines and 
minerals.”  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.8.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs has averred that this Amendment has been incorporate d to 
implement the Memorandum of Settlements (MOSs) with United People ’s Democratic Solidarity 
(UPDS) and Dima Halam Daogah (DHD).  The Committee presumes that MOSs have the 
concurrence of State Governments of Assam.  But now the State Government of Assam has 

37 
 
expressed some reservations about inter-alia ‘land’ transferred to Autonomous Councils of Dima 
Hasao and Karbi Anglong Districts Autonomous Councils, before the Committee.   Moreover, som e 
other stake holders like Autonomous Councils and Members of Parliament from the State also have 
a contrarian view than the State Government on the subject.  
3.8.17 The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs in consu ltation with 
State Government of Assam, elected representatives like MPs and concerned MLAs and 
Autonomous Councils find a way to build a broad consensus on the provision to obviate any 
problem that may arise between the stake holders and State Government while implemen ting this 
provision. 
3.8.18 Secondly, the Committee observes that subjects on which Dima Hasao District and Karbi 
Anglong District Autonomous Councils have power to make laws have been arranged in 
alphabetical orders, i.e. A-Z.  This arrangement gives indication that subjects arranged after  Z i.e. 
Za are part of the subject cited at Z.  But the fact is that subjects cited after Z  are separate and 
independent subjects without any relation with the subject at serial at Z.  Moreove r, the subjects 
have not been arranged in alphabetical order for easy identification. The Ministry of Law and 
Justice was of the view that this is as par the existing practice of number in different sub-clauses. 
3.8.19 The Committee, however, feels that since list of subjects is more that 26 i.e. total alph abets, 
therefore, these subjects, if possible, may be serialized in numerals i.e. 1, 2, 3 -----N.  The subjects 
also needs to be arranged in alphabetical orders for easy identification/location. 
3.8.20 The Committee observes that though State Governments of Meghalaya and Mizoram are in  
agreement to this amendment and State Government of Tripura and some stake h olders have also 
desired that subjects transferred to Dima Hasao District Autonomous Councils and Karbi Anglong 
District Autonomous Councils may be transferred to Tripura District Autonomous Council too.  
The Committee feels that Ministry of Home Affairs should discuss this with State Gove rnment of 
Tripura to find the desirability and viability of transferring these subjects to Autonomous Council s 
of Tripura too.  
3.8.21 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must hold discus sion 
with the concerned State Governments for devolution of additional powers to the Chak ma, Mara 
and Lai District Councils to empower them to make laws.  
 
3.9 Clause 3 (d):
 proposes insertion of the  following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (2) in 
paragraph 6 in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution:  
 
“(3)  The Governor may, by rules, entrust the District Council or as the case may be, the 
Regional Council, with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to 
function as institutions of self-governance and such rules may contain provisions for further 
devolution of such powers and responsibilities upon – 
(a)  the Village Council, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect 
to- 
(i)  The preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(ii)  The implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be 
entrusted to them including those in relation to agriculture and agricultural extension, land 
improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation, 
minor irrigation, water management and watershed development, animal husbandry, 
dairying and poultry, fisheries, social forestry and farm forestry, minor forest produce, small 

38 
 
scale industries including food processing industries, khadi, village and cottage industries, 
rural housing, drinking water, fuel and fodder, roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways 
and other means of communication, rural electrification including distribution of electricity, 
non-conventional energy sources, poverty alleviation programme, education including 
primary and secondary schools, technical training and vocational education, adult and non-
formal education, libraries, cultural activities, markets and fairs, health and sanitation 
including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries, family welfare, women and 
child development, social welfare including welfare of the persons with disability 
(Divyangjan), welfare of the weaker sections, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, public distribution system and maintenance of community assets; and 
 
(b) the Municipal Council subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with 
respect to— 
(i)     the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(ii)     the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted 
to them including those in relation to urban planning and town planning, regulation of land-
use and construction of buildings, planning for economic and social development, roads and 
bridges, water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes, public health, 
sanitation conservancy and solid waste management, fire services, urban forestry, protection 
of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects, safeguarding the interests of weaker 
sections of society including the handicapped and mentally retarded, slum improvement and 
upgradation, urban poverty alleviation, provision of urban amenities and facilities such as 
parks, gardens, play grounds, promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects, 
burials and burial grounds, cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematoriums, cattle 
pounds, prevention of cruelty to animals, vital statistics including registration of births and 
deaths, public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public 
conveniences and regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.” 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.9.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed Amendment is to empower the democracy 
at the grass root level and will bring parity with the Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipalities  
provided in Schedule XI and XII of the Constitution existing across the country barring Sixth Schedule 
areas and few other regions.  
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.9.2 The State Governments of Assam, Mizoram and Tripura are in broad agreement with the proposed 
amendment. 
 
Meghalaya 
3.9.3 Clause 3(d)(3) of the Bill which says, ‘The Governor may, by rules, entrust the District Council or 
as the case may be, the Regional Council, with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable 
them to function as institutions of self-governance and such rules may contain provisions for further 
devolution of such powers and responsibilities upon— 

39 
 
(a) the Village Council, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein... ’  It goes on to mention, 
‘the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them  
including those in relation to agriculture and agricultural extension…. This Clause is applicable to Dima 
Hasao Autonomous Territorial Council, Bodoland Territorial Council and  Karbi Anglong Autonomous 
Territorial Council, because these areas are territorially confined. But, in the case of Meghalaya, the 
jurisdiction of Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council, Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council 
and Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council spreads throughout the State, except in Municipal area.  
So, now, if all these major subjects are given to District Councils, then, practically, the State Government 
has no role to play. 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
 3.9.4 Meghalaya 
 
 Include the following proviso in the amendment, to create Para 6 (3) – 
 “Provided that nothing in sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph shall apply to the 
State of Meghalaya except with the consent of the Autonomous Territorial Councils of 
that State.” 
3.9.5 Mizoram 
 The following sub-paragraph  for sub-paragraph (2) may be substituted in paragraph 
6- 
The Governor may on recommendation or on application of the District Council or as 
the case may be, the regional council shall cause for further devolution of such 
powers and responsibilities under paragraph 3C upon (a) the Village Council, subject 
to such condition as may be specified therein, (b) the municipal council subject to 
such condition as may be specified therein for preparation of plans for economic 
development and social justice. 
 The following paragraph may be added: 
With the consent of the Autonomous Territorial Council, the Governor, may, by 
rules, have the power to allocate all or any of the functions specified under Eleventh 
and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution to their respective Municipal Councils or 
Village Councils as may be necessary to enable them function as an institution of 
self-governance” 
3.9.6 Tripura 
 The following may be added after sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6 of the Sixth 
Schedule: 
With the consent of the Autonomous Territorial Council, the Governor may, by the 
rules, have the power to allocate all or any of the functions specified under Eleventh 
and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution to their respective Traditional Municipal 
Councils or Traditional Village Councils as may be necessary to enable them to 
function as institution of self-governance.” 

40 
 
3.9.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the proposed changes in paragraph 6 (3) is enabling 
clause where Governor may, by rules, entrust District Councils with such powers and authority, as may be 
necessary, to enable them to function as institutions of self governance and such rules may contain the 
provisions for further devolution of such powers and responsibilities upon the Village Councils and 
Municipal Councils as per 11 th and 12 th Schedule of the Constitution. The suggestions have already been 
incorporated. The procedure for delegation of more powers is for the State Government and Autonomous 
District Councils in a particular State. If the State Government and Councils are in agreement, additional 
powers, as per 11th and 12th Schedule may be delegated to the Councils. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.9.8 The Committee notes that the proposed changes in paragraph 6(3) is enabling 
provision/clause where Governor may, by rules, entrust District Councils with such pow ers and 
authority, as may be necessary, to enable them to function as institutions of self governance  and 
such rules may contain the provisions for further devolution of such powers and re sponsibilities 
upon the Village Councils and Municipal Councils as per Eleventh and Twelfth Sche dules of the 
Constitution.   
 
3.9.9 The Committee notes that though it is an enabling provision to transfer subjects  to Village 
and Municipal Councils but feels that once the provision is made in the Constitution there will 
always be pressure on State Governments to transfer these subjects.   
 
3.9.10 The issue of Meghalaya is quite unique as except Municipal limit of Meghalaya all other  
parts of the State are under Sixth Schedule.  But the Committee finds it dichotomous that other 
States after having transferred subjects to Village and Municipal Councils under E leventh and 
Twelfth Schedules respectively still have subjects under their jurisdiction but if the  same subjects 
are transferred to Village and Municipal Councils of Meghalaya the State Government is left with 
very few subjects under its jurisdiction.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of  Home 
Affairs needs to hold discussion with the State Government of Meghalaya to impress upon it that 
when non Sixth Schedule State Governments are having subjects under their jurisdiction after 
transferring subjects under Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules to Village and Municipal Counc ils, 
how the Meghalaya Government stands on a different footing .  For transfer of more subjects to 
Autonomous Councils, the Ministry may discuss with the concerned State Governments and arrive 
at a consensus to ensure smooth implementation of the proposed amendment.  
 
3.9.11 The Committee observes that subjects enumerated in Eleventh & Twelfth Sche dule to the 
Constitution have been reproduced in clause 6(3)(a)(ii) of the Sixth Schedule. These  subjects have 
been stated in a paragraph in the proposed amendment instead of in a ser ial order as has been done 
in Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution. 
3.9.12 The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of reproducing the subje cts enumerated 
in the Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules, they may be linked to those Schedules in the proposed 
amendment.  Whenever any amendment in those Schedules i.e. Eleventh and Twelfth, takes place, it 
will automatically get updated for these subjects of Sixth Schedule that will obviate the e xercise of 
amending this Schedule again. 
3.9.13 The Committee further recommends that subjects under clause 6(3)(A) (ii ) may be entrusted 
to Village Councils for implementation of scheme for economic development and social justice of 

41 
 
India. Similarly, subjects under clause 6(3) (b) (ii) may be entrusted to Municipal Council s for the 
performance of functions in the implementation of schemes.     
 
3.10 Clause 3 (e) proposes insertion of the following paragraph after paragraph 8 in the Sixth Schedule 
to the Constitution: 
 
“8A. (1) The Finance Commission appointed by the Governor for a State shall review the 
financial position of the District Councils including the Village Council and the Municipal 
Council and make recommendations to the Governor as to- 
(a) the principles which should govern- 
(i)    the distribution between the State and the District Councils of the net proceeds of the 
taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, and the allocation of such proceeds between 
the District Councils and the Village Councils and Municipal Councils under its authority; 
(ii)   the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or 
appropriated by, the District Councils including the Village Councils and the Municipal 
Councils under its authority; 
(iii)    the grants- in-aid to the District Councils and the Village Councils and the Municipal 
Councils under its authority from the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(b)    the measures needed to improve the financial position of the District Councils and the 
Village Councils and the Municipal Councils under its authority; and 
 (c)     any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of 
sound finance. 
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under sub-
paragraph (1) together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be 
laid before the Legislature of  the State.” 
  
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.10.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendment is to ensure greater financial 
autonomy to the Sixth Schedule areas for its smooth and effective functioning. The proposed amendment 
was agreed upon by the concerned State Governments. 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
Assam, Mizoram 
 
3.10.2 The State Governments of Assam and Mizoram are in broad agreement with the proposed 
amendment. 
 
Meghalaya 
3.10.3 The State Government has already notified the “Meghalaya State Finance Commission Act, 2012 ” 
with similar provisions envisaged under the proposed amendment. While the issues relating to the 
distribution and determination of resources leviable by the State and their allocation and appropriation to 
the District Councils are well appreciated and have already found a place in the State Act, this may  not 
require further determination by the Central Finance Commission. Therefore, in the context of Meghalaya, 
the mandate of the Central Finance Commission should be restricted and limited to the determination of 
special grants-in-aid to assist the ADCs. 

42 
 
Tripura 
3.10.4 In the absence of provision of allocation of funds from the Finance Commission in ADC areas, 
there was a disparity being created between funding in Panchayat Areas vis a vis  ADC areas. Therefore, 
they welcomed the proposed amendment as the provision has now been brought for allocation of funds to 
ADC areas under the Finance Commission. 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
3.10.5 Assam 
 On the one hand, the matter specified in the proposed New Paragraph 8 of this 
schedule should be applied in Dima Hasao until agreed upon by the Executive 
Committee of the Proposed District Council. On the other hand, forceful imposition 
of the above principles will be violation of the Executive and Legislative Power of 
District Council guaranteed in the Sixth Schedule to the constitution of India. 
3.10.6 Meghalaya 
 The Finance Commission appointed by the Governor for a State wherein one-third of 
the total members are from the ATC(s) shall review the financial position of the 
District Councils including the Village Council and Municipal Council and make 
recommendations to the Governor as to – 
"Provided in the State of Meghalaya the term Village Council shall mean the 
Traditional Institution of Local Self Governance and the term Municipal Council 
shall mean the Town Committee constituted and established by the Autonomous 
Territorial Council." 
3.10.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestions are not tenable as Finance 
Commission for the State is to be recommended by the Governor of the State.  It is not desirable to have 
one-third of the total Members of the Finance Commission from the Territorial/District Councils. 
 After the words “District Councils”, the words “or as the case may be, the Regional 
Councils” shall be inserted, with regard to the insertion of paragraph 8A, in sub-
paragraph (1) of this paragraph. 
3.10.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that Paragraph 1(2) of the Sixth Schedule provides that 
“If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the Governor may, by public 
notification, divide the area or areas inhabited by them into autonomous regions ”.  Presently, there is no 
Regional Council in any of the Sixth Schedule ADCs. 
 
3.10.9 Mizoram 
 
 After paragraph 8A (1) the following be inserted as- 
"8A(2) the Governor shall also appoint at least one member each from Autonomous 
District/Territorial Council in the State Finance Commission." 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.10.10The Committee feels that very purpose of bringing the proposed amendment is to bring Sixth 
Schedule States ADCs at par with local bodies of the rest of the country. There may be some 

43 
 
discrepancies in the Sixth Schedule areas  like existing provision s in Meghalaya which has its own 
State Finance Commission vis-à-vis rest of the Sixth Schedule States who do not have such State 
Finance Commissions.  But, the Committee finds nothing objectionable in the provision of the 
proposed Bill which provides for appointment of a State Finance Commission to r ecommend 
devolution of resources between State and local bodies. It would strengthen the dem ocracy at 
grassroot level.  
 
3.10.11 The Committee is aware of the shortage of funds in ADCs which is hampering the process of 
development in the region. The Committee strongly feels that State Finance Commission sh ould 
earmark funds for ADCs while distributing financial resources between the S tate and the District 
Councils. Besides, States should also provide budgetary allocation and timely release of fund s to the 
ADCs for the implementation of socio-economic developmental plans.  
 
3.10.12 The Committee recommends that the term District Councils may be replaced with 
‘District/Territorial Councils’ in lines 25 and 29 of Page 6 of this amendment Bill. 
 
3.11 Clause 3(f): 
 proposes substitution of the serial number ‘1’ and the entry ‘The Dima Hasao 
District’ in paragraph 20, in the Table, in Part I, for serial number 1 and entries relating thereto in the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. 
"1. The Dima Hasao District." 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.11.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed amendment is being made to implement the 
Memorandum of Settlement signed with Dima Halam Daogah (DHD). The Government of Assam has 
agreed for the proposed change. 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.11.2 The State Government of Assam is in broad agreement with the proposed amendment. 
 
Suggestions from Stakeholders 
3.11.3 Mizoram 
 In paragraph 20, in the Table, in Part II, for serial number 1, 2 and 3, and the entries 
relating thereto, the following serial number and entries shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
“1. The Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council”; 
 2. The Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council”; 
3. The Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council” 
 
 In the Table, in Part IIA, the name “Tripura Tribal Areas District ” shall be 
substituted, namely:- “Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council” and in 
the Table, in Part III, for serial number 1,2 and 3, and the entries relating thereto, 
the following serial number and entries shall be substituted, namely:- 

44 
 
“1. The Chakma Autonomous Territorial Council”; 
2. The Mara Autonomous Territorial Council”; 
3. The Lai Autonomous Territorial Council”; 
 
3.11.4 Tripura 
 In paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule, the following new paragraphs be substituted 
as under:- 
   Part II-A 
 "Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council." 
 
3.11.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the suggestions are not tenable as explained above 
and the term Territorial Council is used when the jurisdiction of the District Council extends to more than 
one Revenue District in the State. 
 
 In paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule in the Table in Part IIA and the entries shall 
be substituted, namely - 
            “Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
 
3.11.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that the issue needs to be discussed with the State 
Government. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.11.7 The Committee notes assessment of the Ministry of Home Affairs that 
the term Territorial 
Council is used when the jurisdiction of the District Council extends to more than one Revenue 
District in the State. The Committee agrees to the views of the Ministry .  However, change in the 
name of Tripura Autonomous Council as Tipraland Territorial Council may be considered. 
 
3.12 Clause 3(g):  proposes substitution of the words “the Dima Hasao Autonomous Terrritorial Council 
or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council ” in paragraph 20BA, for the words “the North 
Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council ” in the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution. 
 
Purpose of the Amendment 
 
3.12.1  The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the renaming of the Councils is being done to 
implement the Memorandum of Settlement signed with Dima Halam Daogah (DHD) and United Peoples ’ 
Democratic Solidarity (UPDS). The Government of Assam has agreed for the proposed change. 
 
Views of the State Governments 
 
3.12.2 The State Governments of Assam is in broad agreement with the proposed amendment. 
 
 

45 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12.3 The Committee agrees to the proposed amendment. 
 
General Recommendation 
 
3.12.4 The Committee sincerely feels that while finalizing this legislation, there had been intensive 
discussion with concerned State governments. Agreements signed with the Autonomous  
District/Territorial Councils of the State of Assam and Meghalaya needs to be honored. Review ing 
them may cause erosion of confidence between centre and these states. 
 
3.12.5 The Committee also recommends that provision for adequate representation of w omen in 
Autonomous District/Territorial Councils needs to be made/continued. The Committee c onsiders 
that the amendment proposed through the Bill with regard to issues like name of the Autonomous 
District/Territorial Councils; number of representatives therein; and powers devolved to them are 
very sensitive and therefore the Government should keep the sentiment of the citizens of the 
affected States in mind while taking any decision. 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER-4 
 
General 
 
4.1 Issues Other Than Provisions in the Bill 
 
4.1.1 Assam 
 
 The Committee was suggested that after proviso (b) of Article 275 (1), another 
proviso (c) be added as under – 
“(c)    the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the 
Autonomous Council created under the Sixth Schedule with the approval of the 
Government of India for the purpose of raising the level of administration of the said 
areas to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of the State.” 
4.1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that there is no proposal to amend Article 275 of the 
Constitution which is administered by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 If the areas governed by Sixth Schedule are to get direct funding from the Finance 
Commission of India, the phrase “and Tribal Areas of Paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule” be inserted between “the States” and “of the net proceeds” in clause (3) (a) 
of Article 280. Or, the sub-clause, “the tribal areas specified in [Part 1] of the table 
appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and referred to Article 275 (1) (a) ” 
be inserted for channelizing fund to Article 275 or for sending funds directly to 
ADCs. 
 Set up a separate Autonomous District council for the Indigenous non-Dimasa 
Populace under the provision of 2(1) of articles 244(2)& 275(1) of the Sixth Schedule 
to the constitution of India based on the  Report of the Task force headed by Sri. P.P. 
Varma, IAS, Chief Secretary (Retd.), Assam and the then Addl. Chief Secretary of 
Assam. Include the areas inhabited by the non-Dimasa Tribes within the Dima Hasao 
Territorial Council or any political setup whose name is in Dimasa's dialect, to 
demarcate boundaries of the new District being created as per the proposed Map of 
the Indigenous People's Forum (IPF) and to name "North Cachar Hills" as the name 
of the new district.  
 The existing provision enshrined in paragraph 3 and Sub-paragraph 2 of Paragraph 6 
of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India should be left in Original Form and 
not be diluted nor distorted through the Bill. 
 Add the words “as soon as possible ” at the end of paragraph 20BA of the Sixth 
Schedule and to amend the paragraph 20BA by deleting the words “the Council of 
Ministers” after the words “after consulting”. 
 The Governor's Role in Bodoland Territorial Council should be discretionary, 
Panchayati Raj Institutions should be immediately implemented in BTC and there 
should be a clear policy on the funding to the ADCs. 
 The Constitution (Schedule Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2019 for the inclusion 
of 41 communities as Scheduled Tribe including (i) Moran, (ii) Matak, (iii) Chutia, 
(iv) Koch Rajbongshi and (v) Tai Ahoms in Assam. 

47 
 
 The Constitutional land rights and Socio-Political Rights of the economically weaker 
and underdeveloped Gorkha Community of Karbi Anglong and Dima Hasao must be 
protected while amending and implementing the provisions of the proposed 
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
 The Gorkhas of Six scheduled areas should be recognized as "Special Protected 
Class" by the proposed Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019. 
 Ensure the right to vote and to be elected in Autonomous Territorial Council, 
Municipal Council and Village Council. 
 Proposed Constituency Delimitation should be on the basis of Geographical and 
Natural boundary, so that representation of Gorkha by election can be ensured.  
 The Bill is for removal of Autonomy from the Autonomous District Council.  The 
word “autonomous” is not mentioned anywhere.  The government seems to propose 
replacement of Autonomous Council by ordinary District Council under Panchayati 
Raj System and should not impose Panchayati Raj on the Hills Tribes people. They 
have their own Traditional Village Councils which are good and equivalent to 
panchayats and already accepted by the Constitution of India and the Sixth Schedule.  
On the whole, the constitution (One Hundred Twenty-fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 is 
not acceptable.  
 
 
4.1.3 Meghalaya  
 
 It must be ensured that Councils receive necessary financial empowerment so that 
they can directly intervene and ignite the slow growth of tribal communities without 
disturbing their in-built and unique practices. 
 In paragraph 1 a new proviso shall be added namely:- "provided also that the 
Governor shall exercise his powers under this paragraph after due consultation and 
consent of the Autonomous District Council/Autonomous Territorial Councils” 
 After sub paragraph (2) of paragraph 6 a proviso shall be inserted namely:-   
provided that when a Bill has been passed by the Autonomous Territorial Council in 
Session, it shall be submitted to the Governor and the Governor shall within a period 
of sixty days declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent 
therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for reconsideration. 
 Provided further that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the submission to 
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with a message requesting that the 
Council will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, 
will consider the desirability of introducing any such Bill or amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Territorial Council 
shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Territorial 
Council with or without amendment and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, 
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 

48 
 
 After sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8 a proviso shall be inserted namely:- “Provided 
that when a Bill has been passed by the Autonomous Council in Session, it shall be 
submitted to the Governor and the Governor shall within a period of sixty days 
declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withhold assents therefrom or that 
he reserves the Bill for reconsideration. 
 Provided further that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the submission to 
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with a message requesting that the 
Council will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, 
will consider the desirability of introducing any such Bill or amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Council shall 
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Council with or 
without amendment and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, the Governor 
shall not withhold assent therefrom:” 
 After sub paragraph(1) of paragraph 9 a proviso shall be added namely:- “Provided 
that such share(s) shall be paid to the Territorial Council regularly on or before the 
end of the financial year along with details of the total share collected” 
 A new Paragraph 9A be inserted Paragraph 9 namely:- 
Paragraph 9A – Share of the profit accruing by power companies corporation. 
boards: Shares out of the profit accruing by power companies, corporations and 
boards whether hydro, thermal, nuclear or non-conventional shall be paid to the  
Autonomous and Territorial councils as the Governor may determine subject that it 
shall not be less thatn 5% of the gross profit of such companies, corporations and 
boards. 
 After sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 10 a proviso be inserted namely:  
Provided that when a Bill has been passed by the Autonomous Territorial Council in 
Session, it shall be submitted to the Governor and the Governor shall within a 
period of sixty days declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds 
assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for reconsideration. 
 Provided further that the governor may, as soon as possible after the submission to 
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with a message requesting that the 
Council will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and in particular, 
will consider the desirability of introducing any such Bill or amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and when a Bill is so returned the Territorial Council 
shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Territorial 
Council with or without amendment and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, 
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
 Insert Sub-paragraph 2(2)(ii) regarding Constitution of Municipal Council:- 
 In Meghalaya the areas that would immediately qualify for constitution of the 
Municipal Councils will be the District and Sub-Divisional Head quarters; and those 
areas with large concentration of people where trade and commerce flourish with 
mixed population. The State Government has already taken initiatives in Urban and 

49 
 
Municipal Administration in such areas. On the other hand, the District Councils are 
lacking in many aspects in the field of Municipal Administration and Urban Affairs. 
 Matters relating to Municipal councils may be left to the domain of the State 
Government in Meghalaya. It will also be necessary to specify the position of the 
existing traditional Village Durbars/institutions within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the Municipal Council prior to its constitution and also to spell out their functions and 
powers vis-à-vis the Municipal Council. 
 Substitute Sub-paragraph (a) of Paragraph 12A as, in Meghalaya the situation is 
different from that in Assam, Mizoram and Tripura. The 3 Autonomous District 
Councils in the State represent generally the three major tribes namely, the Khasis, 
Jaintias and Garos which are also represented proportionately in the State Legislature 
to the extent of 92%. It is not perhaps out of place to mention that some MLAs are 
also Members of the Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council. Almost the whole 
State of Meghalaya except a small portion of Shillong is under the Sixth Schedule 
areas. Therefore, the State government and the Autonomous District Councils share 
the same geographical jurisdiction and the same interest with respect to the progress, 
rights and privileges of the Tribal Communities of Meghalaya. 
 Paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule contains subjects like Management of Forest, 
Establishment of Town Committee and matters relating to Town Administration 
which are very critical in the present days context; on which the State Government 
with its resources has a very important and crucial role to play. 
 In sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 12(A), the word President shall be substituted by 
the word Governor to empower the Governor of the state of Meghalaya to 
constitutionally notify and direct that any act of the Parliament shall not apply to an 
Autonomous District or an Autonomous Region in the state of Meghalaya or shall 
apply to such region in the state or shall apply to such district or region or any part 
thereof subject to such exception or modification as he may specify in the notification 
and direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect and to append the words 
" To protect the language and ethnic identity of the indigenous tribe" in Para 3 of the 
Sixth Schedule. It was further suggested that Para 20 of the Sixth Schedule clause (2) 
Sub-clause (2) should be deleted. 
 NCRWC in its report submitted in 2002 recommended that ‘Five Syiem, Dolloi and 
Nokma to be elected from amongst themselves to be nominated as members of the 
Khasi, Jaintia and Garo Hills Autonomous District Councils’. 
 The unique tribal features in Meghalaya should be retained, safeguard primarily, of 
the customary laws and practices of the indigenous communities of the state, amongst 
others. It is necessary to protect the uniqueness of vulnerable tribal practices. 
 It has further been requested that the Sixth Schedule should contain some provisions 
to compensate promises made in the Instrument of Accession and that the Bill to 
amend Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 should get 
assent. 

50 
 
 More focus is necessary to ensure that all parts of the ADCs have codified laws that 
can stand the test of legal scrutiny and, therefore, the proposed amendment should 
spell out substantial guidelines to overcome lacuna to
 avert pending threat of the 
erosion or probable disappearance of unique tribal law and practice. 
 The entire State of Meghalaya should be declared as Tribal Area. As of now certain 
area of Shillong are not tribal areas thus, they are not within the jurisdiction of 
KHADC.  Hence, in order to bring uniformity, it is important to declare entire 
Meghalaya as Tribal Area falling within the purview of the Sixth Scheduled to the 
Constitution of India. 
 The Governor should be empowered to exempt and modify any Act of Parliament in 
the State of Meghalaya. The indigenous people of the State of Meghalaya are the 
microscopic and in most of the time are irrelevant in the national politics. Hence, in 
order to give the indigenous community meaningful rights to protect and preserve its 
own unique identity, has the right to get itself exempted from any law passed by the 
Parliament which may affect their identity. Hence, this special provisions should be 
inserted in the Proposed Amendment and the provision and the spirit of the Article 
200 to the Constitution of India relating to the Assent of Bills passed by the ADCs be 
incorporated in the Sixth Schedule so as to ensure true autonomy to the legislative 
power of the ADCs in the State of Meghalaya. 
 Representative of Meghalaya Legislative Assembly proposed to add the words 
‘traditional institutions of self-governance ’ in the Bill. As there is very unique 
grassroots traditional institution in the Khasi and Jaintia region amongst the tribes.   
These institutions have been functioning for a very long time.   The District Council 
in the Khasi hills region has put in substantial efforts to codify the systemic 
functioning of the traditional institutions. There is a system in Meghalaya where a 
durbar is formed not by the procedure of voting but by raising of hands,   which is a 
very traditional identity of the people of the State. The Sixth Schedule was 
constituted to protect such systems. Now, diluting it and bringing in a new 
nomenclature into the system may not be a very good idea. So, for the State of 
Meghalaya, it becomes very pertinent to preserve their identities.  
 That the National Commission for Schedule Tribes (NCST) under Article 338A, after 
a detailed hearing issued a directive on 26 th April 2012, and subsequent letters from 
Chairperson NCST to Union Minister of Home Affairs, on 6 th Jan 2014, and 27 th 
August 2014 on the need to incorporate the Agreement of the Khasi States within the 
constitution of India. 
 That letters from Joint Secretary (NE), MHA to the Chief Secretary, Meghalaya 
issued on 25th September, 2014, 14th October, 2014 and 27th November, 2014 is yet to 
be compiled with by the State Government. 
 That the observation of the National Commission for Human Rights (NCHR) (Law 
Division) on 16 th June, 2012 was that the matter of the Khasi States was 'within 
legislative competence of Parliament' and that the Federation of Khasi States was 
advised to approach the government of India for redressal of their grievance. 

51 
 
 That the Khasi Hills autonomous district council passed three similar BILLS (2006, 
2016 and 2018) to provide space for the Traditional Institutions for which the State 
government regretted the Bills stating that the KHADC under the provision of the 
Sixth Schedule did not have the "legislative competence" to legislate such Bills. This 
observation by the State Government is indicative that it is Parliament which has the 
power to legislate for the Khasi States given that the Agreement of the Khasi States 
with the Dominion of India was yet to be concluded between the respective 
signatories. 
 That while Part IX The Panchayats - Article 243 of the Constitution of India defines 
(a) District, (b) Gram Sabha (c) Intermediate Level (d) Panchayat (e) Panchayat area 
(f) population and (g) village including Article 243G which defines powers, authority 
and responsibility of Panchayats; Part IXA The Municipalities Article 243P defines 
Municipalities 243Q Constitution of Municipalities Article 243W defines powers, 
authority and responsibility of Municipalities until Article 243ZG. In the Constitution 
of India there is an exhaustive explanation of the institutions in the rest of India and 
the above was rightly exempted from Meghalaya as Traditional Institutions of self 
government by virtue of Article 243ZC already exist. Part not to apply to certain 
areas referred to in clause (1) and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2) of article 
244. 
 There is a need to empower the Rabhas, who are a marginalized tribe in the State of 
Meghalaya and there is also a need to provide opportunity to this marginalised tribe 
in order to help uplift their economic, social and political status in the society. 
 Changing the nomenclature of ‘Dorbar Shnong ’ to ‘Village Council ’ was 
unacceptable as it is customary and have been used since time immemorial and thus 
should be retained. 
 4.1.4 Mizoram 
 It was proposed that - 
In Article 275 (1) of the Constitution after sub-clause (6) the following sub-clause be 
inserted: 
Provided further that they shall be paid out of the consolidated fund of India as Grant-
in Aid of the State of Mizoram the sums, capital and recurring equivalent to – 
the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years 
immediately preceding of the commencement of this constitution in respects of the 
administration of the scheduled areas specified in (Part-III) of the table appended to 
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule; and 
the cost of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by that state with the 
approval of the Government of India for the purpose of raising level of administration 
of the rest of the areas of that State. 
 Amend Article 275 of the Constitution - 
 In sub-paragraph (1) - 

52 
 
In first proviso after the words “Schedule areas ” the words “and tribal areas ” and 
after the words “areas of that State ”, the sentence “However, allocation of 
consolidated fund of India, for the Territorial Councils under Sixth Schedule shall be 
made by the Government of India separately” shall be inserted. 
In the second proviso for the words “the State of Assam ” the words “the State of 
Assam and Mizoram” shall be substituted. 
In sub-clause (a), of the second proviso after the words “[Part II A] ” the words “and 
Part III” shall be inserted. 
In clause (b), (1A) sub-clause (i), for the words “the State of Assam ” the words “the 
State of Assam and Mizoram” shall be inserted. 
In 1(A) sub-clause (ii), for the words “the State of Assam ” the words “the State of 
Assam and Mizoram” shall be substituted. 
 Under article 275(1) there should have a separate allocation of funds under the tribal 
sub plan.  
 An amendment of Article 275 of the constitution and for speedy enforcement of 
proviso to Article 275(1)  as per recommendation of the 14 th Finance commission so 
as to enable the areas covered under the Sixth Schedule to receive assistance or grants 
for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the people residing in the Autonomous 
Districts of Mizoram or raising the level of administration of such areas on par with 
other areas. 
 In Article 275 of the Constitution- 
In sub-paragraph (1), in the second proviso for the words "the State of Assam" the 
words "the States of Assam and Mizoram" shall be inserted; 
In sub-paragraph (1), in sub-clause (a), of the second proviso after the words "[Part 
I]" the words "[Part I and Part III]" shall be inserted; 
In sub-paragraph (1), in clause (b), [(1A) sub-clause 
For the words "the State of Assam" the words "the States of Assam and Mizoram" 
shall be substituted; 
In sub-paragraph (1), in [(1A) sub-clause (ii), for the words "the State of Assam" the 
words "the States of Assam and Mizoram" shall be substituted." 
 In Article 282 of the Constitution, after the words ‘for any public purpose’ the words 
‘including for specific problems of Autonomous District Council area as referred to 
in clause (2) of Article 244’ be inserted. 
 In sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule, for the words “The 
Governor may, by the public notification ”, the words “The Parliament may, by law ” 
shall be substituted. 
 The first and second provisions to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth 
Schedule shall be omitted. 

53 
 
 After proposed sub paragraph 8 of paragraph 2, a new sub-paragraph be inserted, 
namely; "(9) a department of North East Autonomous Council Affairs shall be 
created under the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India to look after the 
smooth and proper functioning of the Autonomous District Council and Autonomous 
Territorial Council Constituted under Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
 Provided further that a wing shall also be created in the Governor ’s Secretariat of the 
state concerned to look after Autonomous Territorial Council and Autonomous 
District Council in their respective states. 
 After sub paragraph 4 of paragraph 2A, a new proviso shall be inserted:  "Provided 
that any law passed by the Autonomous District Council/Territorial Council 
submitted to the Governor for approval shall be approved or returned to the Council 
for reconsideration within three months. Otherwise, the law shall be deemed to have 
been given assent by the Governor of a state, and it shall come into force. 
 Additional powers be provided to the Councils in Mizoram to make laws. Provided 
that nothing in such laws shall- 
(a) Extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of any citizen in respect 
of his land from the date of commencement of this Act: and 
 
(b) Disallow any citizen from acquiring land either by way of inheritance, allotment, 
settlement or by any other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise eligible for 
such acquisition of land within the Lai ADC. 
 All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far as they relate 
to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the 
Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President. When a 
law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare 
either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom: 
"Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the Lai 
Autonomous District Council, together with the message requesting that the said 
Council will reconsider the law or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, 
will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when the law is so returned, the said Council shall 
consider the law accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of 
such message and, if the law is again passed by the said council with or without 
amendment it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration." 
 Amend Paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule as per the following-  
(i) in clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1), between the words “occupation or use ” and 
the words “or the setting apart ” the words “transfer and acquisition of land and 
property shall be inserted 
(ii) the proviso in clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1), for the words “Government of the 
State”, the words “Autonomous Territorial Council” shall be substituted 

54 
 
(iii) after sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3, the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:- 
“Provided that the power to make laws, as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be stalled at the State level 
for year, while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution and relevant Union and the State Laws.” 
 After paragraph 4, the following paragraph be inserted, namely:- 
4A. Powers and Accountabilities of the Home Ministry over the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils in North-East India: 
 A separate Department in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India to look 
after the smooth and proper functioning of the Autonomous Territorial Council in the 
North-East India 
 An amendment of paragraph 5 of the Sixth Schedule so as to ensure that District 
council Courts are conferred powers under the Criminal Procedure Code and Code of 
Civil Procedure by the provisions of the said paragraph itself and without requiring 
the Governor to confer such powers on them. 
 In sub-Paragraph (1) of Paragraph 6, few new subjects be inserted and in sub-
paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, the following proviso be added- 
"Provided that while the Council is entrusted with such powers conditionally or 
unconditionally the state government shall allocate enough fund for proper 
functioning of the Autonomous District Council/Autonomous Territorial Council." 
 The following sub-paragraph be inserted after sub-paragraph (2) in paragraph 7, 
namely, - 
“(2A) The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall receive salary and non-salary funds 
in a specified time by way or evolving criteria on the basis of population, need, 
backwardness, fixed Council share and area for the developmental activities to run 
the administration”. 
 After paragraph 7, the following paragraph be inserted, namely:- 
“7A. The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall have powers to approve their own 
budget subject to the ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the Government of India and 
State Government to the Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
4.1.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs commented that there is no proposal to amend Paragraph 7 as 
suggested. 
 Amend paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule as per the following–  
(i) In sub-paragraph (4) between the words “this paragraph ” and the words “and 
every such” the words “including clause (zz) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 
3C” shall be inserted. 
(ii) after sub-paragraph (4), the following proviso be added, namely- 

55 
 
“Provided that the power of the Autonomous Territorial Councils to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be respected in its true spirit and draft legislation 
should not be stalled at the State level for year, while ensuring that they are not 
consistent with the provisions of the Constitution and relevant Union and State Laws” 
 Amend paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule as per the following–  
 After sub-paragraph (1), the following proviso be inserted,  namely:- 
“Provided that for the purposes of this Schedule and any Act, Regulations and Rules 
made thereunder, the expression “resident” shall mean a person who has born in 
such autonomous district or either of whose parents was born in the said district” 
 In paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India, the word ‘resident’ 
is not clearly and precisely defined.  Since safeguards are necessary to be provided in 
the Constitution for the native people of the Autonomous Districts, it becomes 
necessary to define who is a resident under paragraph 10 of the said Schedule.  If a 
person who is ordinarily resident of the Autonomous District as defined under the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 is allowed to carry on wholesale or retail 
business in any commodity except under a licence issued on that behalf by the 
District Council or to carry on the business of money-landing or to have a voting right 
in the election to the District Council, it would entirely defeat and destroy the spirit of 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India.  Therefore, it was requested that a 
clear and precise definition of ‘resident of the three Autonomous District in 
Mizoram” may be included in the Bill and be based on 29 th April, 1972, the day when 
the three (3) Autonomous District Councils in Mizoram were constituted. 
 Re-insert paragraph 10 of Sixth Schedule as below- 
"10. 'Power of District Council to make regulations for control of Money-lending and 
trading by Non-Tribals'- 
(1) The District Council of an Autonomous Council may make regulations for 
the regulation and control of Money-lending or trading within the District 
by persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the District. 
(2)(d)  Prescribed that no person who is not a member of Scheduled Tribes resident 
in the District shall carry on wholesale or retail business in any commodity 
except under a license issued in that behalf by the District Council. 
 After paragraph 10, the following paragraph shall be inserted; 
"10A Powers of Autonomous District/Territorial Council in North East India for the 
execution of Centrally Sponsored Schemes” 
(i) The Autonomous District/Territorial Council shall have the powers to execute 
all Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Central Sector Schemes, etc. within their 
respective Councils such as Development Agencies, DRDA, etc. and 
programmes-ICDS, ICDP. 

56 
 
(ii) They shall have the powers to submit Projects/Schemes proposals directly to the 
Central Government of India and shall also have the powers to implement such 
schemes as grant-in-aid. 
(iii) Every Ministry of the Government of India may, assign the Autonomous 
District/Territorial Council as implementing agencies for implementation of 
various developmental schemes within their respective jurisdiction. 
 Insert the following paragraph after paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule–  
“10A. Powers of Autonomous Territorial Councils in North-East India for the 
execution of Centrally Sponsored Schemes”: 
 The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall have the powers to execute all centrally 
sponsored Schemes, Central Sector Schemes, etc., within their respective Councils 
such as Development Agencies-DRDA, etc., and Programmes-ICDS, ICDP, etc. 
 They shall have the powers to submit projects/schemes proposals directly to the 
Government of India and shall also have the powers to implement such schemes 
either on the basis of matching share or complete cent percent sponsored. 
 Every Ministry of the Government of India may assign the Territorial Councils as 
implementing agencies for the implementation of various developmental schemes 
within their respective jurisdictions. 
 In Para 11, the following words may be inserted: “Provided that all laws, rules and 
regulations made under this schedule by a district council or regional council if the 
Governor has no objection to, shall be assented within six months from the date of 
submission.” 
 Paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule be substituted by the following paragraph, 
namely.- 
“The Government of India shall make separate allocation of salary and non-salary 
funds for the autonomous territorial councils while releasing grants- in-aid to the State 
Government and the estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to such 
autonomous district which are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the 
Consolidated Fund of the State shall be first placed before the Autonomous 
Territorial Council for discussion and then after such discussion be shown separately 
in the annual financial statement of the State to be laid before the Legislature of the 
State under Article 202”. 
 Amend paragraph 14 as per the following-  
In sub-paragraph (1), after the word “state” the words “including matters specified in 
clause (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of this schedule, ” shall 
be omitted. 
 In paragraph 20BB, after the words “functions under” the words “sub-paragraph (2) 
and (3) of paragraph 1, ” and after the words “Council of Ministers, and the words “if 
he thinks necessary,” be omitted. 

57 
 
 It has been stated in the representation that injustice was done to the Chakmas of 
Mizoram for not including the majority of the Chakma inhabited areas of Mizoram 
within the Chakma Autonomous District Council when it was granted in 1972 and 
this has divided a community despite living in a contiguous belt with different 
privileges and opportunities. Therefore, the majority of the Chakmas of Mizoram 
have been deprived of the fruits of autonomy under the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution of India and therefore, it was requested to include  all the Chakma 
villages (which are contiguous) within the Chakma Autonomous District Council by 
expanding its area. 
 The Scheduled Tribe list of the state of Mizoram under the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) Order 1950 under Article 342(2); 
It is seen that in; 
S/No.2. Dimasa (Kachari), 
S/No.3. Garo, 
S/No.4. Hajong, 
S/No.6. Khasi and Jaintia (including Khasi, Synteng or Pnar, War Bhoi or 
Lyngngam), 
S/No.11. Mikir, 
S/No.12. Any Naga Tribes and 
S/No.14. Synteng 
under Part XVII-Mizoram Scheduled Tribe list, who are not indigenous tribes to the 
state of Mizoram, has to be removed and deleted from the Scheduled Tribe list of 
Mizoram as they have their own Land in the state of Assam and Meghalaya. 
Moreover, S/No.8. Lakher and S/No.13. Pawi has to be substituted as Lakher into 
Mara and Pawi into Lai.  
 
4.1.6 Tripura 
 The Committee was suggested that- 
Article 275 (1) of the Constitution be amended so as to provide the Autonomous 
Territorial/State Councils to prepare schemes of development on their own in order to 
promote the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the Tribal Areas (Sixth Schedule 
areas) specified in the Part I, II-A of the table appended to paragraph- 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule or to raise the level of administration of the said schedule areas to that of 
the administration of that State. 
 Implement Article 275 and 280 of the Constitution of India for economic upliftment 
of the indigenous People of Tripura. 
 Direct funding is a must for empowerment of the inhabitant of 
Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council  (TTAADC)  and accordingly the constitution of India 
be amended. 

58 
 
 Amend Paragraph 1 as per the following –  
In sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule, for the words “The 
Governor may, by the public notification ”, the words “The Parliament may, by law ” 
be substituted. 
 The first and second provisions to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth 
Schedule be omitted. 
 After proviso to sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, the 
following proviso be inserted, namely:- 
“1A. There shall be a Legislative Assembly for Tripura Tribal Autonomous State 
Council. 
 Provided further that in respect of Autonomous District Council in Tripura – 
The members of the elected members in the Council shall consist of not more than 
fifty members, of whom six members including at least three tribal women members 
shall be nominated by the Chief Executive Member and three non-tribal members 
shall be nominated by the Governor. 
The existing elected three non-tribal seats shall be converted to elected tribal seats. 
 After paragraph (2) of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraph be inserted to the 
State of Tripura, namely:- 
No acts in respect of a “reserve forest” means any area which is reserved forest under 
the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891 or under any other law for the time being in force 
in the area in question shall not be applicable in any area of Tripura Tribal 
Autonomous State Council. 
 After proviso to sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, the 
following proviso be inserted, namely:- 
“1A. There shall be a Legislative Assembly for Tipraland Autonomous Territorial 
Council. 
 Provided further that in respect of the Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council – 
The numbers of the elected member in the Council shall consist of not more than fifty 
members of whom at least two women members shall be nominated by the Chief 
Executive members of whom at least two members shall be nominated by the 
Governor from the non-representative from the non-representative tribe. 
The existing elected three non-tribal members shall be converted to elected tribal 
seats. 
 Additional Powers may be provided to the Autonomous Councils and thus the 
following requests are made to the Committee- 
The 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council  (TTAADC) should be 
brought under the purview of Paragraph 3A to the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution 

59 
 
of India to avail additional powers like Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) 
and North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NCHAC). 
 After paragraph 3B of the Sixth Schedule, the following may be inserted, namely- 
“Provided additional powers of the Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council to 
make laws; 
(1) As vested additional powers of Bodoland Territorial Council in Paragraph 3B :-  
(i) to (xl) 
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far they relate 
to matter specific in list III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the 
Governor who shall reserve for the consideration of the President.” 
 The existing additional powers of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council under paragraph 3A of the Sixth Schedule of 
the Constitution of India as provided in sub-paragraph 3A (1) (a) to (o) to makes laws 
and the proposed amendment in paragraph 3A of sub-paragraph (1) (i) (ii) (iii) and 
(p) to (zs) should be provided to the “Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council”. 
 The existing additional power of the Bodoland Territorial Council under paragraph 
3B of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India as provided in sub-paragraph 
3A (1), (2) & (3) should also be provided to the “Tripura Autonomous Territorial 
Council” by necessary amendment. 
 Additional powers of the present North Cachar Hills Autonomous Territorial Council 
and Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council under para 3A of the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution to make laws should be extended to our Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council including education up to College Level. 
 In line with the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council, the Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council should have the 
power to make laws as inserted in the paragraph 3A of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution. 
 Amend Paragraph 3 as per the following:- 
In clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, between the 
words “occupation or use ” and the words “or the setting apart ”, the words “transfer 
and acquisition of land and property” shall be inserted. 
 In proviso to clause (a) of sub-paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, for the words “the 
Government of the State ”, the words “Autonomous State Council ” shall be 
substituted. 
 After sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, the following proviso 
shall be added, namely: 
“provided that the power to make laws, as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be stalled at the State level 

60 
 
for year, while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution and relevant Union and State laws.” 
 After paragraph 3B of the Sixth Schedule, the following be inserted in its application 
to the Autonomous Council of Tripura, namely:- 
“Provided additional powers of the Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council to make 
laws: 
As vested additional powers of North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council in paragraph 3A in sub-paragraph 1 clause : (a), (b), 
(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n) and (o) and additional powers of 
Bodoland Territorial Council in paragraph 1 clause:- (i) to (xl). 
 All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far they relate to 
matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the 
Governor who shall reserve it for the consideration of the President. 
 When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President declare 
either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assents therefrom: 
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the Tripura 
Tribal Autonomous State Council with the message requesting that the said Council 
will reconsider the law or any specified provisions thereof and, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his 
message and, when the law is so returned, the said Council shall consider the law 
accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipts of such message 
and, if the law is again passed by the said council with or without amendment it shall 
be presented again to the President for his consideration.” 
 The following may be inserted – 
In Clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph (3) of the Sixth Schedule, between 
the words, “occupation or use ” and the words “or the setting apart ”, the words 
“transfer and acquisition of land and property” shall be inserted. 
 There are no judicial courts under the existing Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous 
District Council (TTAADC) for the trial of cases and therefore, proposed that judicial 
courts should be constituted for trial of suits and petty cases as per the customary 
laws. 
 Amend Paragraph 5 as per the following – 
“5. The Autonomous Territorial Council or courts constituted by such Autonomous 
Territorial Council or any officer of such council appointed in that behalf by the 
Governor shall be conferred powers to try the suits or cases arising out of any law in 
force in any autonomous district being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, 
or to try offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment for a 
term of not less than five years under the Indian Penal Code or under any other law 
for the time being applicable to such district in accordance with the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as the case may 
be.” 

61 
 
 After sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-
paragraph be inserted, namely:- 
1A. Consolidated Fund of the Tripura Tribal Autonomous Council: 
As the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in 
this behalf, all revenues received in the Councils by the Government of India or 
Administrator of the Council in relation to any matter with respect to which the 
Legislative Assembly of the Council has the power to make laws, and all grants made 
and loan advances to the Council from the Consolidated Fund of India and all money 
received by the Council in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to 
be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the Council. 
No money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Council shall be appropriated except 
in accordance with, and for the purposes and in the matter provided, in this Act. 
The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Council, the payment of money into 
such fund, the withdrawal of money therefrom and all other matters connected with 
or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Administrator 
with the approval of the President.” 
 After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-
paragraph be inserted, namely:- 
“2A. The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall receive salary and non-salary funds 
in a specified time by way of evolving a criteria on the basis of population and area 
for the developmental activities and to run the administration. Single window system 
for the release of funds to the Councils shall be established.” 
 After paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraph be inserted, 
namely:- 
“7A. The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall have powers to approve their own 
budget subject to the ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the Government of India and 
State Government to the Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
 After sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-
paragraph shall be inserted, namely : 
“1A Consolidated fund of the Tipra land Autonomous Territorial Council: 
As the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in 
this behalf, all revenues received in the Territorial Councils by the Government of 
India and Tripura in relation to any matter with respect to which the Legislative 
Assembly to the Council has power to make laws, and all grants made and all loans 
advance to the Council from the Consolidated funds of India and all money received 
by the Council in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled 
“the Consolidated Fund of the Council”.  
No money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Council shall be appropriated except 
in accordance with, and for the purpose and in the matter provided, in the Act. 

62 
 
The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Council, the payment of the money there 
from and all other matters shall be regulated by the rules made by Council with the 
approval of Governor. 
 After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-
paragraph be inserted, namely; 
(2A) “The council shall received salary and non-salary funds in a specific time by 
way of evolving criteria on the basis of population and area of land for the 
development and opening single window  system for realizing funds. 
(3e) At the end of the provisos of paragraph 7 a new paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely; 
“The Territorial Council shall have powers to approve their own budget subject to the 
ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the Govt. of India and State to the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils” 
 Insert the following paragraph after paragraph 7: 
7A.     The Autonomous Territorial Council shall approve powers to approve their 
own budget subject to the ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the Government of India 
and the State Government to the Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
 After sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule, the following proviso 
be added, namely:- 
“Provided that the power to make laws, as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be stalled at the State level 
for year, while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution and relevant Union and State laws.” 
 After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule, the following proviso 
shall be added, namely:- 
2A. For the purpose of this schedule and any acts, regulations and rules made 
thereunder, the expression “resident” shall mean a person who was born in such an 
autonomous district or either of whose parents was born in the said district. It shall 
not include a person who is ordinarily residing in such an autonomous district. 
 Any bill(s), resolution(s) or decision(s)/rule(s)/regulation(s) which is/are brought, 
taken and /or passed by the legislative assembly of TTAADDC shall be bound to give 
assent by the Governor within reasonable time of 6 months whichever may be placed 
before him for making it into effect and in paragraph 11, for the words, "published 
forthwith in the official gazette of the State and shall on such publication have the 
force of Law",
 the word, "published forthwith in the official gazette of the Union and 
shall on such publication have the force of law" be substituted. 
 For paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraph be substituted, 
namely:- 
“13.  The Government of India shall make separate allocation of salary and non-
salary funds for the Autonomous Territorial Councils and the estimate receipts and 

63 
 
expenditure pertaining to such autonomous district which are to be credited to, or is to 
be made from, the Consolidated Fund of India shall be first placed before the 
Autonomous Territorial Council for discussion and then after such discussion be 
shown separately in the annual financial statement of India to be laid before the 
Parliament under Article 202” 
“14A. The Governor shall make quarterly, or whenever so required by the President, 
a report to the President regarding the administration of the Tribal areas by the 
District Councils in the State and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the 
giving of directions to the State as to the administration of such areas”. 
 The provision mentioned in paragraph 20BB, caption as Exercise of discretionary 
power by the Governor in the discharge of his functions relating to the sub-paragraph 
(3) of paragraph 3 in the beginning of the line 3 contradicts with the provisions so 
envisaged in paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (3) caption as Powers of the District 
Councils and Regional Councils to make laws. 
Therefore, a separate proviso in the amendment for not applying it to Tripura so 
proposed as Tipraland Territorial Council the particular provision as mentioned in 
Paragraph 20BB relating to Paragraph 3(3) as this provision supersedes the powers so 
provided in paragraph 3(3) in  caption Powers of the District councils and Regional 
Councils to make laws. 
 Three-tier elected bodies- Village Council in the grass root level, Block Council in 
the Block level and District Council in the District level were demanded. 
 Elections to 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) should be 
conducted by the Election Commission of India (ECI). 
 All the government establishment /institution falling within the TTAADC should be 
brought under the administrative control of TTAADC. 
 To strengthen the council and for better administrative management, a 3 tier system 
in 3 levels- Village Level, Sub-zonal Level and Zonal Level was proposed. 
 All powers should be entrusted amongst the Village Committee, Sub-Zonal 
Committee and Zonal Committee, in the line of Panchayati Raj Institution. 
 Zonal Development Officer should be renamed Zonal Magistrate, the powers of 
Zonal Magistrate under TTAADC/Territorial Council should be the same as that of 
the District Magistrate of the state. 
 TTAADC should be empowered to have its own police force recruited by the council. 
 Non-Tribal infiltration must be stopped by State/Central Govt. The area should not be 
used for settlement of the non-tribal people. 
 TTAADC should be empowered to have its own recruitment policy. 
 TTAADC should be allowed to establish its own service Selection board. 
 TTAADC should be empowered to establish a Public Service Commission. 

64 
 
 100% of employment should be reserved for the tribals. 
 A separate budget is required to establish for unemployed youths for jobs as well as 
self-sustainable trade, small industries, farming etc. 
 Since the majority of the population in the area is STs, for industrial and economic 
development, a consultation of a specialized body of the country must be held and 
they must be associated as a partner with TTAADC. They recommended the Dalit 
Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DICCI) who have a proven track record 
in economic development for the ST population in the country. 
 Land transfer record, allotment, transfer, the settlement should be brought under the 
purview of TTAADC. 
 Areas where tribal population is in majority in non ADC area should be brought 
under the TTAADC and all such areas should be included within the council 
jurisdiction. 
 No further exclusion of TTAADC land should be allowed for any reason and must be 
stopped forth with.  
 Reserve Forest land, proposed forest land and other forest area which are falling 
under TTAADC 
 TTAADC should be empowered to de-reserved the reserve forest land under ADC to 
carry out the developmental works under ADC as and wherever required in the 
interest of tribal people and the general public at large. 
 Under the Forest Right Act 2006, TTAADC should be empowered to allot forest land 
to tribals residing in the forest area. 
 The TTAADC should be empowered to establish separate Secondary Education 
Boards, colleges and universities in ADC areas. 
 The TTAADC should be empowered to establish and run school education upto 
higher secondary level and college level. 
 The TTAADC should be empowered to establish technical institutes, medical 
colleges nursing institutes etc under its jurisdiction. 
 TTAADC should be empowered with to establish full-fledged separate health 
directorate. All health institutions under TTAADC should be brought under the 
control of the health directorate of the council. 
 TTAADC be empowered to establish tertiary level care hospitals and its recurring 
costs to be borne by Central Government. 
 Historical, cultural, religious, archaeological monuments and other cultural religious 
pilgrims places should be brought under the control of TTAADC. 

65 
 
 A separate budget for the Tipra State territorial council should be earmarked by 
Central Government, like that of the state. 
 While preparing the Budget, it should be prepared proportionate to the area of 
TTAADC to state and not in terms of population. 
 50% of the SGST collected must be shared with the Territorial Council. 
 Taxes and revenue collected from natural resources which are located in TTAADC 
areas should be included in TTAADC. 
 For better development and prosperity of the area under TTAADC, a Planning 
Commission should be formed as per the structure laid by Niti Ayog. 
 Recommendation of the tax relaxation and addition on forest based natural products 
like bamboo etc must be given utmost importance to develop and promote farming of 
such products. 
 Multiple taxation on forest produces should be stopped; single taxation system should 
be implemented in all forest produces. 
 TTAADC should be funded by the Central Government to establish new township at 
head quarter and in all five zonal head offices.   
 Re-demarcate the area of T.T.A.A.D.C., to empower for Land & Revenue purpose 
with full power to the said Territorial council and Assam forest regulation 1891and to 
empower Judiciary and Home affairs. 
 Article 244A (1) and (2) may be amended to include Tripura State within it's purview 
and the existing TTAADC may be upgraded to Autonomous State to provide 
adequate safeguard to the indigenous Tripuri peoples who are already reduced to 
minority (only 31%) in their own ancestral State.  
 Article 275(1) and (2) may be accordingly amended to ensure the enhanced flow of 
funds for the development of the Autonomous Council/State areas in Tripura also.  
 Law and order and Land Revenue/land transfer power may be transferred to 
TTAADC.  
 All forest areas management power including forest areas under Central and State 
reservation may be transferred to TTAADC.  
 Presently, around 2.5 lakhs non-tribal peoples are living within TTAADC areas and 
their number is increasing fast. There is apprehension and concern among the 
indigenous Tripuri peoples that if this trend continues, then Tripuri people will be 
reduced to a minority even within TTAADC areas in the near future. Therefore, 
further settlement of non-tribal peoples and khasaland/forest land transfer to non-
tribal peoples should be prohibited by law that may be included in the Constitution 
(One Hundred and twenty-fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019.  

66 
 
 Plan funds may be determined for TTAADC by Govt. of India (Niti Ayug) following 
the twin norms of population and area criteria to ensure adequate flow of plan funds 
for TTAADC areas at the level of rest of the State.  
 At present, the legislative power of TTAADC is subject to the approval of the 
Governor of the concerned State (Cabinet approval) as per the Sixth Schedule 
provision. Many legislative proposals are still pending for a long time without 
approval of the State Cabinet. Therefore, approval of any legislative proposals (Bill) 
passed by the Autonomous Council be vested with the Governor exclusively without 
involving the Cabinet of the concerned State as the special power of the Governor in 
respect of TTAADC.  
 A separate judicial system based on the customary law of the Tripuri people may be 
introduced in TTAADC to settle all disputes occurring among the indigenous Tripuri 
peoples.  
 It was submitted that the parliament may by law provide the consolidated fund of 
India in each year as grant- in-aid of revenues of TTAADC. The fund as needs by the 
ADC is to be determined and fixed by the parliament in its financial statement of each 
year. This is for speedy Development of the ADC areas the backwardness of the 
backward area of the country so as to raise the level of administration of the 
scheduled areas therein to that of the administration of the ADC. 
 It was proposed to include that the TTAADC shall have the power to approve their 
own annual budget subject to the ceilings of funds sanctioned by the Government of 
India and State Government to the TTAADC.  
 It is apparent that the Acts, Regulation, and Rule made in the TTAADC have 
remained without assent of the Governor of Tripura and thereby no any Gazette 
notification could publish years after years in respect of the subject specified in 
paragraph 3(1) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) establishment of Town Committee (F) (g)(h)(i)(j) of 
the constitution. 
 All Central government flagship programmes should also be given to TTAADC 
directly under a clear formula. 
 All Govt. Establishments/institution falling within the TTAADC area should be 
brought under the Administrative control of the TTAADC. 
 The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of all elections to the District Councils shall be vested either in the 
Election Commission or the Regional Commissioner appointed under Article 324(4) 
of the Constitution of India. 
 The Autonomous Territorial/State Councils may, by law, make provision with respect 
to all matters relating to, or in connection with elections to the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils, Traditional Municipal Councils, Traditional Town Committee or 
Councils, Traditional Village Councils. 

67 
 
 All Centrally sponsored schemes, Central Sector Schemes, NEC Schemes, External 
Aided Schemes shall be implemented by the Autonomous Territorial/State Councils 
in their respective areas and the development agencies such as DRDA etc. shall be 
merged with the Councils and programmes such as ICDS, ICDP etc. shall be handed 
over to such councils. 
 A separate wing exclusively to look after the welfare of Autonomous Territorial 
Councils shall be created in the North-East Division of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and such newly created wing shall be under the charge of Additional or Special 
Secretary to handle the affairs of Autonomous Territorial Councils in the North-East 
and a separate Development Commissioner may be designated to act as an 
intermediary between the Government of India and the Councils. 
 It has further been requested in the representation to include KOKBOROK in Roman 
Scripts in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
 The Bill be amended in order to provide an ample scope and quality educations in 
total areas of education including medical & technical, research, etc., upto the 
University level in the best interest of the students community of the indigenous 
populations of the scheduled areas as a whole and there should not be 100 point roster 
in recruitment policy in the scheduled areas. Further, Land & Revenue control should 
be given to the ADC-authority under its areas. 
 
Comments of the Ministry 
4.1.7 The Ministry on all the suggestions has commented that they are outside the scope of the Bill and 
there is no proposal for effecting said suggestions or amendments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1.8 The suggestions/ proposed amendments in the representations received by the  Committee 
though, outside the scope of “The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 
2019” but concern the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India and Tribes under that S chedule. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may in consultation with con cerned 
State Governments consider those suggestions and 
may act appropriately upon them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Clause 2  
 
The Committee feels that direct funding of ADCs by the centre will not only b e against the existing 
Constitutional scheme but also would unnecessarily affect the relations of ADCs vis-à-vis state 
governments adversely.  The very purpose of amending article 280 of Constitution is to m ake an 
institutional provision for augmenting the resources of ADCs through State Finance Commission.   
The said provision is on the lines of article 243-I and 243Y meant for Panchayats and Munici palities 
and 73rd and 74th Constitution Amendment Acts. 
(Para 3.1.11)  
 
The Committee therefore agrees to the proposed amendment to article 280 and does not suggest any 
amendment. 
(Para  3.1.12)  
 
Clause 3(a)(i) 
Assam 
Paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution provides for not less than thirty membe rs for 
each of the autonomous District Councils with four members to be nominated by Gove rnor of 
concerned State. There are 10 ADCs 3 each in Assam, Meghalaya and Mizoram and one in Tripura.   
In the present Amendment Bill, membership of 9 Councils has been changed.  Membership of 
Bodoland Territorial Council has already been changed previously.  The Committee thus feels that 
the existing para 2(1) of the Schedule has become redundant.  The Committee feels that since 
membership of all the 10 ADCs has been changed,  therefore, instead of providing proviso to 
paragraph 2(1) of the  Sixth Schedule provisions of membership made for each AD C, may be 
incorporated in paragraph 2(1) of the Sixth Schedule.  
(Para 3.2.23) 
 
In para 20 of the Schedule in the Table, the 10 Autonomous District Councils have been li sted in the 
following order:- 
4. North Cachar Hills District Council 
5. The Karbi and Anglong District Council 
6. The Bodoland territorial Area District Council 
(Para 3.2.24) 
 
Similarly, in para 2 of the Table in respect of Meghalaya, the order of Autonomous District 
Councils is as under:- 
4. Khasi Hills District 
5. Jaintia Hills District 
6. Garo Hills District 
(Para  3.2.25) 

69 
 
 
The Committee finds that the said order has been changed in the proposed Amendment Bill as 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Councils has been placed first in the proviso followed b y 
Dima Hasao Autonomous Councils. Whereas the Dima Hasao is first in the Table.   Similarly, Garo 
Hills Autonomous Council has been cited first followed by Khasi and Jaintia while in the T able they 
are ordered Khasi Hills followed by Jaintia Hills and Garo Hills.  The Committee finds that no 
reason has been stated for changing the said order.  Therefore, Committee f eels that the order of 
these Autonomous Councils in the proviso after, sub para 1 and para 2 may be in the same  order as 
in the Table of the Sixth Schedule. 
(Para 3.2.26) 
 
The Ministry has stated that increase in the membership of different Councils has b een as per the 
discussion held with various State Governments.  Therefore, there is no logic or ration ale like the 
population, area etc. vis-a-vis the number of membership of these Councils. The Committee finds it 
rather arbitrary.  Since there is no logic followed in determining the membership of these 
Autonomous Councils as a result there are so many suggestions for changing the membership of 
these Councils.  In the absence of rational criteria there will always be some disputes or  demand for 
changing the membership of these councils.  Therefore, the Committee reco mmends that 
membership of these Councils should be based on some rational criteria instead o f deciding on the 
basis of an agreement/demand to obviate any subsequent demand to change the same. 
 
(Para 3.2.27) 
 
Meghalaya 
In the Bill it is proposed to change the membership of  Garo Hills ADC to 42, Kh asi Hill ADC to 40 
and Jaintia Hills ADC to 34 with nomination of 6,4 and 4 respectively by Governor with at least 2  
women each. The Committee presumes that these number of membership have been proposed in 
the Bill on the basis of agreement with the State Government of Meghalaya.  But no w, Government 
of Meghalaya through it interaction with the Committee informed that they want to change these 
numbers.  It has been suggested that for Garo Hills strength of ADC should be at 40 inste ad of 42 
and for Khasi Hill at 40 same as proposed in the Bill but without any nomination of u nrepresented 
tribes.  The State Government of Meghalaya has suggested that there should not be any n omination 
of unrepresented tribes.  The Committee in this regard feels that inclusive partic ipation of all the 
tribes is not only desirable but is a sine quo non in a democratic setup.  Therefor e, Committee 
recommends that there should be representation of unrepresented tribes in the ADCs.  It may be 
with a rider that only those tribes will be nominated in the nomination category which could not get 
elected in the election.  Moreover, these nominations may be on the basis of some reasonable criteria 
and on rational basis, to obviate any arbitrariness.  Regarding replacing the word of ‘unrepresented 
tribes’ with ‘unrepresented indigenous tribes ’, the Committee feels once a rationale criterion is 
fixed for nominating unrepresented tribes, the said suggestion will be taken care of.  
(Para 3.2.28) 
 
 

70 
 
Mizoram 
Suggestion for increasing the strength of Lai, Chakma and Mara ADCs has been received by the 
Committee.  The Committee feels that in case of Mizoram too if a rationale criterion is for mulated 
for fixing the strength of ADCs, then strength of there ADCs could also be fixed accordingly. 
(Para 3.2.29) 
 
Tripura 
Besides increasing the strength of Tripura ADC, suggestion has also been received for  changing its 
name as Tipraland.  The Committee feels that changing the name of Tripura AD C to Tipraland 
may be considered by the MHA. As regards, increasing the strength of membership of Tripura 
ADC from 30 as proposed in the Bill to 50 to which even the Ministry seems to be agre eable, the 
Committee is of the view that some criteria should be fixed failing which the demand for  increasing 
or decreasing the Membership will continue to arise.  Once the criterion is fixed, it can be explained 
to those demanding the change in membership.  
(Para 3.2.30) 
 
 
Clause 3 (a) (ii) 
 
The Committee takes notes of the suggestion of the State Government of Tripura f or renaming the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) as "Tipra Territorial Council" for 
the reason that the territorial jurisdiction of TTAADC extends over to all the 8(eight) 
administrative/revenue Districts. The Ministry of Home Affairs seems to be agreeable to the 
suggestion but needs to discuss with State Government.  The Committee, as observed rather, 
recommends that renaming of TTAADC as “Tipra Territorial Council ” may be considered by the 
Ministry in consultation with State Government of Tripura. 
(Para 3.3.7) 
 
 
Clause 3 (a) (iii) 
 
The Committee notes that the provision of disqualification was not there in the S ixth schedule and 
insertion of this provision will bring ADCs at par with the Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Stat e 
governments are in agreement to the amendment.  As regards, the suggestion for insertion  of the 
word “qualifications” in sub para (d) of para 6 of the Sixth Schedule, the Committee recommends 
that it may be considered by the MHA because there might be some qualification for the Territorial 
Members. 
(Para 3.4.7) 
 
Clause 3 (a) (iv) 
 
The Committee notes that this provision is being inserted to ensure that an electe d member of the 
ADC does not simultaneously become Member of Parliament or a State Legislature an d is in 
consonance with the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 (M/o Law Notifi cation 

71 
 
No. 46/50-C dated 26.09.1950) formulated under Article 101 and 190 of Constitution of India.  The 
Committee observes that this proviso shall have no effect on the term of the Council s existing on or 
before the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fif th Amendment) Act, 
2019, The Committee is thus in agreement to the proposed amendment. 
(Para 3.5.8) 
 
 
Clause 3 (a) (v) 
 
An exemption through a proviso has been provided to the State of Meghalaya for appl ication of this 
provision.  The relaxation has been granted in consultation with the State Government of 
Meghalaya. The State Government of Meghalaya has suggested that existing practice of Village 
Dorbar/Councils which recurs are not elected by adult suffrage. The Committee fe els that this goes 
against the very basic norms of democratic principles. Customs/practices however, sacrosanct they  
may be, should not override the democratic principles.  The Committee, ther efore, recommends 
that Ministry prescribe a time limit for lifting this relaxation/operation of this exemption to  
Meghalaya. Since it is a constitutional amendment Bill, providing exemption to a state without an y 
reasonable cause or any time limit may not be tenable. 
(Para 3.6.11) 
 
Clause 3 (b) 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that the proposed amendments have been made to bring in 
elements of Panchayati Raj Institution in the Sixth Schedule areas.  This will strengthen the 
democracy at the grass root level, i.e. village level.  The Committee feels that providing any 
exception to the said provisions as has been done in the case of Meghalaya goes against the eth os of 
democracy particularly at the grass root level. Demand for this exception may also arise from other 
States too.  Therefore, the very purpose of bringing this amendment may get d efeated if relaxation 
is given to any State. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that for strengthening democracy at 
the grass root level, this provision should be applicable to all States without any exception.  Though, 
it is good to make laws on the basis of consultation with the concerned State Governments.  But 
providing democratic rights without exception to people particularly at village level is in the spirit 
of our Constitution and democratic values. The exception to Meghalaya may be for a 
transitional/specified period till the state is ready for the said provision, but providing it for  an 
indefinite time, needs to be reconsidered.   
(Para 3.7.17) 
Clause 3 (c) 
  
The Ministry of Home Affairs has averred that this Amendment has been incorporated to 
implement the Memorandum of Settlements (MOSs) with United People ’s Democratic Solidarity 
(UPDS) and Dima Halam Daogah (DHD).  The Committee presumes that MOSs have the 
concurrence of State Governments of Assam.  But now the State Government of Assam has 
expressed some reservations about inter-alia ‘land’ transferred to Autonomous Councils of Dima 
Hasao and Karbi Anglong Districts Autonomous Councils, before the Committee.   Moreover , some 
other stake holders like Autonomous Councils and Members of Parliament from the State also have 
a contrarian view than the State Government on the subject.  
(Para 3.8.16) 

72 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation w ith State 
Government of Assam, elected representatives like MPs and concerned MLAs an d Autonomous 
Councils find a way to build a broad consensus on the provision to obviate any problem that may 
arise between the stake holders and State Government while implementing this provision. 
(Para 3.8.17) 
 
Secondly, the Committee observes that subjects on which Dima Hasao District and Karbi Anglong 
District Autonomous Councils have power to make laws have been arranged in alphabetic al orders, 
i.e. A-Z.  This arrangement gives indication that subjects arranged after Z i.e. Za are part of the 
subject cited at Z.  But the fact is that subjects cited after Z are separate and  independent subjects 
without any relation with the subject at serial at Z.  Moreover, the subjects have not bee n arranged 
in alphabetical order for easy identification. The Ministry of Law and Justice was of the view that 
this is as par the existing practice of number in different sub-clauses. 
(Para 3.8.18) 
 
The Committee, however, feels that since list of subjects is more that 26 i.e. total alphabets, 
therefore, these subjects, if possible, may be serialized in numerals i.e. 1, 2, 3 -----N.  The subjects 
also needs to be arranged in alphabetical orders for easy identification/location. 
(Para 3.8.19) 
 
The Committee observes that though State Governments of Meghalaya and Mizoram are in 
agreement to this amendment and State Government of Tripura and some stake hold ers have also 
desired that subjects transferred to Dima Hasao District Autonomous Councils and Karbi Anglong 
District Autonomous Councils may be transferred to Tripura District Autonomous Council too.  
The Committee feels that Ministry of Home Affairs should discuss this with State Gove rnment of 
Tripura to find the desirability and viability of transferring these subjects to Autonomous Counc ils 
of Tripura too.  
(Para 3.8.20) 
 
  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs must hold 
discussion with the concerned State Governments for devolution of additional power s to the 
Chakma, Mara and Lai District Councils to empower them to make laws.  
(Para 3.8.21) 
 
 
Clause 3 (d) 
 
 The Committee notes that the proposed changes in paragraph 6(3) is enabling 
provision/clause where Governor may, by rules, entrust District Councils with such powe rs and 
authority, as may be necessary, to enable them to function as institutions of self governance an d 
such rules may contain the provisions for further devolution of such powers and re sponsibilities 

73 
 
upon the Village Councils and Municipal Councils as per Eleventh and Twelfth Schedu les of the 
Constitution.   
(Para 3.9.8) 
 
 
The Committee notes that though it is an enabling provision to transfer subjects to Vill age and 
Municipal Councils but feels that once the provision is made in the Constitution there will always be 
pressure on State Governments to transfer these subjects.   
(Para 3.9.9) 
 
 
The issue of Meghalaya is quite unique as except Municipal limit of Meghalaya all other parts of the 
State are under Sixth Schedule.  But the Committee finds it dichotomous that other States after 
having transferred subjects to Village and Municipal Councils under Eleventh and T welfth 
Schedules respectively still have subjects under their jurisdiction but if the same subje cts are 
transferred to Village and Municipal Councils of Meghalaya the State Government is left w ith very 
few subjects under its jurisdiction.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Ho me Affairs 
needs to hold discussion with the State Government of Meghalaya to impress upon it that when non 
Sixth Schedule State Governments are having subjects under their jurisdiction after transferring 
subjects under Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules to Village and Municipal Councils, how the 
Meghalaya Government stands on a different footing.  For transfer of more subjects to Autonomous 
Councils, the Ministry may discuss with the concerned State Governments and arrive at a consensus 
to ensure smooth implementation of the proposed amendment.  
(Para 3.9.10) 
 
 
The Committee observes that subjects enumerated in Eleventh & Twelfth Schedu le to the 
Constitution have been reproduced in clause 6(3)(a)(ii) of the Sixth Schedule. These subjects have 
been stated in a paragraph in the proposed amendment instead of in a ser ial order as has been done 
in Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution. 
(Para 3.9.11) 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of reproducing the subjec ts enumerated in the 
Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules, they may be linked to those Schedules in the proposed amendment.  
Whenever any amendment in those Schedules i.e. Eleventh and Twelfth, takes place, it will 
automatically get updated for these subjects of Sixth Schedule that will obviate the exe rcise of 
amending this Schedule again. 
(Para 3.9.12) 
 
The Committee further recommends that subjects under clause 6(3)(A) (ii) may b e entrusted to 
Village Councils for implementation of scheme for economic development and social  justice of 
India. Similarly, subjects under clause 6(3) (b) (ii) may be entrusted to Municipal Council s for the 
performance of functions in the implementation of schemes.     
(Para 3.9.13) 

74 
 
Clause 3 (e) 
 
The Committee feels that very purpose of bringing the proposed amendment is to bring Sixth 
Schedule States ADCs at par with local bodies of the rest of the country. There may be some  
discrepancies in the Sixth Schedule areas  like existing provisions in Meghalaya which has its own 
State Finance Commission vis-à-vis rest of the Sixth Schedule States who do not have such State 
Finance Commissions.  But, the Committee finds nothing objectionable in the provision of  the 
proposed Bill which provides for appointment of a State Finance Commission to rec ommend 
devolution of resources between State and local bodies. It would strengthen the democrac y a t 
grassroot level. 
(Para 3.10.10) 
  
 
The Committee is aware of the shortage of funds in ADCs which is hampering the p rocess of 
development in the region. The Committee strongly feels that State Finance Commission sh ould 
earmark funds for ADCs while distributing financial resources between the S tate and the District 
Councils. Besides, States should also provide budgetary allocation and timely release of fund s to the 
ADCs for the implementation of socio-economic developmental plans.  
(Para 3.10.11) 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the term District Councils may be replaced with 
‘District/Territorial Councils’ in lines 25 and 29 of Page 6 of this amendment Bill. 
(Para 3.10.12) 
 
 
Clause 3(f) 
 
The Committee notes assessment of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the term Territorial  Council 
is used when the jurisdiction of the District Council extends to more than one Revenue Distr ict in 
the State. The Committee agrees to the views of the Ministry.  However, change in the n ame of 
Tripura Autonomous Council as Tipraland Territorial Council may be considered. 
(Para 3.11.7) 
 
Clause 3(g) 
 
The Committee agrees to the proposed amendment. 
(Para 3.12.3) 
 
General Recommendation 
 
The Committee sincerely feels that while finalizing this legislation, there had been inte nsive 
discussion with concerned State governments. Agreements signed with the Autonomous 
District/Territorial Councils of the State of Assam and Meghalaya needs to be honored. Review ing 
them may cause erosion of confidence between centre and these states. 
(Para 3.12.4)  
 

75 
 
The Committee also recommends that provision for adequate representation of w omen in 
Autonomous District/Territorial Councils needs to be made/continued. The Committee consider s 
that the amendment proposed through the Bill with regard to issues like name of the Autonomous 
District/Territorial Councils; number of representatives therein; and powers devolved to the m are 
very sensitive and therefore the Government should keep the sentiment of the citizen s of the 
affected States in mind while taking any decision. 
(Para 3.12.5) 
 
 
Issues Other Than Provisions in the Bill 
 
 The suggestions/ proposed amendments in the representations received by the Co mmittee 
though, outside the scope of “The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 
2019” but concern the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India and Tribes under that Sche dule. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may in consultation with con cerned 
State Governments consider those suggestions and may act appropriately upon them. 
(Para 4.1.8) 

76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

77 
 
I 
 
FIRST MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 30th September, 2019 in Room No.074, 
PLB, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.      Shri Anand Sharma                  -  Chairman 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
5. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
8. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
9. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
10. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
11. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
12. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
13. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
14. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
16. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
17. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
20. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 

78 
 
WITNESSES at 11.00 A.M.  
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
2. Shri. A.P. Maheswari, Special Secretary 
3. Shri Satpal Chauhan, Special Secretary 
4. Shri Vivek Joshi, Registrar General & Census Commissioner 
5. Shri P.K. Srivastav, Additional Secretary 
6. Shri Bhupendra Singh, Special Secretary & Financial Advisor 
7. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary 
8. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj, Additional Secreatry 
9. Smt. Dharitri Panda, Principal Chief Controller of Accounts  
10. Shri Piyush Goyal, Joint Secretary 
11. Shri Praveen Vashista, Joint Secretary 
12. Smt. Saheli Ghosh Roy, Joint Secretary 
13. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Secretary 
14. Shri S.C.L. Das, Joint Secretary 
15. Shri Anuj Sharma, Joint Secretary 
16. Smt. Punya Salila Srivastav, Joint Secretary 
17. Shri R.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
18. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, Joint Secretary 
19. Shri K.B. Singh, Joint Secretary 
20. Shri J.P. Agarwal, Joint Secretary 
21. Rajesh Kumar, Chief Controller of Accounts (Home) 
22. Shri B.R. Sharma, Secretary, (BM) 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters 

79 
 
WITNESSES at 2.00 P.M.  
Representatives of Ministry of DoNER 
1. Dr. Inder Jit Singh, Secretary  
2. Shri Rambir Singh, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.L. Meena, Joint Secretary 
4. Smt. Mamta Shankar, Economic Advisor 
5. Shri Chandramani Sharma, Statistical Advisor 
6. Shri Shyam S. Dubey, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser 
7. Shri Saurabh Gaur, Director 
8. Shri Atul Basumatary, Director (Parl.) 
9. Shri Umesh Kumar, Director 
10. Shri Ravindra Choudhary, Director 
11. Shri B. N. Prasad, Director 
12. Shri Gaje Singh Maheshwal, Superintending Engineer 
 
Representatives of North Eastern Council (NEC) 
 
Shri Ram Muivah, Secretary 
 
Representative of North Eastern Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation 
(NEHHDC) 
 
Shri Dhiraj Thakuria, Managing Director 
 
Representative of North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited 
(NERAMAC) 
      
Shri Pankaj Prasad, Managing Director 
 
Representative of North Eastern Region Community Resource Management Project  
(NERCORMP) 
      
Shri Mangsatabam Iboyaima Meitei, Managing Director 
 
Representative of Cane and Bamboo Technology Centre (CBTC) 
      
Dr. Shailendra Chaudhari, Managing Director 
 
Representative of North East Development Finance Institution (NEDFI) 
 
Shri B. P. Mukteih, CMD 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the Committee 
after its reconstitution and sought their co-operation in carrying out the responsibilities entrusted 
to the Committee.   He hoped that all the Members would take active participation in the 

80 
 
proceedings of the Committee and would enrich the Committee proceedings by their 
contribution.  
3. Thereafter, The Chairman explained the mandate of the Committee as laid down under 
Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Rajya Sabha and also 
informed the Members that the ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019’ has been referred to the Committee for examination and Report by 12 th December, 
2019. He also stated that as per practice DRSC selects subjects for its consideration and 
examination and the Committee may accordingly decide the future course of action and select 
the subjects for its detailed examination. He also invited suggestions from Members regarding 
subjects for examination by the Committee. The following subjects were given for selection: 
1. Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi; 
2. National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam; 
3. Rising Crime in Delhi and NCR Region; 
4. Administration, Development and People’s Welfare in the Union Territories of: 
(i)  Andaman & Nicobar Islands; 
(ii) Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh; 
5. Role of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in Mitigating the Recent Floods; 
6. National Security, Intelligence Coordination and Counter Terrorism; 
7. Left Wing Extremism; and 
8. Coastal Security 
4. xxx   xxx    xxx 
5. The Chairman then informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. briefing 
on the functioning of the Ministry of Home Affairs and a Presentation on ‘The Constitution (One 
Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 ’ by the Home Secretary in the forenoon and 
briefing by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Development of North Eastern Region  on the functioning 
of the Ministry of DoNER in the afternoon.  
6. xxx   xxx    xxx .  
7. xxx   xxx    xxx . 
8. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
9. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
10. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
11. The Chairman then asked the Home Secretary to brief the Committee on ‘The 
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 ’. The Home Secretary, 
then briefed the Committee broadly on the main provisions of the Bill. 
12.  One Member raised query related to the clause (4) (iv) of the Bill where under it is 
proposed that after clause (o) a clause on “land and revenue, land refoms ” i.e. [(4)(iv)(zh)] shall 
be inserted and whether the State Legislatures needs to change their Land and Land Reform Acts 
accordingly. To this query the Ministry replied that they would send a reply in writing to the 
Committee. 
13. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters 

81 
 
 
14. xxx   xxx    xxx.  
 
 The Committee then 
adjourned at 1:11 p.m. for lunch and reassembled at 2:00 p.m. 
 
15. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
16. xxx   xxx    xxx
. 
17. xxx   xxx    xxx.  
18.  xxx   xxx    xxx .  
19. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
20.  xxx   xxx    xxx. 
 21. xxx   xxx    xxx .  
 22. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
23. The Committee, then, adjourned at 3:10 p.m. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters 

82 
 
II 
 
SECOND MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 10 th October, 2019 in Room No.62, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
1.  Shri Anand Sharma   -  Chairman 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Manish Gupta 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
 LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
8. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
9. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
xxx    xxx    xxx 
 
WITNESSES  
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri A.P. Maheswari, Special Secretary 
2. Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Secretary 
Representatives of State Government of Assam 
 
1. Shri Alok Kumar, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri, Commissioner & Secretary 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters 

83 
 
Representatives of State Government of Meghalaya 
 
1. Shri H. Marwen, Additional Chief Secretary 
2. Smt. R.V. Suchiang, Additional Chief Secretary (Home) 
3. Shri T. Dkhar, Commissioner & Secretary 
 
Representatives of State Government of Mizoram 
 
Shri Ajay Chaudhry, Resident Commissioner 
Representatives of State Government of Tripura 
 
Shri N. Darlong, Secretary, Tribal Welfare Department 
 
2. xxx    xxx    xxx. 
3. The Chairman then informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. xxx 
 xxx  xxx   and thereafter, to hear the views of the Chief Secretaries of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura on 'The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019' pending with the Committee for examination and Report. 
                                              (on arrival of witnesses) 
4. xxx    xxx    xxx. 
5. xxx    xxx    xxx .  
6. xxx    xxx    xxx . 
7. xxx    xxx    xxx.  
8. xxx    xxx    xxx.  
9. xxx    xxx    xxx . 
 
 (Some of the witnesses then withdrew and some new witnesses arrived) 
10. The Chairman then asked the Special Secretary, MHA to brief about the ‘The Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 ’ and informed that various representations 
have been received from stakeholders including one from Shri Vincent H. Pala, MP, Lok Sabha on the 
subject. The Special Secretary, then briefed the Committee broadly on the main provisions of the Bill. 
11. The Chairman then asked Shri Vincent H. Pala, MP, Lok Sabha to express his views on the 
Bill. He raised issues regarding increase in the number of seats in Khasi and Jainitia Hills District 
Councils. 
12. Queries were also raised pertaining to the word ‘unrepresented tribes’, agreement with the  
__________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters. 

84 
 
State of Meghalaya, whether this Amendment would make Councils redundant, funding to the 
Autonomous Councils, implementation of land reforms, difference between the proposed Amendment 
and the powers given to the North Eastern States under Article 371, etc. 
13. The Joint Secretary, MHA replied  to queries on ‘unrepresented tribes’, redundancy of Councils 
due to proposed Amendment Bill, funding to the Autonomous Councils, implementation of land 
reforms, etc. R
egarding other queries, the Committee was assured that a written reply would be sent to 
the Committee within 10 days. 
14. The Chief Secretary, Government of Assam suggested that nothing in the law should prevent 
the State Government from taking over land for projects of State Government and the Central 
Government.  
15. The 
representatives of State Government of Mizoram and State Government of Tripura 
informed the Committee that they are in broad agreement with the proposed Amendment Bill. 
                                                    (Witnesses withdrew) 
16. The Committee then decided to have a meeting on 22 nd October, 2019 on   xxx   xxx 
 xxx     and another meeting on 
The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019 on 30 th October, 2019 to hear the representatives of the Autonomous Councils and other 
stakeholders.  
 17. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
18. The Committee, then, adjourned at 2:09 p.m. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85 
 
V 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 30 th October, 2019 in Room 
No.074, PLB, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman 
14. Dr. Anil Jain 
15. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
16. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
17. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
18. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
21. Shri Ravneet Singh 
22. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
23. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 
 
Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
 
Member of Meghalaya Legislative Assembly 
  
Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh 

86 
 
Representatives of Government of Assam 
 
1. Shri V. S. Bhaskar, Additional Chief Secretary, Hill Area Department 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Das, Principal Secretary, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
(KAAC) 
3. Shri Elwin Teron, Advisor to CEM, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) 
4. Smt. Nirupama Timungpi, Joint Secretary, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) 
5. Shri Sanjay Hanse, Deputy Secretary, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) 
6. Shri Debanan Daulagupa, Secretary, North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NCHAC) 
7. Shri Jewel Timung, Executive Engineer, PWD 
8. Shri Amitabh Rajkhowa, Principal Secretary, North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council 
(NCHAC) 
9. 
Shri Kang Jang Terang, KAAC 
10. Shri Surjya Rongphar, KAAC 
 
 
Representatives of Government of Meghalaya 
 
1. James K. Sangma, Minister I/C District Council Affairs  
2. Shri Teinwall Dkhar, CEM, Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council (KHADC) 
3. Shri Bindo Lanong, MDC, Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council (KHADC) 
4. Shri Dipul R. Marak, CEM, Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) 
5. Shri Thombor Shiwat, CEM, Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council (JHADC) 
 
 
Representatives of Government of Mizoram 
 
1. Shri Ajay Chaudhry, Resident Commissioner 
2. Shri Laltlawmlova Chinzah, Executive Member, Lai Autonomous District Council 
3. Shri Budha Lila Chakma, Member Chakma Autonomous District Council 
4. Shri Derrick Salai Sola, Council Member, Mara Autonomous District Council 
5. Shri Rasik Mohan Chakma, CEM, Chakma Autonomous District Council 
 
 
Representatives of Government of Tripura 
 
1. Shri M. Nagaraju, Principal Resident Commissioner 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting of 
the Committee and informed them about the agenda of the meeting i.e to hear 
the representatives 
of Autonomous Territorial/District Councils along with representatives of Governments of 
Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura and other stakeholders
 on 'the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019'.  
(On Arrival of Witnesses) 

87 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Law & Justice, 
the representatives of the Autonomous Territorial/District Councils, representatives of the State 
Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura, stakeholders who were present 
including Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA, Meghalaya and other officers to the meeting of the 
Committee. The Chairman then asked the representatives to express their views on the Bill. 
4. Representatives of the State Government of Assam, Mizoram and Tripura informed the 
Committee that they are in broad agreement with the proposed Amendment Bill. 
5. Representative of Autonomous District Councils of the State Government of Meghalaya 
expressed their reservation about 
the word ‘unrepresented tribes ’, number of seats in the 
Councils and nominated Members, District Planning Committee and transfer of subjects, etc. 
6. Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA, Meghalaya proposed to use the words ‘traditional 
institutions of self-governance ’ instead of Autonomous Territorial Council and expressed her 
views on the word unrepresented tribes, devolution of financial powers and women 
representation, etc.  
7. Thereafter, Representatives of the Autonomous Territorial/District Councils highlighted 
the need for devolution of more financial powers resources. They also raised issues specific to 
their Councils regarding the powers of the allotment of land, conduct of elections to the 
Councils, subject allocation, allocation of funds and the funding system, District planning 
Committee, number of Members of the Council, nomination of Members, financial sanction to 
the Scheduled Areas and for the development of the Scheduled Tribes, dilution of powers and 
effect of NRC with regard to Karbi Anglong, etc. 
8.  Queries/Issues were raised pertaining to correspondence between the State and the MHA 
on the Bill, funds allocated to the Autonomous Territorial/District Councils, 
‘unrepresented 
tribes’, metalled road connectivity to District Headquarters from the place where a large number 
of Chakmas live in State of Mizoram and women representation, etc. 
9. The Joint Secretary, MHA replied  to queries on correspondence between the State and 
the MHA on the Bill, financial powers, ‘unrepresented tribes’, nomination of Members, dilution 
of powers and effect of NRC with regard to Karbi Anglong, etc. On other queries, the Chairman 
of the Committee asked the Ministry that written replies should be sent to the Committee within 
a period of 10 days. 
10. The Chairman thanked the witnesses and informed that an advertisement is also being 
given in the local newspapers of concerned states inviting memoranda/representations regarding 
the Bill. 
11. xxx    xxx    xxx. 
12. T
he Committee, in the light of reservation expressed by Representatives of Autonomous 
District Councils particularly unrepresented tribes decided to undertake a study visit to Shillong 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters. 

88 
 
 
 and Guwahati from 18 th to 21 st December, 2019 
to hear remaining stakeholders on 'the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019'. Therefore, the 
Committee authorized its Chairman to finalize the tour programme, to seek permission from 
Hon’ble Chairman and complete other formalities. 
13. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
14. The Committee, then, adjourned at 2:25 p.m. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters 

89 
 
XIII 
 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 03:00 PM  on Wednesday, the 4 th March, 2020 in Room No.63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Manish Gupta 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
8. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
11. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
12. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
13. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
15. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
17. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
19. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
20. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
21. Shri Ravneet Singh 
22. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
23. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Rohtas, Additional secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 

90 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
Shri Satyendra Garg, Joint Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 
 
1. Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Additional Secretary, Deptt. of Legal Affairs 
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department 
3. Shri Sohan Kumar Sharma, Deputy Legal Advisor, Deptt. of Legal Affairs 
4. Shri B.N.S.V.S.K. Bangarraju, Assistant Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda 
of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following three draft Reports of the Committee:- 
(i) 223rd Report on the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) 
Bill, 2019; 
(ii) xxx    xxx    xxx; and 
(iii) xxx    xxx    xxx. 
 
3. The Chairman asked the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on the 
recommendations and observations given in the draft Reports, and mentioned that those 
suggestions would be incorporated suitably, if necessary.
  
4. The Committee took up the draft 223 rd Report for consideration and adoption and 
adopted it without any change.  
5.  xxx    xxx    xxx.  
6. xxx    xxx    xxx.  
7. The Committee offered to provide clarification on any of its  recommendation/observation in 
the 223rd Report on the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019, if 
Ministry feels so. 
8. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors and 
also decided for presentation/laying of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament by 6 th 
March, 2020.  
9.  xxx    xxx    xxx.  
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.  
__________________________________________________________________________ 
xxx  Relates to other matters. 

91 
 
11. The Committee then adjourned at 3.28 p.m. 
 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
125 
 
Table I 
 
Representations received on the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 and 
comments of MHA  
 
 
 
(1) Clauses of the Bill Name of representationist /stakeholders 
and suggestions 
Ministry’s Comments 
1. 
(Clause 
2) 
In Article 280 of the Constitution, in 
clause (3), after sub-clause clause 
(c), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
"(ca) the measures needed to 
augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State to supplement the resources 
of the District Councils including 
Village Councils and Municipal 
Councils in the tribal areas within the 
States referred to in clause (2)  of 
Article 244 on the basis of the 
recommendations made by the 
Finance Commissions of the said 
States;”- 
 
(1)  Recommendations of the Committee 
notified by the Government of Meghalaya : 
 
In order to make the recommendation of 
Finance Commission all-encompassing for the 
State of Meghalaya in view of the unique 
traditional institutions, the following proviso 
may be included in Article 280: 
 
“Provided that for the State of 
Meghalaya, the measures needed to augment 
the Consolidated Fund of a State to 
supplement the resources of the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils will also include Village 
Councils and Traditional Institutions of Self 
Governance and Town Committees duly 
constituted by the Autonomous Territorial 
Councils (ATCs) in the Tribal Areas within the 
State referred to in Clause (2) of Article 244 
and Para 20 of the Sixth Schedule on the basis 
of the recommendations made by the Finance 
Commission of the said State.” 
 
(2) Shri L. Rabha, President, All Rabha 
(1)    Presently Finance 
Commission is not making 
recommendations for augmenting 
the resources of District, Village 
and Municipal Councils under Sixth 
Schedule areas as is being done 
for these institutions in rest of the 
country after 73 rd and 74 th 
Constitutional Amendments which 
introduced democratic functioning 
of grass root institutions. To make 
Finance Commission make 
recommendations for these 
institutions in Sixth Schedule areas, 
the amendment to Article 280 is 
being introduced. It is also relevant 
to mention that the States of 
Assam, Mizoram and Tripura have 
supported this amendment.  
 
 As for Meghalaya, this 
amendment was agreed upon by 
Government of Meghalaya in 
response to the draft circulated and 

 
 
126 
 
Students Union of Meghalaya, Tikrikilla, 
Meghalaya -  
 
(3)   Shri L. Darlong, Secretary, MSC of 
Bodo Sahitya Sabha, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya – 
 
(4) Shri D. Koch, President, Meghalaya 
Koch Association, Ghasura, Ampti, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(5) President, All Meghalaya Mann (Tai-
Speaking) Welfare Society, Meghalaya –  
 
(6) President, All Rabha Students Union of 
India –  
  
            After the words “District Councils ”, the 
words “or as the case may be, the Regional 
Councils” shall be inserted. 
 
 
 
 
 
(7)  Shri Mg. Anthony Debbarma, Convener, 
Joint Action Committee of Civil Society –  
 
(8)  Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, Tribal 
Engineers’ Society, Tripura –  
 
           In addition to the insertion of sub-clause 
in a meeting under Dy. CM at 
Shillong on 25.05.2018.  
 The suggestion of the 
Committee is not tenable as by 
introducing this proviso we will be 
agreeing to continuation of the 
traditional institutions of Meghalaya 
without introducing democratic 
elements in it. 
 
(2) to (6)    Paragraph 1(2) of the 
Sixth Schedule provides that “If 
there are different Scheduled 
Tribes in an autonomous district, 
the Governor may, by public 
notification, divide the area or areas 
inhabited by them into autonomous 
regions”  
           District Council in the 
proposed amendment will also 
include Regional Council, if any 
Regional Council is formed.  
 
(7) & (8)     There is no proposal to 
include direct funding to the ADCs 
in the proposed amendment. 
 
 

 
 
127 
 
(ca), after sub-clause (c), under Clause (3) of 
Article 280 of the Constitution, a provision of 
direct funding to Autonomous Council may also 
be incorporated in this amendment Bill for 
“Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council ” to 
strengthen economy and autonomy. 
 
(9) Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –   
 
(10)  Shri Budha Debbarma, Office 
Secretary, Indigenous Peoples ’ Front of 
Tripura –   
 
(11) Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –  
 
(12) Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, Indigenous 
People’s Front of Tripura –  
(13) Shri Dhananjay Tripura, President, 
Youth Indigenous People ’s Front of Tripura 
–  
(14)  Shri Ahalas Jamatia, President, All 
Tipra Indigenous Students Association – 
 
            They agreed to the proposal for 
amendment of Article 280 of the Constitution of 
 
 
 
 
(9) to ( 14) The proposed 
amendment includes changes in 
name of some ADCs where an 
ADC is more than in one district. 
Changing these into Zonal and 
Sub-Zonal Council is not part of the 
proposed changes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
128 
 
India subject to the substituting of the term 
District Council by Territorial Council including 
Zonal Council, Sub Zonal Council and Village 
Councils. 
(15) Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief 
Executive Member, Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council –  
 
            In Article 280 of the Constitution, in 
Clause 3 after proposed clause (ca), another 
clause as (cb) be inserted for direct funding by 
the Union to the Council – 
           “(cb)   the measures needed to augment 
the ‘District & Regional Funds ’ under 
paragraph 7 to supplement the resource of the 
Autonomous Council constituted under Sixth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India by the 
Union” 
 
(16) Shri Radha Charan Debbarma, Chief 
Executive Member, TTAADC – 
 
          For undertaking all round developmental 
activities, the TTAADC should be given share 
of fund under the Article 280 & 275 of the 
Constitution of India  
 
(17)    Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram  –  
 
(18) Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
 
15)   There is no proposal in 
amendment to supplement the 
resources of the Council through 
District and Regional Funds.    
 
 
 
 
 
(16) to ( 21): Presently Finance 
Commission is not making 
recommendations for augmenting 
the resources of District, Village 
and Municipal Councils under Sixth 
Schedule areas as is being done 
for these institutions in rest of the 
country after 73 rd and 74 th 
Amendments. The proposed 
amendment will enable Finance 
Commission to make 
recommendations for 
supplementing the resources of 
these Institutions in Sixth Schedule 
areas. 

 
 
129 
 
 
Insertion of the following proviso in Article 280- 
           “Provided that separate allocation of  
fund for the District Councils shall be 
earmarked by the Government of India on the 
recommendation of the Finance Commission of 
the State of the Union.”  
 
(19)    KHADC, JHADC and GHADC –  
 
Insertion of following proviso in Article 280- 
Provided in the State of Meghalaya the 
measures needed to augment the 
Consolidated Funds of a State to supplement 
the resources of the District Councils including 
the Traditional Institutions of Self Governance 
and town committee duly constituted by the 
Council in the tribal areas within the States 
referred to in Clause (2) of Article 244 on the 
basis of the recommendations made by the 
Finance Commissions of the said States; 
 
(20)     Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha) , 
2-Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(21)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
             Article 280 of the Constitution of India 
should be amended so as to ensure that the 
The proposed amendment 
will considerably increase the 
resources of Autonomous District 
Councils including the Village and 
Municipal Councils for undertaking 
developmental activities. The 
suggestions of KHADC, JHADC 
and GHADC for incorporating the 
provision for supplementing the 
resources of the traditional 
institutions of self-governance is 
not tenable as by introducing this 
proviso we will be denying 
introduction of democratic 
principles like adult franchise and 
gender justice.  
Presently, the proposed Bil l 
gives relaxation to Meghalaya 
Councils for not having elected 
Village and Municipal Councils till 
the Governor approves the same.  
The issue of release of 
Central funds to the District 
Councils can be looked into by 
State Finance Commission. 
 
 
 

 
 
130 
 
Government of India makes separate 
allocation of funds for the Autonomous 
Territorial/ State Councils while releasing 
grants-in-aid to the State and such funds are 
released either by the Central Government or 
the State Government to the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils in time and without any 
delay. 
 
(22)      Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA, 16-
East Shillong (ST) Constituency, Meghalaya 
– 
          Focus of the proposed amendment is to 
ensure that Councils receive necessary 
financial empowerment so that they can 
directly intervene and ignite the slow growth of 
our tribal communities without disturbing their 
in-built and unique practices. 
 
(23)  Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya -   
 
            We are of the Opinion that the ADCs 
and the Traditional Institutions of Grassroots 
Governance need to be funded by the Union 
Government through Article 280 and we also 
suggest that they may be also directly funded 
under article 275 of the Constitution of India. 
 
(24)     Lai Autonomous District Council , 
Mizoram –  
 
 
 
 
 
(22)       This suggestion will be 
addressed by the revised Article 
280.  
 
 
 
(23)   The amended Article 280 will 
enable Finance Commission to 
make recommendations for funding 
of District Councils including Village 
and Municipal Councils. 
 
 
 
(24)     The composition of State 
Finance Commission is to be 
decided by the concerned State 
Government as per rules for 
constitution of the State Finance 

 
 
131 
 
In Article 280 of Constitution, in sub-claus e 
(ca) of clause (3), the following proviso shall be 
added-  
 
         “Provided that at least one representative 
of each Autonomous District 
Councils/Autonomous Territorial Councils shall 
be appointed as member of State Finance 
Commission by the Governor of a state,” 
 
(25)     Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, 
Diphu –  
 
            (i)   The proposed amendment of Article 
280 will lead to lowering down of the Sixth 
Schedule to the level of Village Councils or 
panchayats.  We demand that this should not 
be done by the government.  All provisions for 
augmentation of resources of the state for 
development of Tribal Areas under Sixth 
Schedule are already available in Article 275.  
For channelizing fund from the Finance 
Commission, only minor insertion of some 
words in both these two Articles is needed. 
           (ii)  Since Traditional Village Councils of 
the Scheduled Tribes, such as, Ser Van Kep of 
Karbis, Dorbar Shnong of Khasis, Salaiyaro of 
Dimasas, Tulsong Vaisa of Hma rs-Kukis and 
so on, are equal to the Panchayats under the 
Sixth Schedule and also under Article 242 (d), 
the phrase “and Traditional Village Councils of 
the Scheduled Tribes ‘by whatever name 
Commission.  
 
 
 
(25) to (28)     The imputation in the 
suggestion no. 25 is not correct. On 
the contrary the proposed 
amendment to Article 280 will 
strengthen the District Councils as 
well as Village Councils and 
Municipal Councils. The 
suggestions at 26 to 28 have 
responded at answer to suggestion 
no. 1. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
132 
 
called’ can be inserted between “Panchayat” 
and “in the State ” in sub clause (bb) of clause 
(3) of Article 280. We demand that this should 
be done by the government. 
 
(26) Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong – 
(27)   Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U 
Hynniewtrap –  
 
(28)  Shri James Lyngdoh, Working 
President, Meghalaya Pradesh Congress 
Committee, Shillong –   
 
To include the following: 
 
            Provided in the State of Meghalaya the 
measure needed to augment the Consolidated 
Fund of a State to supplement the resources of 
the Territorial Councils to strengthen the 
grassroot Traditional Institutions of Local Self 
Governance and Town Committee or Town 
Committee Council duly Constituted by the 
Autonomous Territorial Council in the tribal 
areas within the States referred to in clause (2) 
of article 244 on the basis of the 
recommendations made by the Finance 
Commissions of the said States. 
 2. 
(Clause 
3(a) (i)) 
In the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution, (a) in paragraph 2,- 
in sub-paragraph (1), after the 
(1)   Recommendations of the Committee 
notified by the Government of Meghalaya:  
 
(1)   In Para 2.5 of the Settlement 
signed by Government of India, 
Government of Meghalaya and 

 
 
133 
 
proviso, the following provisos shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 “Provided further that the 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous 
Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than fifty members, of 
whom six members including at 
least two women members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and the 
rest of the members shall be elected 
on the basis of adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the Dima 
Hasao Autonomous Territorial 
Council shall consist of not more 
than forty members, of whom four 
members including at least two 
women members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and rest 
of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage: 
Provided also that Garo Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall 
consist of not more than forty-two 
members, of whom thirty-six 
members shall be elected on the 
basis of adult suffrage. The 
Governor will nominate six members 
of whom at least two members shall 
be women and at least four 
members shall be from the 
unrepresented tribes:   
Provided also that Khasi Hills 
         (a) Reducing the number of seats from 
40 to 31 in the Khasi Hills Autonomous 
District Council for the reason that the 
Autonomous District Councils in the State of 
Meghalaya are facing severe financial 
constraints. The proposal to increase the seats 
by one member only in the case of the Khasi 
Hills Autonomous District Council will enable 
the Council to meet the needs of administrative 
exigencies within the limits of the financial 
constraints being faced. The reduced number 
will also satisfy the need for proper 
representation in the new Khasi Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council. 
           However, in case of the Jaintia Hills 
Autonomous District Council, the filling up of 
four seats in the new Territorial Council by 
nomination is without basis for the reason that 
nominated members are not elected by the 
people and therefore do not necessarily reflect 
the wishes and aspirations of the people. With 
this in mind, filling up only two seats in the 
Council by nomination of Members, including 
one woman, is sufficient to meet the intention 
of the proposed amendment. 
 
            (b) Removing the words “Un-
represented Tribes ” from the proposed 
amendment as the terms is anomalous and its 
inclusion will open a Pandora ’s box of 
contradictions and mis-understanding of the 
meaning and intention of the Sixth Schedule to 
Achik National Volunteer Council 
(ANVC), it was agreed to increase 
the number of members of the 
Council in principle. Further,  the 
National Commission on review of 
working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC) in its report dated 
31.03.2002, in Para 209 (2), as 
regards Meghalaya, has mentioned 
that ‘the number of seats in each 
Autonomous District Councils in 
Meghalaya should be increased by 
10 seats i.e. to a total number of 40 
seats. Of the 10 additional seats, 
having regard to the non-
representation of women and non-
tribals, the Governor may nominate 
upto five members from these 
categories to each of the ADCs’. 
Based on the discussions 
with the State Government of 
Meghalaya, the proposed 
amendments regarding increase in 
seats in the Councils were 
introduced. The proposed 
amendment was also discussed in 
a meeting of the State Government 
under Dy. CM and elected office 
bearers of these Councils at 
Shillong on 25.05.2018 and in a 
meeting under Union Home 
Minister with Chief Ministers of the 

 
 
134 
 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall 
consist of not more than forty 
members, of whom thirty-six 
members shall be elected on the 
basis of adult suffrage. The 
Governor will nominate four 
members of whom at least two 
members shall be women and at 
least two members shall be from the 
unrepresented tribes:  
Provided also that Jaintia 
Hills Autonomous Territorial Council 
shall consist of not more than thirty-
four members, of whom four 
members including at least two 
women members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and rest 
of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the Lai, 
Chakma and Mara Autonomous 
District Councils and the Tripura 
Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial 
Council each of which shall consist 
of not more than thirty members, of 
whom four members including at 
least two women members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and rest 
of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage: 
Provided also that the increase in 
the number of members of the said 
the Constitution of India. Para 1(2) has already 
made provisions for “other Scheduled Tribes ”. 
Inclusion of this term will open the door for 
defeated candidates from indigenous tribes 
eligible to stand for election in the three future 
ATCs to claim “un-represented status ” and 
thus, nomination. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States. 
As regards the suggestion 
for reducing nominated members in 
Jaintia Territorial Council is 
concerned, the Constitution 
scheme has been for 4 nominated 
members out of 30 members. The 
proposed amendment while 
recognizing the primacy of the 
democratic element, has restricted 
nominated members at 4 out of 34 
proposed strength of the Council. 
As regards unrepresented Tribes in 
GHADC and KHADC, the 
population composition of these 
two ADCs is relevant. The numeric 
dominance of the two tribes make 
possibility of less numeric tribes 
getting elected extremely difficult 
and to give them representation in 
ADCs, seats are proposed to be 
reserved for unrepresented tribes. 
The same principle of nomination of 
unrepresented communities 
already exists in Bodoland 
Territorial Council (BTC) where 
seats are reserved for 
unrepresented communities as 
nominated members. This provision 
will ensure equity and justice in 
GHADC and KHADC.  
 

 
 
135 
 
Autonomous Territorial Councils 
under the second, third, fourth, fifth, 
sixth and seventh provisos shall 
have no effect on the term of the 
Councils existing on or before the 
commencement of the Constitution 
(One Hundred Twenty Fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2019, but shall 
apply to the elections to be held in 
those Councils after the expiry of 
their respective terms on or after 
such commencement.”; 
(2) Shri Radha Charan Debbarma, Chief 
Executive Member, TTAADC –  
Reservation for women should not be less than 
one-third of the total seats in the District 
Council.  
(3)   Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –  
 
           In sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2, 
after the proviso, insertion of the following 
proviso-  
             “Provided also that the Chakma, Mara 
and Lai Autonomous Territorial Council and the 
Tripura tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial  
Council each of which shall consist of not more 
than thirty-four members, of whom four 
members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and rest of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage.” 
  
(4) suggestion of KHADC, JHADC and 
GHADC –  
 
              Provided also that Garo Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than Forty-two members, of whom 
thirty-six shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate six 
members of whom at least two shall be woman 
 
 
(2) to (4), (30) and (33) to (39) : As 
regards Karbi Anglong Autonomous 
Territorial Councils and Dima 
Hasao Autonomous Territorial 
Councils,  the proposed increase in 
strength of these Councils has 
been done in consultation with and 
as agreed by the State of Assam. 
These proposals are also in 
consonance with the Memorandum 
of Settlement signed with UPDS 
and DHD. 
 
 As regards GHADC, 
KHADC, JHADC, the proposed 
changes were discussed with the 
State Government of Meghalaya. 
On June 17, 2015, the Government 
of Meghalaya had suggested 
raising of the strength of GHADC, 
KHADC from the existing 30 to 40 
and JHADC from present 30 to 34. 
The proposed changes were further 
discussed in a meeting taken by 
Deputy Chief Minister of Meghalaya 
at Shillong where the proposed 
changes as regards KHADC and 
GHADC were agreed to be 
increased to 40. As regards 
JHADC, the State Government had 

 
 
136 
 
on the advice and recommendation of the Garo 
Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
               Provided also that Khasi Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than thirty one members, of whom 
twenty nine shall be elected on the basis of 
adult suffrage. The Governor will nominate two 
members of whom at least one shall be woman 
on the advice and recommendation of the 
Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 
              Provided also that Jaintia Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than thirty Four members, of whom 
thirty shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate two 
members of whom at least one shall be woman 
on the advice and recommendation of the 
Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggested increase from 30 to 40 
but based on population difference 
it was suggested to the State 
Government to increase the 
strength from 30 to 34. 
 As regards nomination of 
Members from unrepresented 
communities is concerned, there 
were representations to the Ministry 
that in view of over-whelming 
numbers of Khasi, Garo and Jaintia 
tribes in the State, the tribes with 
lesser number did not have 
possibility of getting elected in the 
District Councils.   
 Based on these 
representations and the 
precedence of Bodoland Territorial 
Council which has provisions of Six 
Council Members being nominated 
by the Governor from amongst the 
unrepresented communities of the 
District was incorporated in the Bill 
after approval of the Union Cabinet.  
 
 The proposed representation 
from the unrepresented 
communities is to ensure fair 
possibility of non-numeric tribal 
communities other than Khasi and 
Gharo in KHADC & GHADC being 
represented in their District 

 
 
137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5)  Shri L. Rabha, President, All Rabha 
Councils. There is total justification 
for nomination of unrepresented 
communities in these Councils as is 
being done in respect of Bodoland 
Territorial Council.  
 It has also been proposed 
that in Autonomous 
Territorial/District Councils, at least 
two women are nominated to 
ensure that there is gender justice 
in these Councils as per the 
recommendations of National 
Commission to Review the Working 
of Constitution. 
  
 As suggested by Sh. Radha 
Charan Debbarma, Chief Executive 
Member, Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council 
(TTAADC), in the present stage of 
development, however, desirable it 
may be, it may not be possible to 
reserve 1/3 rd of total seats in 
District/Territorial Councils. 
 
            In Lai, Mara and Chakma 
Autonomous District Councils, 
there is no proposal to increase the 
number of seats in the Council from 
the present 30 seats. Two seats 
have been proposed for the 
nominated category for women. 

 
 
138 
 
Students Union of Meghalaya, Tikrikilla, 
Meghalaya –   
 
(6)   Shri L. Darlong, Secretary, MSC of 
Bodo Sahitya Sabha, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya – 
 
(7)  Shri D. Koch, President, Meghalaya 
Koch Association, Ghasura, Ampti, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(8)  President, All Meghalaya Mann (Tai-
Speaking) Welfare Society, Meghalaya –  
 
(9)   President, All Rabha Students Union of 
India –  
 
(10)   President, Hajong Students 
Association, Tura, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya & Others – 
 
Insertion of the following –  
             After the words “Governor will ”, the 
words “immediately after expiry of fourteen 
days after formation of the Executive 
Committee of the Council” shall be inserted; 
             After the words “adult suffrage ”, the 
words “of whom six shall be reserved for the 
less populated indigenous Scheduled Tribes of 
the Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council ” 
shall be inserted; 
              For the words “unrepresented tribes ”, 
 
 
(5) to ( 10):       With regard to the 
proposed amendment in paragraph 
2(1), the reservation of seats is in 
respect of the nomination by the 
Governor. For the rest of the seats 
to be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage, there is no provision for 
reservation.  
 
          The ‘Unrepresented Tribes ’ 
will be nominated by the Governor 
as per rules in this regard and their 
rights and privileges will be in 
accordance to the rules prevalent in 
the ADCs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
139 
 
the words “unrepresented indigenous tribes of 
the Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial Council 
having the same rights and privileges as other 
members, including voting rights ” shall b e 
substituted. 
               After the words “unpresented tribes ”, 
the words “having the same rights and 
privileges as other members, including voting 
rights” shall be inserted. 
 
 
(11)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee 
(TPCC) –   
 
(12)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee – 
 
           We demand the increase of the existing 
strength of 28 (Twenty-eight) elected members 
and 2 (Two) nominated members be doubled 
i.e. 56 elected members and 4 (Four) 
nominated members.  
 
(13)   Shri Nityananda Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Employees Association 
(TTEA) –    
 
   Following shall be inserted - 
          Provided further that Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than 50 (fifty) members ,  of whom 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) to (24) and (40) to (42):                
            As regards membership of 
TTAADC is concerned, the draft Bill 
was consulted with the State 
Government of Tripura and the 
proposed changes in the Council 
was as per discussions with the 
State Government.   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
140 
 
(five) including at least 2 (two) women 
members from unrepresented tribe/ 
communities shall be nominated by the 
Governor and rest of members shall be elected 
from Schedule Tribe only on the basis of adult 
Suffrage.” 
 
(14)  Shri Mg. Anthony Debbarma, 
Convener, Joint Action Committee of Civil 
Society -   
 
Insertion of the following – 
         “Provided further that ‘Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ shall consist of 
not more than 50 (fifty) members for ST 
category of whom six members including at 
least three women members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and the rest shall 
be elected on the basis of adult suffrage.” 
 
(15)  Shri Swapnati Reang, Secretary, 
Indigenous Women’s Welfare Society -   
 
Insertion of the following – 
         “Provided further that ‘Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ shall consist of 
not more than 50 (fifty) members of whom six 
members including at least 4 (four) women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and the rest shall be elected on the basis of 
adult suffrage.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
141 
 
(16)  Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(17) Shri Budha Debbarma, Office 
Secretary, Indigenous Peoples ’ Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(18)  Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –   
 
(19)   Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, 
Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura –   
 
(20)  Shri Dhananjay Tripura, President, 
Youth Indigenous People ’s Front of Tripura 
– 
(21)  Shri Ahalas Jamatia, President, All 
Tipra Indigenous Students Association –  
 
Insertion of the following – 
       “Provided further that Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than 50 (fifty) members, of whom 5 
(five) including at least 2 (two) women 
members from unrepresented tribe/ 
communities shall be nominated by the 
Governor and rest of members shall be elected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
142 
 
from Scheduled Tribe only on the basis of adult 
suffrage” 
 
(22)   Shri Gautam Das, Secretary, CPI (M), 
Tripura State Committee –   
 
Insertion of the following – 
      “Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District 
Council shall consist of not more than thirty two 
(32) members of whom four members including 
two women members shall be nominated by 
the Governor and rest of the members shall be 
elected on the basis of adult franchise.” 
 
(23)  Shri B.K. Hrangkhawl, President, 
Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra – 
 
            In the case of ADC of Tripura, it is 
proposed to increase the number of members 
from the present 30 to 44 out of which 40 
members will be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage and 4 members will be nominated by 
the Governor form amongst the unrepresented 
communities. 
 
(24)    Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, 
Tribal Engineers’ Society, Tripura – 
   
Insertion of the following – 
        “Provided further that ‘Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ shall consist of 
not more than 50 (fifty) members of whom six 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(25) & ( 26)   The proposed 

 
 
143 
 
members including at least 3 (three) women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and the rest shall be elected on the basis of 
adult suffrage.” 
 
(25)    Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(26) Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secretary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association –  
 
             As part of the women empowerment 
process, one third of total seats in the 
Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council 
should be reserved for tribal women. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(27)  Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief 
Executive Member, Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council –   
 
           In the proposed first proviso of 
paragraph 2(i), after the words “nominated by 
amendment provides that in 
Autonomous Territorial/District 
Councils, at least two women are 
nominated to ensure that there is 
gender justice in these Councils as 
per the recommendations of 
National Commission to Review the 
Working of Constitution. The 
Village and Municipal Councils, 
except in Meghalaya, are proposed 
to be elected with one third 
reservation for women 
 
          At this stage, reservation on 
one-third seats for women in the 
District Council is not under 
consideration. 
 
 
(27)   There is no proposal to 
restrict nomination in the manner 
suggested at 27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(28)  The suggestion has been 
incorporated as regards Khasi Hills 
Autonomous District Council. 
 

 
 
144 
 
the Governor”, the words “from the indigenous 
tribes and Karbi sub-tribes” may be inserted. 
 
(28)  Shri O.L. Terang, President, All 
Meghalaya Karbi Association and others –  
 
        The suggestion is to include the provision 
of nomination of the Unrepresented Tribes with 
regard to Khasi Hills Autonomous District 
Council (KHADC) and Jaintia Hills Autonomous 
District Council (JHADC) in the Autonomous 
District Councils in the proposed 125 th 
Constitutional Amendment Bill, 2019.  
 
(29) Shri Ramlal Chauhan, President, Karbi 
Anglong Hindi Bhasi Sanstha Central 
Committee and others–  
 
         The number of seats in the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council must be 
increased but increased seats must not be 
reserved for any particular community. 
          Reservation of seats for women in Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council for their 
development. 
 
(30)  Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya -   
 
             The word “Unrepresented Tribe ” in 
paragraph 3 and 4 of the Clause 3 of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and twenty fifth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(29)  The proposed amendment 
incorporates the suggestions 
regarding increase in seats and 
reservation for women.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
145 
 
Amendment) Bills, 2019 which provided that 
only the unrepresented Tribes of the State 
shall be nominated as member in KHADC and 
GHADC need to be deleted. 
              We are of the opinion that as far as 
the proposal for increase of Seats for KHADC 
is concern, it needs to be re-looked and we 
suggest that KHADC shall have 31 Seats 
where 29 (Twenty Nine) are elected and 2 
(two) to be nominated and at least one should 
be a Woman. 
 
(31)   Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
Following is proposed: 
 
                Provided also that the Chakma, Mara 
and Lai Autonomous Territorial Council and the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial 
Council each of which shall consist of not more 
than thirty-four members, of whom four 
members including at least two women 
members hall be nominated by the Governor 
and rest of the members hall be elected on the 
basis of adult suffrage. 
 
(32)    Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
                In sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2, 
after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
 
 
 
 
(31)           There is no proposal to 
increase the seats in respect of 
ADCs in Mizoram and Tripura . The 
Bill was drafted in consultation with 
State Governments of Mizoram nad 
Tripura.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(32)     The amendment proposes 
to change the nomenclature of 
ADCs to Territorial Councils where 
their jurisdiction extends to more 
than one revenue districts. As the 
jurisdiction of Lai, Mara and 
Chakma Autonomous Councils are 
within one Revenue District of the 
State of Mizoram, it is not 
recommended to name these as 
Autonomous Territorial Councils as 
proposed.  
 

 
 
146 
 
substituted as follows – 
           “Provided also that the Lai, Mara and 
Chakma Autonomous Territorial Council and 
the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial 
Council each of which shall consist of not more 
than thirty members, of whom four members 
including at least two women members shall 
be nominated by the Governor and rest of the 
members shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage:” 
 
(33)   Shri Frezer Sengyung, Jadikhe Naisho 
Hoshom, Assam –   
In Paragraph 2, 
       in sub-paragraph (1), after the proviso, the 
following provisos shall be inserted, namely:- 
 Provided also that the Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Council shall consist of not more 
than forty members, of whom four members 
including at least two members shall be 
nominated by the Governor and the rest of the 
members shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. 
 
(34)    Shri Sandesh Bakshaka, President, 
Meghalaya Rabha Jatio Sewa Sangha –) 
 
           They had stated that the Rabha 
Community of Meghalaya strongly oppose the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
147 
 
proposal/suggestion of the State Government 
of Meghalaya in this regard. 
 
 
(35)   Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(36)  Shri James Lyngdoh, Working 
President, Meghalaya Pradesh Congress 
Committee, Shillong –   
 
(37) Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U 
Hynniewtrap 
 
Following provisos to be inserted – 
          Provided also that Garo Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than forty two members, of whom 
thirty six shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor on the advice and 
recommendation of the Garo Hills Autonomous 
Territorial Council will nominate six members of 
whom at least two shall be women.   
           Provided also that Khasi Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
more than thirty seven members, of whom 
thirty five shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor on the advice and 
recommendation of the Khasi Hills Territorial 
Council will nominate two members of whom at 
least one shall be woman. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
148 
 
            Provided also that the Jaintia Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than thirty-two members, of whom 
two members including at least one woman 
member shall be nominated by the Governor 
on the advice and recommendation of the 
Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial Council 
and rest of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage. 
 
(38) Shri James Lyngdoh, Working 
President, Meghalaya Pradesh Congress 
Committee, Shillong –  
  
To include the following – 
            Provided also that Jaintia Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than thirty members, of whom twenty 
nine shall be elected on the basis of adult 
suffrage. The Governor will nominate one 
member on the advice and recommendation of 
the Jaintia Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council. 
 
(39)  Ms. Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & 
Angela Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, 
Meghalaya – 
 
The following provisos are proposed – 
              Provided further that the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Territorial 5 Council shall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
149 
 
consist of not more than fifty members, of 
whom six members including at least two 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and rest of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to 
reservation of not less than one-third seats for 
women: 
 
              Provided also that the Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not than forty members, of whom four 
members 10 including at least two women 
members 10 including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and rest of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to 
reservation of not less than one-third seats for 
women: 
             Provided also that Garo Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Coucil shall consist of 
not more than forty-two members, of whom 
thirty-six shall be electe d on the basis of tribal 
adult suffrage subject to reservation of not less 
than one-third seats for women. The Governor 
will nominate six members of whom at least 
two shall be women and at least four shall be 
from the indigenous unrepresented tribes: 
               Provided also that Khasi Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
not more than forty members, of whom thirty-
six shall be on the basis of tribal adult suffrage 
subject to reservation of not less than one-third 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
150 
 
seats for women. The Governor will nominate 
of whom at least two shall be women and at 
least two shall be from the unrepresented 
indigenous tribes: 
               Provided also that Jaintia Hills 
Autonomous Territorial Council shall consist of 
note thirty-four members, of whom four 
members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
25 and rest of the members shall be elected on 
the basis of tribal adult suffrage subject to 
reservation of not less than one-third seats for 
women: 
               Provided also that the Lai, Chakma 
and Mara Autonomous District Council and the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial 
Council each of which shall consist of not more 
than thirty members, of whom four members 
including at least two women members shall 
be nominated shall be nominated by the 30 
Governor and rest of the members shall be 
elected on the basis of tribal adult suffrage 
subject to reservation of not less than one-third 
seats for women. 
 
(40)   Shri Chitta Ranjan Debbarma, 
Tipraland State Party, Agartala –  
 
They had proposed the following in respect of 
TTAADC – 
          To increase the number of seats to not 
more than ‘forty’ members of whom four 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 
 
151 
 
members including at least two women 
members shall be nominated by the Governor 
and the rest of the members shall be elected 
on the basis of adult suffrage. 
 
(41)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
           It is demanded that the existing strength 
of TTAADC is 30 members should be 
increased to 50 (fifty) members out of which 6 
(six) members including at least 3 (three) 
women members shall be nominated by the 
governor and the rest shall be elected on the 
basis of adult suffrage. 
 
(42)      Shri P.H. Jamatia, Jt. secretary, 
BGM, Jamatia Hoda, Tripura –  
              Minimum 50 seats to be increased in 
TTAADC. 
 
3. 
(Clause 
3(a) (ii)) 
In sub-paragraph (3), for the first 
proviso, the following proviso shall 
be substituted, namely:- 
“Provided that- 
 (a) the District Council 
constituted for the Karbi Anglong 
District shall be called the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Territorial 
Council; 
(b) the District Council 
(1)     Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –  
 
Insertion of following proviso –  
 
          The District Council constituted for the 
Chakma District shall be called the Chakma 
Autonomous Territorial Council; 
 
         The District Council constituted for the 
(1)       As the jurisdiction of Lai, 
Mara and Chakma Autonomous 
Councils are within one Revenue 
District of the State of Mizoram, it is 
not desirable to call them 
Autonomous Territorial Councils as 
proposed by Lai, Mara and 
Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram. 
 

 
 
152 
 
constituted for the Dima Hasao 
District shall be called the Dima 
Hasao Autonomous Territorial 
Council;  
(c) the District Council 
constituted for the Garo Hills 
District shall be called the Garo 
Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council; 
(d) the District Council 
constituted for the Khasi Hills 
District shall be called the Khasi 
Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council; 
(e) the District Council 
constituted for the Jaintia Hills 
district shall be called the Jaintia 
Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council; and 
(f)   the District Council constituted 
for the Tripura Tribal Areas shall 
be called the Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous Territorial Council.”; 
Mara District shall be called the Mara 
Autonomous Territorial Council; and 
 
          The  District Council constituted for the 
Lai District shall be called the Lai Autonomous 
Territorial Council; 
 
 
(2) Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee 
(TPCC) –   
 
          Upgradation and Change of the 
nomenclature of “Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) to 
Tripura Territorial Council (TTC) or Tripura 
Autonomous State Council (TASC)” 
(3)  Shri Mg. Anthony Debbarma, Convener, 
Joint Action Committee of Civil Society –  
 
(4) Shri Swapnati Reang, Secretary, 
Indigenous Women’s Welfare Society –   
 
(5)    Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, Tribal 
Engineers’ Society, Tripura – 
 
Insertion of the following – 
 
       “Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous 
Territorial Council ” be renamed as “Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council ” or “Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) to ( 12)      As regards 
nomenclature of TTAADC, the draft 
Bill was consulted with the State 
Government of Tripura and the 
proposed changes was as per 
discussions with the State 
Government.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
153 
 
 
 
(6) Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(7) Shri Budha Debbarma, Office Secretary, 
Indigenous Peoples’ Front of Tripura –  
 
(8) Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –   
 
(9)   Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, Indigenous 
People’s Front of Tripura – 
 
 
           In sub-paragraph 3(f), the word ‘Tripura 
Tribal Areas Autonomous Territorial Council ’ 
shall be substituted as ‘Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council’. 
 
 
(10)  Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(11)   Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secretary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association –  
 
           The existing Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council should be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
154 
 
renamed as the Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council. 
 
 
(12)  Shri B.K. Hrangkhawl, President, 
Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra – 
 
             The name of “Tripura Tribal Areas 
Autonomous District Council ” may be changed 
to “Tripura Autonomous Territorial Council 
(TATC)”. 
 
(13)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
Proposed to include the following: 
 
       (g)  The District Council constituted for the 
Chakma District shall be called the Chakma 
Autonomous Territorial Council; 
       (h)   The District Council constituted for the 
Mata District shall be called the Mara 
Autonomous Territorial Council; and  
        (i)  The District Council constituted for the 
Lai District shall be called the Lai Autonomous 
Territorial Council; 
 
(14)     Lai Autonomous District Council , 
Mizoram –  
 
               After clause (f) of sub paragraph (3) 
of Paragraph 2, the following clause shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) and (14)        The amendment 
proposes to change the 
nomenclature of ADCs to Territorial 
Councils where their jurisdiction 
extends to more than one revenue 
districts. As the jurisdiction of Lai, 
Mara and Chakma Autonomous 
Councils are within one Revenue 
District of the State of Mizoram, it is 
not recommended to name these 
as Autonomous Territorial Councils 
as proposed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
155 
 
added- 
        (g) the District Council constituted for the 
Lai District shall be called ‘The Lai 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ 
        (h) the District Council constituted for the 
Mara District shall be called ‘The Mara 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ 
        (i) the District Council constituted for the 
Chakma District shall be called ‘The Chakma 
Autonomous Territorial Council’ 
 
(15)   Shri Chitta Ranjan Debbarma, 
Tipraland State Party, Agartala –   
 
              They had proposed the following in 
respect of TTAADC – 
 
               (f)    the District Council constituted 
for the Tripura Tribal Areas shall be called the 
“Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council ” in 
short “Tipraland Territorial Council”. 
 
(16)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
           Since TTAADC Covers all the State 8th 
District of Tripura & 19 tribes and it is unique 
institution unlike other District Council of every 
State of Assam, Meghalaya and Mizoram, 
which are basically particular tribal community 
based. It is therefore demanded that the 
nomenclature be changed from “Tripura Tribal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(15) and ( 16)      As regards 
nomenclature of TTAADC, the draft 
Bill was consulted with the State 
Government of Tripura and the 
proposed changes was as per 
discussions with the State 
Government. 
 
 

 
 
156 
 
Area Autonomous District Council ” (TTAADC) 
to “Tipra Autonomous State Council” (TASC). 
 
4. 
(Clause 
3(a)(iii)) 
In sub-paragraph (6), after clause 
(d), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“(da) the disqualification of 
members of such Councils on the 
ground of defection;” 
(1)    Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –  
              
           in clause (d) of sub-paragraph (6), 
between the word “qualifications” and the 
words “for being elected ” the words “and 
disqualifications” shall be inserted. 
 
 
(2)  Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –  
 
(3)   Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secretary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association -   
 
        Disqualification on defection may be 
made applicable to the member of the Council 
as per the provisions of the Tenth Schedule to 
the Constitution of India. 
 
(1)       The suggestion is not 
tenable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) & (3)     Disqualification on 
defection as suggested at (2) and 
(3) is as per the provisions of the 
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution 
of India. 
 
 
 
5. 
(Clause 
3(a)(iv)) 
In sub-paragraph (6A), after the 
second proviso, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
“Provided also that where an 
elected member of the District 
Council is chosen as a Member in 
either House of Parliament or in the 
House of the Legislature of a State, 
(1)       KHADC, JHADC and GHADC –  
           Provided also that where a elected 
member of the District Council is chosen as a 
Member in either House of Parliament or in the 
House of the Legislature of a State, his seat in 
the District Council shall become vacant after 
the expiration of a period of Sixty day from the 
(1)    The proposed amendment is 
in line with  The Prohibition of 
Simultaneous Membership Rules, 
1950 formulated under Article 101 
and 190 of Constitution of India . 
Hence, the suggestion is not 
tenable. 
 

 
 
157 
 
his seat in the District Council shall 
become vacant after the expiration 
of a period of fourteen days from the 
date of publication of the declaration 
in the Gazette of India or in the 
Official Gazette of the State, that he 
has been so chosen.”; 
date of publication of the declaration in the 
Gazette of India or in the Official Gazette of the 
State, that he has been so chosen.”; 
          Provided further, that this proviso shall 
have no effect on the term of the Councils 
existing on or before the commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2019. 
 
(2)    Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief 
Executive Member, Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council –  
 
           The proviso of sub-paragraph 6A may 
be amended by inserting the words “on the 
advice and recommendation of the District 
Council” after the words “be extended by the 
Governor”. 
 
 
(3)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong – 
 
(4)    Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U 
Hynniewtrap –  
 
          Provided further that the proviso shall 
have no effect on the term of the Council 
existing on or before the commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and twenty fifth 
Amendment Act, 2019). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2)   The suggested change is not 
possible. As per constitutional 
provisions, the Governor is to act 
on aid and advice of the State 
Government or in his discretion any 
capacity, if provided specifically in 
the Constitution.  
 
 
 
(3)  & (4)     All amendments are 
prospective, unless specified in the 
proposal itself. 

 
 
158 
 
 
6. 
(Clause 
3(a) (v)) 
after sub-paragraph (7), the 
following sub-paragraph shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“(8) The superintendence, 
direction and control of the 
preparation of electoral rolls for, and 
the conduct of, all elections to the 
District Council, Regional Council, 
Village Council and Municipal 
Council shall be vested in a State 
Election Commission appointed by 
the Governor for that State: 
           Provided that nothing in this 
sub-paragraph shall apply to a 
Village Council and Municipal 
Council in the State of Meghalaya 
until approved by the Governor of 
that State.”; 
(1)   Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –   
 
Insertion of following: 
 
         “(8) The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of, all elections to the District 
Council and Regional Council shall be vested 
in a State Election Commission or Regional 
Commissioner appointed under Article 324 (4) 
of the Constitution of India.” 
 
         “(9)  The  superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of, all elections to the Village 
Council, Municipal Council and the Town 
Committee shall be vested in the  Autonomous 
Territorial Councils’ 
             Provided that nothing in this sub-
paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya 
until approved by the Governor of that state,”; 
 
 
(2)   Shri L. Rabha, President, All Rabha 
Students Union of Meghalaya, Tikrikilla, 
Meghalaya –   
 
(3)    Shri L. Darlong, Secretary, MSC of 
Bodo Sahitya Sabha, West Garo Hills, 
(1)    The proposed amendment is 
in line with Article 243K relating to 
elections to the Panchayats. 
Hence, the suggestion is not 
tenable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) to (7)    The proposed Bill gives 
relaxation to the Sixth Scheduled 
Councils in Meghalaya for not 
having elected Village and 
Municipal Councils till the Governor 

 
 
159 
 
Meghalaya –  
 
(4)   Shri D. Koch, President, Meghalaya 
Koch Association, Ghasura, Ampti, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(5)   President, All Meghalaya Mann (Tai-
Speaking) Welfare Society, Meghalaya –  
 
(6)     President, All Rabha Students Union 
of India –  
 
(7) President, Hajong Students Association, 
Tura, West Garo Hills, Meghalaya & Others 
– 
 
 
          The proviso “Provided that nothing in 
this sub-paragraph shall be apply to a Village 
Council and Municipal Council in the State of 
Meghalaya until approved by the Governor of 
that State.” shall be omitted. 
(8) Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –   
 
(9)  Shri Budha Debbarma, Office Secretary, 
Indigenous Peoples’ Front of Tripura –  
 
(10)   Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –  
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) to ( 11)    The proposed 
amendments are as per discussion 
with the State Governments. 
Village and Municipal Councils are 
exempted on the suggestion of 
State Government. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
160 
 
 
Insertion of the following – 
         8.  The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of elections to the Territorial 
Council should be vested to the Election 
Commission of India. 
          However, Elections to the Regional 
Councils, Zonal Council, Sub-Zonal Council, 
Village Council & Municipal Council shall be 
vested in a State Election Commission 
appointed by the Governor for that State. 
 
(11)    Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, 
Tribal Engineers’ Society, Tripura –  
 
Insertion of the following – 
 
          8.   The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral roll for, 
and the conduct of, elections to District Council 
shall be vested in an Election Commission of 
India and Regional Council, Village Council 
and Municipal Council shall be vested in a 
State Election Commission appointed by the 
Governor for that State. 
 
(12)    Shri Ramlal Chauhan, President, 
Karbi Anglong Hindi Bhasi Sanstha Central 
Committee and others –   
 
           The State Election Commission should 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12)  The proposed amendment 
incorporates the suggestion. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
161 
 
supervise every conduct of election process. 
 
(13)    Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
Proposed as under: 
           After sub-paragraph (7), the following 
sub-paragraphs shall be inserted, namely:-  
  
         “(8) The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of, all elections to the District 
Council and Regional Council shall be vested 
in the Election Commission or Regional 
Commissioner appointed under Article 324 (4) 
of the Constitution of India. 
 Provided that nothing in this sub-
paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya 
until approved by the Governor of that State.” 
 
         “(9) The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of all elections to the Village 
Council, Municipal Council and the Town 
Committee shall be vested in the Autonomous 
Territorial Councils concerned:  
 Provided that nothing in this sub-
paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya 
until approved by the Governor of that State.” 
 
 
(13) & ( 14)    The proposed 
amendment is in line with Article 
243K relating to elections to the 
Panchayats. Hence, the suggestion 
is not tenable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
162 
 
 
(14)   Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, 
Diphu –  
 
           The proposed Para 2(8) must be 
cancelled. 
 
 
(15)     Shri Frezer Sengyung, Jadikhe 
Naisho Hoshom, Assam –  
 
Following proviso to be inserted in the 
proposed Para 2(8) – 
 
         “Provided that nothing in Sub-
Paragraph (1) and (2) of the proposed New 
Paragraph 2A after Paragraph 2 should be 
applied in Dima Hasao District until approved 
by the proposed Dima Hasao Autonomous 
Territorial Council.” 
 
 
 
(16)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(17)     Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U 
Hynniewtrap –  
 
Following provisos to be inserted - 
             Provided that nothing in this sub-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(15)     The suggestion is not 
tenable as the proposed changes 
were made in discussions with the 
State Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16) to ( 18)    The proposed Bill 
gives relaxation to the Sixth 
Scheduled Councils in Meghalaya 
for not having elected Village and 
Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 
 
 
 

 
 
163 
 
paragraph shall apply to a Village Council and 
Municipal Council in the State of Meghalaya 
and the prevailing customary practices relating 
to grassroot traditional institution of local self 
governance shall continue to function. 
 
              Provided also that in the state of 
Meghalaya, the term Village Council shall 
mean the traditional Village Dorbars and Gittim 
Nokmas within the Autonomous District 
Council. The Term Elaka Councils shall mean 
the Dorbar Hima of the particular Elaka 
whether a Hima, Dalloiship or Nokmaship. The 
Raiij Councils shall mean the Dorbar Raid. Any 
other reference shall be interpreted as per the 
prevailing customary practices or relevant Acts 
and Rules of the respective Autonomous 
Territorial Councils in Meghalaya. The Term 
Municipal Council shall mean Town Council or 
Town Committee. 
 
              Provided that nothing in sub-
paragraph (1) and (2) of paragraph 2A shall 
apply to the State of Meghalaya. 
 
               Provided in Meghalaya each 
Territorial Council shall also constitute a 
Territorial Planning Committee for the district 
consisting of not more than fifty members of 
such members from the Territorial Council or 
Regional Council and such members as 
deems necessary, for the purpose of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
164 
 
consolidating plans prepared by each such 
Council and to prepare a development plan for 
the district as a whole and such other matters 
relating thereto. 
 
(18)    Ms. Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & 
Angela Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, 
Meghalaya – 
 
They had proposed as under:- 
 
          “(8)     The superintendence, direction 
and control of the preparation of electoral rolls 
for; and the conduct of , all elections to the 
District Council, Regional Council, Village 
Council and Municipal Council otherwise 
known as Dorbar Shnongs or any other 
local names  shall be vested in a State 
Election Commission appointed by the 
Governor for that State: 
 
7. 
(Clause 
3(b)) 
after paragraph 2, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
“2A. (1) Within a period of 
one year from the date of 
commencement of the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty-fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2019, each District 
Council shall establish Village 
Councils for a village or a group of 
(1)   Recommendations of the Committee 
notified by the Government of Meghalaya:   
 
Addition of proviso to the proposed 
Paragraph 2A of the Bill to amend the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution  – The following 
proviso is required for this new paragraph in 
order to maintain the autonomy of the new 
Autonomous Territorial Councils in the State of 
Meghalaya which will read as follows – 
(1)   The suggestion of the 
Committee as regards Paragraph 
2A of the Bill being applicable to 
State of Meghalaya except with the 
consent of Autonomous Territorial 
Council (ATC) in the State is not 
tenable because the executive 
powers of the State and under 
Sixth Schedule vest with the 
Governor and not with ATC. 

 
 
165 
 
villages in the rural areas and 
Municipal Councils for an urban area 
or an agglomeration of such urban 
areas of the District. 
(2) The District Council may, 
by law, provide for - 
(a) the number of Village 
Councils and Municipal Councils 
to be formed, their composition, 
the number of seats in each such 
Council in such manner that their 
numbers remain the same 
throughout the district; 
(b) the manner of allocation of 
seats in such Councils subject to 
reservation of not less than one-
third seats for women; 
(c) the delimitation of territorial 
constituencies for the purpose of 
election to the Village Council and 
the Municipal Councils on the 
basis of adult suffrage; 
(d) the qualification for voting at 
election to such Councils; 
(e) the qualifications for being 
elected as members of such 
Councils; 
“Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall 
apply to the State of Meghalaya except with 
the consent of the Autonomous Territorial 
Councils in that State.” 
 
 
 
(2)   Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –  
 
Addition of the following proviso: 
        “Provided that the power to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation 
should not be stalled at the State level for year, 
while ensuring that they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Constitution and 
relevant Union and State Laws;  
 
 
(3) suggestions of KHADC, JHADC and 
GHADC –  
 
        Provided that nothing in sub-paragraphs 
(1) and (2) of paragraph 2A shall apply to the 
State of Meghalaya.  
         Provided in Meghalaya each Territorial 
Council shall also constitute a Territorial 
Planning Committee for the district consisting 
of not more than fifty members of such 
members from the Territorial Council or 
Regional Council and such members as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) and (3)       Suggestion of Lai, 
Mara and Chakma BJP 
Coordination Committee is not 
tenable. The suggestions of 
KHADC, JHADC and GHADC 
regarding time limit of the Governor 
regarding the Bill passed by 
Autonomous Councils are not 
tenable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
166 
 
(f) the term of office of members 
which shall not be less than five 
years; 
(g) the grounds for 
disqualification of members; 
(h) the powers to be exercised 
and functions to be performed by 
such Councils; and 
(i) any other matter relating 
thereto. 
   Provided that nothing in sub-
paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply 
to the State of Meghalaya until 
approved by the Governor of that 
State.”; 
(3)  Each District Council shall 
also constitute a District Planning 
Committee for the district consisting 
of such number of elected members 
from the District Council or Regional 
Council and from each of the Village 
Councils and the Municipal 
Councils, as it deems necessary, for 
the purpose of consolidating plans 
prepared by each such Council and 
to prepare a development plan for 
the district as a whole and such 
deems necessary, for the purpose of 
consolidating plans prepared by each such 
Council and to prepare a development plan for 
the district as a whole and such other matters 
relating thereto. 
          In the first line of Paragraph 3(1)(a). the 
word “transfer” to be followed by a coma “(,)” 
shall be inserted before the word “allotment”. 
and after the words “ of land” to be followed by 
the words “including land records and 
codification, of land holding system ” shall be 
inserted. 
 
          After sub-paragraph (3) of Paragraph 3 a 
proviso shall be inserted namely ”- “Provided 
that when a Bill has been passed by the 
Autonomous Council in Session, it shall be 
submitted to the Governor and the Governor 
shall within a period of sixty days declare either 
that he assents to the Bill or that be withholds 
assent therefore or that he reserves the Bill for 
reconsideration. 
 
           Provided further that the Governor may, 
as soon as possible after the submission to 
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill 
together with a message requesting that the 
Council will reconsider the Bill or any specified 
provisions thereof and, in particular, will 
consider the desirability of introducing any 
such Bill or amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
167 
 
other matters relating thereto. 
(4) All laws made under this. 
paragraph shall be submitted 
forthwith to the Governor and, until 
assented to by him, shall have no 
effect.; 
so returned, the Council shall reconsider the 
Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again 
by the Council with or without amendment and 
on resubmission to the governor for assent, the 
Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
 
 
(4)   Shri L. Rabha, President, All Rabha 
Students Union of Meghalaya, Tikrikilla, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(5)    Shri L. Darlong, Secretary, MSC of 
Bodo Sahitya Sabha, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya – 
 
(6)  Shri D. Koch, President, Meghalaya 
Koch Association, Ghasura, Ampti, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(7)  President, All Meghalaya Mann (Tai-
Speaking) Welfare Society, Meghalaya –  
 
(8)   President, All Rabha Students Union of 
India –  
 
(9)  President, Hajong Students 
Association, Tura, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya & Others – 
 
 
       Pertaining to the insertion of sub-
paragraphs of (1) and (2) of 2A, after 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) to (9)    The proposed Bill gives 
relaxation to the Sixth Scheduled 
Councils in Meghalaya for not 
having elected Village and 
Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
168 
 
paragraph 2, 
       The proviso “Providing that nothing in sub-
paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to the State 
of Meghalaya until approved by the Governor 
of that State.” shall be omitted.  
 
(10)     Shri Nityananda Debbarma, 
President, Tripura Tribal Employees 
Association (TTEA) –   
 
(11)    Shri Brishaketu Debbarma , 
Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura –    
 
           They had agreed to the proposed 
amendment, subject to insertion of – 
 
           “Constitution of Zonal Councils and 
Sub-Zonal Councils of Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council.” 
 
 
(12)  Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(13)  Shri Budha Debbarma, Office 
Secretary, Indigenous Peoples ’ Front of 
Tripura – 
 
(14)     Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –  
 
 
 
(10) to (14)     There is no proposal 
to insert Zonal/Sub-Zonal Councils 
in the proposed amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
169 
 
 
              2A.(2)2(c), In respect of Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council, Zonal Council 
and Sub Zonal Council to be added. 
 
 
(15)    Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –  
 
(16)  Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secertary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association – 
 
             At present, the District Planning 
Committee (DPC) is constituted with the 
District Magistrate and Collectors and the 
concerned members of the Zilla Parishad 
(District Panchayat). There is no representative 
from the existing TTAADC in the District 
Planning Committee. In other words, the 
TTAADC has no role in formulation of plans 
and programs for the development of the 
District. It is therefore proposed that District 
Planning Committee should be constituted for 
each District with the District Magistrate & 
Collector as well as the Chairman of the Zonal 
Council, Sub Zonal Council and Municipal 
Council of the Territorial Council should be 
included as members of the DPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
(15) and ( 16)      The proposed 
District Planning Committee would 
consist of the elected members 
from the District Council or 
Regional Council and from each of 
the Village Councils and the 
Municipal Councils. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(17)   The views of UAYF are 
welcome and respect the 
democratic functioning of grass root 
institutions. However, the State 

 
 
170 
 
(17)   President, United A.Chik Youth 
Federation (UAYF), Meghalaya –  
 
They had submitted as under – 
 
       (a) Formation of Village Councils is 
important as it will help the different tribes and 
localities who reside in Khasi Hills and Jaintia 
Hills district to voice their grievances through 
the Village Councils. 
       (b) when the Village Council is formed in 
they will become the member or be the part of 
the Committee in government delivering 
system or in allocation of Government Scheme 
and accordingly the member who represent the 
Village Council can raise their grievances or 
place their demand in the committee and 
accordingly the scheme or project can be 
equally distribute or allotted to each and every 
village localities equally without bias. 
        (c) Non-consideration of forming the 
Village Council will lead to unequal distribution 
of public scheme. 
        (d)  If this is not fulfilled, then many 
genuine citizen or community will be deprived 
of equal allocation of government scheme and 
government project and many unrepresented 
tribes or community will suffer and only few 
community and influential people or villages or 
localities and community will be benefitted 
through the government project. 
 
Government and the Councils are 
not agreeable to formation of 
Village Councils at present. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)     The proposed Bill gives 
relaxation to the Sixth Scheduled 
Councils in Meghalaya for not 
having elected Village and 

 
 
171 
 
(18)  Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya –  
  
             Provisions in the Constitution (One 
Hundred and twenty fifth Amendment) Bills 
2019 which dilute the essence of the 
Traditional Institution of Grassroots 
Governance like the Village Council and 
Municipal Council need to be deleted and we 
feel that the Traditional Institutions of 
Grassroots Governance like the Dorbar 
Shnong and Town Committee established and 
constituted by the District Council need to be 
protected, preserve and strengthened at any 
cost for the growth and continuity of the 
indigenous tribe of the State. 
 
(19)     Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram – 
 
Following proviso after proposed Para 2A(4): 
 
           “Provided that the power to make laws, 
as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation 
should not be stalled at the State level for year, 
while ensuring that they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Constitution and 
relevant Union and State Laws’; 
 
(20)   Lai Autonomous District Council , 
Mizoram –  
Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(19) & (20)     Suggestion of Mara 
and Lai ADC is not tenable in view 
of the present scheme of the 
Constitution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
172 
 
 
(a)  In paragraph 2A (1), the following proviso 
shall be inserted; 
 
            “Provided that Establishment of 
Municipal Councils for an urban area shall not 
apply to the Autonomous District/Territorial 
Council of Mizoram until approved by the 
Governor of that State.” 
 
(b)    After sub paragraph 4 of paragraph 2A, a 
new proviso shall be inserted;  
 
            “Provided that any law passed by the 
Autonomous District Council/Territorial Council 
submitted to the Governor for approval shall be 
approved or returned to the Council for 
reconsideration within three months of time. 
Otherwise the law shall be deemed to have 
been given Assent by the Governor of a state, 
and it shall come into force of law. 
 
(21)     Shri Debolal Gorlosa, CEM, NCHAC – 
 
The following changes may be included: 
         “Provided further that nothing in sub-
paragraph (1) & (2) shall apply to the state of 
Meghalaya and the North Cachar Hills 
Autonomous Council, Haflong (Dima Hasao 
District) in the State of Assam, until approved 
by the Governor of that State”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(21) & (22)       The proposed 
amendments about Dima Hasao 
Councils have been made in 
consultation with the State 
Government. Their suggestions are 
not tenable.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
173 
 
 
(22)     Shri Frezer Sengyung, Jadikhe 
Naisho Hoshom, Assam –  
 
Following proviso to be inserted – 
 
         “Provided that nothing in Sub-
Paragraph (1) and (2) of the proposed New 
Paragraph 2A after Paragraph 2 should be 
applied in Dima Hasao Dist. Until approved by 
the proposed Dima Hasao Autonomous 
Territorial Council.” 
 
(23)  Shri Chitta Ranjan Debbarma, 
Tipraland State Party, Agartala –  
 
They had proposed as under – 
  
             We demand to include in the 
amendment proposal, the “Sub-zonal Council ” 
in the intermediate level above Village 
Committees (Councils) and 4(four) “Zonal 
Councils” above Sub-Zonal Councils i.e. as 
good as District level Council within the District 
Council areas are functioning. It is to be 
mentioned further that at present there are 591 
Gram Panchaya ts (almost similar 587 Village 
Committees), 35 Intermediate Panchayats and 
8 District Panchayats are working in the rural 
areas of the State. 
              These Zonal Councils Sub-Zonal 
Councils and Village Committees (Councils) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(23)      There is no proposal to 
insert Zonal/Sub-Zonal Councils in 
the proposed amendment.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
174 
 
would be under District Council since TTAADC 
is not confined to one or two districts and it cut 
across all 8(eight) revenue District of the State. 
As such, it is justified to constitute Zonal 
Councils and Sub-Zonal Councils under the 
District or as proposed Territorial Council. 
Alternatively, these provisions may also be 
inserted after paragraph 3(1)(e) for Tripura. 
              Therefore, it is to place demand to 
suitably insert in the proposed amendment in 
Sl. No.(b) “2A(I) and (2)(a),(b),(c) before the 
word “Village Councils” as at page No.3. 
 
 
(24)     Ms. Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & 
Angela Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, 
Meghalaya – 
 
               No exemption should be given to 
Meghalaya vis-a-vis establishment of Village 
Councils (or any other traditional terms 
identifying the same like Dorbar Shnong) 
regarding elections and voting allowing women 
to both take part in deliberations, elections and 
standing for elections at the village level as 
well as reservation of one third seats in the 
Village Councils (or any other traditional terms 
identifying the same like Dorbar Shnong) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(24)   The proposed Bill gives 
relaxation to the Sixth Scheduled 
Councils in Meghalaya for not 
having elected Village and 
Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
           
8. 
(Clause 
In paragraph 3A, in sub-paragraphs 
(1), - 
(1)   Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief Executive 
Member, Chakma Autonomous District 
(1) and (2)     At this stage, it is not 
possible to agree to suggestion of 

 
 
175 
 
3(c))      (i) in clause (c), for the word 
"preservation", the word "animal 
husbandry and veterinary, that is to 
say, preservation" shall be 
substituted; 
    (ii) for clause (d), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
      "(d)   education, that is to say, 
primary and secondary education, 
higher secondary education 
including vocational training, adul t 
education, college 
education(general);"; 
(iii) in clause (n), - 
     (a) after the words “libraries, 
museums”, the word “,archaeology” 
shall be inserted; 
    (b) the word “and”, occurring at 
the end shall be omitted; 
(iv) after clause (o), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 
(p)    forests (other than reserved 
forest);  
(q)    public works relating to the 
Public Works Department; 
(r)    sericulture; 
(s)   cultural affairs; 
(t)    soil conservation; 
(u)   co-operation; 
(v)   handloom and textile; 
(w)  health and family welfare; 
(x)  public health engineering; 
Council –   
 
       In the proposed amendment, after Clause 
3B, the following be inserted as:  
 
3C. Additional powers of the Chakma 
Autonomous District Council, Lai Autonomous 
District Council and Mara Autonomous District 
Council to make laws. 
 
(2)  Lai, Mara and Chakm a BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –  
Insertion of a new Paragraph 
        After paragraph 3B, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted in its application to 
the State of Mizoram, namely:- 
 
3C. Additional powers of the Chakma 
Autonomous Territorial Council, the Mara 
Territorial Autonomous Council and the Lai 
Autonomous Territorial Council to make laws: 
 
(3)      Shri Nityananda Debbarma, 
President, Tripura Tribal Employees 
Association (TTEA) –  
They had agreed to the proposed amendment, 
subject to insertion of – 
 
      “Establishment of:- 
Shri Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief 
Executive Member, Chakma 
Autonomous District Council 
regarding additional powers to 
Chakma, Lai and Mara 
Autonomous District Councils.  
Additional powers to District 
Councils have to be done in 
consultation with the State 
Government. 
 The proposed amendment to 
increase the powers of Karbi 
Anglong and Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Districts are as 
agreed in Memorandum of 
Settlements with UPDS and DHD 
and has been agreed by the State 
Government of Assam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3)    The provision of the proposed 
amendment is not applicable to 
Tripura. 
            The proposed amendment 
to increase the powers of Karbi 
Anglong and Dima Hasao 
Autonomous Districts are as 

 
 
176 
 
(y)  social welfare; 
(z)  sports and youth welfare; 
(za) weight & measures subject to 
the provisions of entry 50 of List 1 
of the Seventh Schedule; 
(zb)  food and civil supplies; 
(zc) publicity and public relation; 
(zd)  printing and stationery; 
(ze)  tourism;  
(zf) urban development including 
town and country planning;  
(zg)  tribal research institute 
controlled and financed by the State 
Government; 
(zh)  land and revenue, land 
reforms; 
(zi)   planning & development; 
(zj)   Municipal Corporation or 
Boards, improvement trust, district 
boards and other local authorities; 
(zk)  welfare of tribes living in hilly 
areas; 
(zl)   markets and fairs; 
(zm)  lotteries subject to provisions 
of entry 40 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule;  
(zn)  statistics; 
(zo)  intoxicating liquors, opium and 
derivatives subject to the provisions 
of entry 84 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule; 
(zp)   labour and employment; 
 
(i) Tipraland Universities (Both General & 
Technical) under UGC, AICTE 
(ii) Referral Hospitals, 
(iii) Introduction of Englo Roman script in the 
education sectors from primary to Universities 
level. 
 
 
(4)   Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief 
Executive Member, Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council –  
 
Inclusion of Mines and Minerals Development:  
          In sub-paragraph 1 of paragraph 3, after 
proposed clause (zs) another clause is 
required to be included as “(zt) Mines & 
Minerals Development (subject to the provision 
of list 1 with respect of regulation and 
development under the control of the Union)” 
  
Inclusion of Technical & Higher Education in 
Paragraph 3A:         
  
          In clause (d) of Paragraph 3A, the 
subject “Technical & Higher Education ” is 
required to be incorporated instead of “College 
Education (General)”.  
 
Inclusion of ecology, wildlife and environment:  
 
         The proposed clause (p) of paragraph 3 A 
agreed in Memorandum of 
Settlements with UPDS and DHD 
and has been agreed by the State 
Government of Assam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)  The subject of Mines & 
Minerals development, this subject 
is in the Union List and there is no 
proposal to change this.  
        With regard to inclusion of 
technical and higher education in 
Para 3A of the Sixth Schedule, the 
suggestion is not tenable as this 
subject is enumerated in entry 66 of 
list I and entry 25 of list III of the 
Seventh Schedule.  
        Inclusion of ecology, wildlife 
and environment, the suggestion is 
not possible as this was not in the 
Memorandum of Settlement with 
UPDS.  
 

 
 
177 
 
(zq)   registration of births and 
deaths; 
(zr)    small, cottage & rural Industry; 
(zs) rural development including 
District Rural Development 
Agency.”, 
“Forest (other than reserved forest) ” be 
replaced with “(p) forest, ecology, wildlife and 
environment.” 
 
(5) Shri Ramlal Chauhan, President, Karbi 
Anglong Hindi Bhasi Sanstha Central 
Committee and others  –   
           To transfer more powers for the benefit 
of people. 
 
(6)     Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, 
Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura –   
 
(7) Shri Dhananjay Tripura, Youth 
Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura –  
 
(8)  Shri Ahalas Jamatia, President, All Tipra 
Indigenous Students Association –   
      They had agreed to the proposed 
amendment, subject to insertion of – 
 
      “Establishment of:- 
(i) Tipraland Universities (Both General & 
Technical) under UGC, AICTE 
(ii)   Referral Hospitals, 
(iii) Introduction of Englo Roman script in the 
education sectors from primary to Universities 
level. 
 
 
 
 
(5)     The proposed amendments 
incorporate the Memorandum of 
Settlement with UPDS and 
enhance powers of the Councils. 
 
 
 
(6) to (8)      The proposals as 
regards TTAADC have been based 
on discussions with the State 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
178 
 
Forest (both reserved and unreserved) as 
mentioned in s ub-clause (p) & of sub-clause 
(o) being an integral part of the life and 
livelihood of the indigenous people of Tripura 
therefore it should also be handed over to the 
Tipraland Territorial Council. 
In the sub-para (zh) of para z. 
           Agreed to the said amendment however 
it should be considered in the lines of List-II of 
State List under VII Schedule of the Indian 
Constitution viz. 
 
Entry 18     Land, that is to say, right in or over 
hand, land tenures including the relation of 
landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; 
transfer and alienation of agricultural land; and 
land improvement and agricultural loan; 
colonization. 
Entry 45  Land revenue, including the 
assessment and collection of revenue, the 
maintenance of land records, survey for 
revenue purposes and records of rights, and 
alienation of revenue. 
Entry 3      Procedure in respect of rent and 
Revenue Courts, Customary courts and Munsif 
courts. 
 
 
 
(9)     Shri Frezer Sengyung, Jadikhe Naisho 
Hoshom, Assam –   
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9)      The suggestion is not 
tenable. 

 
 
179 
 
           The existing provision enshrined in 
Paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule should be 
left in original form and not be diluted. 
 
(10)    Shri Chitta Ranjan Debbarma, 
Tipraland State Party, Agartala – 
 
Following is proposed – 
           To include a separate paragraph as 3C 
or any other as deem fit in respect of the 
Tripura to empower more suitable power as 
given to the Bodoland Territorial Council it may 
simply replica of paragraph 3(B) which may be 
as follows:- 
           3(C) Additional powers to the Tipraland 
Autonomous Territorial Council to make laws. 
 
(11)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
Following is proposed – 
         (i)     In Sub-Paragraph (1) of Paragraph 
3A after the NCHAC & KAAC, the state of 
Tripura should be inserted in the proposed 
Amendment Bill of 2019, i.e., The Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty Fifth Amendment 
Bill, 2019. 
 It is demanded that TTAADC of Tripura 
must come under the purview of the Paragraph 
3A of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of 
India including the proposed provisions of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) & ( 11)        The proposed 
amendments have been based on 
the discussions with the State 
Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
180 
 
said Amendment Bill of 2019 so as to provide 
additional powers to the TTAADC of Tripura. 
 
           (ii)      In paragraph 3A, in sub-
paragraph (1), (iv) after clause (o), the 
following shall be inserted, namely in clause 
(p) of the said Amendment Bill, 2019 the words 
“forests (other than reserved forests” should be 
substituted  by the words ” forests including 
reserved forest”  
 
  In clause (zh), the Entry 18 and 45 of 
List-II of 7th Schedule should be inserted with 
a view to provide land protection rights to the 
tribal people particularly who are residing 
within the territory of TTAADC. 
 
 
(12)  Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief 
Executive Member, Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council –  
 
            To end constant administrative conflict 
in the Higher Education Sector between the 
Council and the State Education Department, 
since college education is included in 
Paragraph 3A Sub-Paragraph ii(d) the words 
“higher education” may be added. 
 
          The main revenue base of the Council 
has been revenue collected from minor 
minerals (schedule ‘x’ and ‘y’ items) which has 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12)    The proposed amendment is 
in consonance with the 
Memorandum of Settlement signed 
with UPDS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
   

 
 
181 
 
been taken over by the State Government 
through the enactment of Assam Minor Mineral 
Concession Rules 2013. This must be restored 
to the Council by adding the item “Mines and 
Minerals” to the list in Paragraph 3A as Clause 
(zt). 
 
 
9. 
(Clause 
3(d)) 
in paragraph 6, for sub-paragraph 
(2), the following sub-paragraph 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
“(3)  The Governor may, by 
rules, entrust the District Council or 
as the case may be, the Regional 
Council, with such powers and 
authority as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as 
institutions of self-governance and 
such rules may contain provisions 
for further devolution of such powers 
and responsibilities upon – 
(a)  the Village Council, subject to 
such conditions as may be specified 
therein, with respect to- 
(i)  The preparation of plans for 
economic development and social 
justice; 
(ii)  The implementation of schemes 
for economic development and 
social justice as may be entrusted to 
them including those in relation to 
agriculture and agricultural 
extension, land improvement, 
implementation of land reforms, land 
(1)      Recommendations of the Committee 
notified by the Government of Meghalaya :  
 
To include the words “with the 
consent of the Territorial Councils ” in the 
proposed amendment to Para 6 of the 
existing Sixth Schedule to the Constitution 
– 
 
 The following proviso may be included 
for Meghalaya in the amendment, to create 
Para 6 (3) – 
“Provided that nothing in sub-paragraph 
(3) of this paragraph shall apply to the State of 
Meghalaya except with the consent of the 
Autonomous Territorial Councils of that State.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) and (10) to (12):    Para 6(3) is 
an enabling provision by which the 
Governor may by rules entrust the 
District Council or as the case may 
be, the Regional Council with such 
powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to 
function as institutions of self 
governance and such rules may 
contain provisions for further 
devolution of such powers and 
responsibilities upon the Village 
Councils and Municipal Councils in 
respect of preparing plans for 
economic development and social 
justice and implementation of such 
schemes. This provision is on the 
lines of 73 rd and 74 th Constitutional 
Amendments so that the Sixth 
Schedule institutions may be 
brought at par with Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and Municipalities in the 
rest of the Country. With more 
democratization, the Councils 
should be willing to take more and 
more powers for development of 

 
 
182 
 
consolidation and soil conservation, 
minor irrigation, water management 
and watershed development, animal 
husbandry, dairying and poultry, 
fisheries, social forestry and farm 
forestry, minor forest produce, small 
scale industries including food 
processing industries, khadi, village 
and cottage industries, rural 
housing, drinking water, fuel and 
fodder, roads, culverts, bridges, 
ferries, waterways and other means 
of communication, rural 
electrification including distribution of 
electricity, non-conventional energy 
sources, poverty alleviation 
programme, education including 
primary and secondary schools, 
technical training and vocational 
education, adult and non-formal 
education, libraries, cultural 
activities, markets and fairs, health 
and sanitation including hospitals, 
primary health centres and 
dispensaries, family welfare, women 
and child development, social 
welfare including welfare of the 
persons with disability (Divyangjan), 
welfare of the weaker sections, in 
particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes, public 
distribution system and maintenance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2)     Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief Executive 
Member, Chakma Autonomous District 
Council –  
 
In paragraph 6, for sub-paragraph (2), the 
following sub-paragraph shall be substituted:- 
 
          (2) The Governor may on 
recommendation or on application of the 
District Council or as the case may be, the 
regional council shall cause for further 
devolution of such powers and responsibilities 
under paragraph 3C upon (a) the Village 
Council, subject to such condition as may be 
specified therein, (b) the municipal council 
subject to such condition as may be specified 
therein for preparation of plans for economic 
development and social justice. 
 
 
 
(3)   Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram – (‘A’ at p. 
298/C) 
 
their areas. 
 It is suggested that the 
proposed amendments may please 
be approved by the Hon ’ble 
Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs. 
(2) to (5)       The proposed 
changes in paragraph 6(3) is 
enabling clause where Governor 
may, by rules, entrust District 
Councils with such powers and 
authority, as may be necessary, to 
enable them to function as 
Institutions of self governance and 
such rules may contain the 
provisions for further devolution of 
such powers and responsibilities 
upon the Village Councils and 
Municipal Councils as per 11 th and 
12th Schedule.  The suggestion of 
Shri Rasik Mohan Chakma, Lai, 
Mara and Chakma BJP 
Coordination Committee and Shri 
Rebati Tripura, MP Lok Sabha , 
have already been incorporated. 
The procedure for delegation of 
more powers is for the State 
Government and Autonomous 
District Councils in a particular 
State. If the State Government and 
Councils are in agreement, 

 
 
183 
 
of community assets; and 
(b) the Municipal Council subject 
to such conditions as may be 
specified therein, with respect to— 
(i)     the preparation of plans for 
economic development and social 
justice; 
(ii)     the performance of functions 
and the implementation of schemes 
as may be entrusted to them 
including those in relation to urban 
planning and town planning, 
regulation of land-use and 
construction of buildings, planning 
for economic and social 
development, roads and bridges, 
water supply for domestic, industrial 
and commercial purposes, public 
health, sanitation conservancy and 
solid waste management, fire 
services, urban forestry, protection 
of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects, safeguarding the 
interests of weaker sections of 
society including the handicapped 
and mentally retarded, slum 
improvement and upgradation, 
urban poverty alleviation, provision 
of urban amenities and facilities 
such as parks, gardens, play 
grounds, promotion of cultural, 
educational and aesthetic aspects, 
 
Addition of the following: 
          With the consent of the Autonomous 
Territorial Council, the Governor, may, by 
rules, have the power to allocate all or any of 
the functions specified under Eleventh and 
Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution to their 
respective Municipal Councils or Village 
Councils as may be necessary to enable them 
function as institution of self-governance” 
 
(4)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha) , 
2-Tripura East (Tripura) – 
 
Addition of the following: 
 
          With the consent of the Autonomous 
Territorial Council, the Governor may, by the 
rules, have the power to allocate all or any of 
the functions specified under Eleventh and 
Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution to their 
respective Traditional Municipal Councils or 
Traditional Village Councils as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as 
institution of self-governance.” 
 
 
(5)   Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In sub-paragraph (2) of Paragraph 6 the 
following proviso shall be added-  
additional powers, as per 11 th and 
12th Schedule may be delegated to 
the Councils. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
184 
 
burials and burial grounds, 
cremations, cremation grounds and 
electric crematoriums, cattle pounds, 
prevention of cruelty to animals, vital 
statistics including registration of 
births and deaths, public amenities 
including street lighting, parking lots, 
bus stops and public conveniences 
and regulation of slaughter houses 
and tanneries.”; 
            “Provided that while the Council is 
entrust with such powers conditionally or 
unconditionally the state government shall 
allocate enough of fund for proper functioning 
of the Autonomous District 
Council/Autonomous Territorial Council.’ 
 
 
(6)      Shri Nityananda Debbarma , 
President, Tripura Tribal Employees 
Association (TTEA) –   
 
(7)   Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(8)  Shri Budha Debbarma, Office Secretary, 
Indigenous Peoples’ Front of Tripura –  
 
(9)    Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –  
 
They had agreed to the proposed amendment, 
subject to insertion of – 
 
           “Constitution of Zonal Councils and 
Sub-Zonal Councils of Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council.” 
 
(10)   Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, 
Diphu –  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6)  to (9)   There is no proposal to 
constitute Zonal and Sub-Zonal 
Councils in the Scheduled area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
185 
 
 
            They had stated that this is against the 
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution and that 
Government must withdraw it. 
 
(11)     Shri Frezer Sengyung, Jadikhe 
Naisho Hoshom, Assam –  
 
           The existing provision enshrined in sub-
paragraph (2) of Paragraph 6 of the Sixth 
Schedule should be left in original form and not 
be diluted. 
 
 
(12)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong – 
 
Following proviso is proposed – 
 
            Provided nothing in this sub paragraph 
(3) shall apply to the State of Meghalaya. 
 
 
(13)    Ms Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & 
Angela Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, 
Meghalaya –  
 
             Mandatory Social Audit to be 
implemented by Village Councils and Municipal 
Councils in Meghalaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13)  The proposed Bill gives 
relaxation to the Sixth Scheduled 
Councils in Meghalaya for not 
having elected Village and 
Municipal Councils till the Governor 
approves the same. This has been 
done in consultation with the State 
Government of Meghalaya. 

 
 
186 
 
 
10. 
(Clause 
3(e)) 
after paragraph 8, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
    “8A. (1) The Finance Commission 
appointed by the Governor for a 
State shall review the financial 
position of the District Councils 
including the Village Council and the 
Municipal Council and to make 
recommendations to the Governor 
as to- 
(a) the principles which should 
govern- 
(i)    the distribution between the 
State and the District Councils of the 
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, 
tolls and fees leviable by the State, 
and the allocation of such proceeds 
between the District Councils and 
the Village Councils and Municipal 
Councils under its authority; 
(ii)     the determination of the taxes, 
duties, tolls and fees which may be 
assigned to, or appropriated by, the 
District Councils including the 
Village Councils and the Municipal 
Councils under its authority; 
(iii)       the grants- in-aid to the 
District Councils and the Village 
Councils and the Municipal Councils 
under its authority from the 
(1)    Suggestions o f KHADC, JHADC and 
GHADC –  
8A. (1)  The Finance Commission appointed by 
the Governor for a State wherein one-third of 
the total members are from the ATC(s) shall 
review the financial position of the District 
Councils including the Village Council and 
Municipal Council and to make 
recommendations to the Governor as to – 
Provided in the State of Meghalaya the term 
Village Council shall mean the Traditional 
Institution of Local Self Governance and the 
term Municipal Council shall mean the Town 
Committee constituted and established by the 
Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 
 
(2)    Shri L. Rabha, President, All Rabha 
Students Union of Meghalaya, Tikrikilla, 
Meghalaya -   
 
(3)     Shri L. Darlong, Secretary, MSC of 
Bodo Sahitya Sabha, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya – 
 
(4)   Shri D. Koch, President, Meghalaya 
Koch Association, Ghasura, Ampti, 
Meghalaya –  
 
(5)    President, All Meghalaya Mann (Tai-
(1)    The suggestions of KHADC, 
JHADC and GHADC are not 
tenable as Finance Commission for 
the State is to be recommended by 
the Governor of the State.  It is not 
desirable to have 1/3 rd of the total 
Members of the Finance 
Commission from the 
Territorial/District Councils. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) to (7)      Paragraph 1(2) of the 
Sixth Schedule provides that “If 
there are different Scheduled 
Tribes in an autonomous district, 
the Governor may, by public 
notification, divide the area or areas 
inhabited by them into autonomous 
regions”  
           Presently, there is no 
Regional Council in any of the Sixth 
Schedule ADCs. 

 
 
187 
 
Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(b)    the measures needed to 
improve the financial position of the 
District Councils and the Village 
Councils and the Municipal Councils 
under its authority; and 
(c)    any other matter referred to the 
Finance Commission by the 
Governor in the interests of sound 
finance. 
(2) The Governor shall cause 
every recommendation made by the 
Commission under sub-paragraph 
(1) together with an explanatory 
memorandum as to the action taken 
thereon to be laid before the 
Legislature of  the State.”; 
Speaking) Welfare Society, Meghalaya – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(6)      President, All Rabha Students Union 
of India –  
 
(7)  President, Hajong Students 
Association, Tura, West Garo Hills, 
Meghalaya & Others –  
 
         With regard to the insertion of paragraph 
8A, in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph: 
 
           After the words “District Councils ”, the 
words “or as the case may be, the Regional 
Councils” shall be inserted. 
 
11. 
(Clause 
3(f)) 
in paragraph 20, in the Table, in Part 
I, for serial number 1 and entries 
relating thereto , the following serial 
number and entries shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
"1. The Dima Hasao District"; 
 
(1)    Lai, Mara and Chakma BJP Co-
ordination Committee, Mizoram –   
 
 In paragraph 20, -    
     
In the Table, in Part II, for serial number 1, 2 
and 3, and the entries relating thereto, the 
following serial number and entries shall be 
(1)      The suggestions of Lai, Mara 
and Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee are not tenable as 
explained above. The term 
Territorial Council is used when the 
jurisdiction of the District Council 
extend more than one Revenue 
District in the State. 

 
 
188 
 
substituted, namely:- 
“1. The Khasi Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council”; 
2. The Jaintia Hills Autonomus Territorial 
Council”; 
3. The Garo Hills Autonomous Territorial 
Council”; 
 
In the Table, in Part IIA, the name “Tripura 
Tribal Areas District ” shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
         “Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous 
Territorial Council” 
 
In the Table, in Part III, for serial number 1,2 
and 3, and the entries relating thereto, the 
following serial number and entries shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
         “1. The Chakma Autonomous Territorial   
Council”; 
          2. The Mara Autonomous Territorial 
Council”; 
          3. The Lai Autonomous Territorial 
Council”; 
 
 
(2)       Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha) , 
2-Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(3)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) and (3)        The suggestion is 
not tenable.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
189 
 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
          In paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule, 
the following new paragraphs substituted as 
under:- 
 
                        Part II-A 
Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council 
 
 
(4)   Shri Nityananda Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Employees Association 
(TTEA) –  
 
(5) Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –  
 
(6)    Shri Budha Debbarma, Office 
Secretary, Indigenous Peoples ’ Front of 
Tripura –   
 
(7) Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –   
 
The table in Part IIA and the entries shall be 
substituted, namely – 
 
           “Tipraland Autonomous Territorial 
Councils.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) to ( 10)      As regards 
nomenclature of TTAADC, the draft 
Bill was consulted with the State 
Government of Tripura and the 
proposed changes was as per 
discussions with the State 
Government.   
 

 
 
190 
 
 
(8)   Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, Indigenous 
People’s Front of Tripura –   
 
(9)   Shri Dhananjay Tripura, President, 
Youth Indigenous People ’s Front of Tripura 
–  
(10)     Shri Ahalas Jamatia, President, All 
Tipra Indigenous Students Association –  
 
The table in Part IIA and the entries shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
             “Tipraland Territorial Council” 
 

191 
 
Table –II 
Representations received on the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 and 
comments of MHA  
 
GENERAL ISSUES 
 
 General Issues 
(Recommendations/Suggestions 
not specifically w.r.t clauses) 
Name of the representationist / stakeholders 
and suggestions 
Ministry’s Comments 
1. Retention of unique tribal features 
in Meghalaya.  
Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA The suggestion is general.  
2. To ensure that Councils received 
necessary financial empowerment 
so that they can directly intervene 
and ignite the slow growth of our 
tribal communities without 
disturbing their in-built and unique 
practices.  
Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA The proposal is there to 
amend Article 280 to increase 
financial resources of the 
Council. 
3. The proposed amendment should 
spell out substantial guidelines to 
overcome lacuna to avert pending 
threat of the erosion or probable 
disappearance of our unique tribal 
law and practice.  
Dr. M. Ampareen Lyngdoh, MLA Proposed amendment will 
strengthen District, Village 
and Municipal Councils. 
4. Sixth Schedule should contain 
some provisions to compensate 
promises made in the Instrument of 
Accession. 
Sh. John F. Khars hiing, Adviser, Federation 
of Khasi States  
 
              Sixth Schedule should contain some 
provisions to compensate promises made in the 
Instrument of Accession.   
 
               National Commission for Scheduled 
Tribes (NCST) under Article 338 A issued a 
The suggestion of Shri 
Kharshiing relate to 
instrument of accession. 
These issues are not the 
subject matter of the 
proposed amendment. 

192 
 
directive on 26.04.2012 and subsequent letters 
from Chairperson, NCST to Union Minister of 
Home Affairs on 06.01.201 and 27.01.2014 on 
the need to incorporate the agreement of the 
Khasi States with the Constitution of India.   
 
5. Bill to amend Central MMDR Act, 
1957 not getting assent.  
Sh. John F. Khars hiing, Adviser, Federation 
of Khasi States 
The suggestion does not 
relate to the proposed 
amendments which pertain to 
a subject falling in Union List. 
Hence, no comments are 
given at this stage.  
6. NCRWC in its report submitted in 
2002 recommended that ‘Five 
Syiem, Dolloi and Nokma to be 
elected from amongst themselves 
to be nominated as members of the 
Khasi, Jaintia and Garo Hills 
Autonomous District Councils’.  
Sh. John F. Khars hiing, Adviser, Federation 
of Khasi States  
Recommendations of 
NCRWC were considered 
and incorporated in the 
proposed Bill to the extent 
possible and in consultation 
with the State Government. 
Hence, the given suggestion 
has not been proposed. 
7. Proposed amendment does not 
provide any scope of enhancement 
of additional powers for ADCs in 
Mizoram except amendment of 
Article 280.   
Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram 
There is a proposal to 
increase conferment of more 
powers to all the Councils 
including Mizoram under 
proposed paragraph 
6(3)(a)(i)&(ii) and 
6(3)(b)(i)&(ii). 
8. Councils in Mizoram are given 
funds for salaries to staff by the 
State Government, no funds for 
development.  
Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram 
9. Article 200 of the Constitution (1)    Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya –   
                
            The provision and the spirit of the Article 
200 to the Constitution of India relating to the 
Assent of Bills passed by the ADCs must be 
There is no proposal to 
amend Article 200 of the 
Constitution 

193 
 
incorporated in the Sixth Schedule so as to 
ensure true autonomy to the legislative power of 
the ADCs in the State of Meghalaya. 
10. Article 275 of the Constitution (1)   Shri Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief 
Executive Member, Chakma Autonomous 
District Council, Mizoram -   
 
              In Article 275 (1) of the Constitution after 
sub-clause (6) the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted: 
 
(c) provided further that there shall be paid out of 
the consolidated fund of India as Grant-in Aid of 
the State of Mizoram sums, capital and recurring 
equivalent to – 
 
(i)  the average excess of expenditure over the 
revenues during the two years immediately 
preceding of the commencement of this 
constitution in respects of the administration of 
the scheduled areas specified in (Part-III) of the 
table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule; and 
 
(ii) the cost of such schemes of development as 
may be undertaken by that state with the 
approval of the Government of India for the 
purpose of raising level of administration of the 
rest of the areas of that State. 
 
 
(2)    Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –   
 
(3)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
(1) to (4)      There is no 
proposal to amend Article 275 
of the Constitution. For 
increasing the financial 
resources of the Councils, 
Article 280 is proposed to be 
amended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

194 
 
Mizoram –  
  
In Article 275 of the Constitution, - 
In Sub-paragraph (1), - 
 
     (i) in first proviso after the words “Schedule 
areas” the words “and tribal areas ” and after the 
words “areas of that State. ” The sentence 
“However, allocation of consolidated fund of 
India, for the Territorial Councils under Sixth 
Schedule shall be made by the Government of 
India separately” shall be inserted; 
 
   (ii)   in second proviso for the words “the State 
of Assam ” the words “the State of Assam and 
Mizoram” shall be substituted: 
 
   (iii)   in sub-clause (a), of the second proviso 
after the words “[Part II A] ” the words “and Part 
III” shall be inserted; 
     (iv)    in clause (b), (1A) sub-clause (i), for the 
words “the State of Assam ” the words “the State 
of Assam and Mizoram” shall be inserted: 
 
     (v)      in 1(A) sub-clause (ii), for the words 
“the State of Assam ” the words “the State of 
Assam and Mizoram” shall be substituted: 
 
(4)       Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
Article 275 (1) of the Constitution shall be 
amended so as to provide the Autonomous 
Territorial/State Councils to prepare schemes of 
development in their own in order to promote the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

195 
 
welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the Tribal 
Areas (Sixth Schedule areas) specified in the 
Part I, II-A of the table appended to paragraph- 
20 of the Sixth Schedule or to raise the level of 
administration of the said schedule areas to that 
of the administration of that State. 
 
(5)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–  
 
(6)   Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee –  
 
          We demand that the implementation of 
Article 275 and 280 of the Constitution of India for 
economical upliftment of the Indigenous People 
of Tripura. 
 
(7)    Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
–  
Insertion of the following –   
 
            After proviso (b) of Article 275 (1), 
another proviso (c) is to be added as under – 
 
          “(c)    The costs of such schemes of 
development as may be undertaken by the 
Autonomous Council created under the Sixth 
Schedule with the approval of the Government of 
India for the purpose of raising the level of 
administration of the said areas to that of the 
administration of the rest of the areas of the 
State.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) to  (7)    There is no 
proposal to amend Article 275 
of the Constitution which is 
administered by Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

196 
 
 
(8)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
               Article 275(1) of the Constitution shall 
be amended so as to provide the Autonomous 
Territorial/State Councils to prepare schemes of 
development in their own in order to promote the 
welfare of the scheduled tribes in the Tribal Areas 
(Sixth Schedule Areas) specified in the Part I, II-A 
of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule or to raise the level of 
administration of the said schedule areas to that 
of the administration of that State. 
 
(9)  Lai Autonomous District Council, Mizoram 
–  
 
In Article 275 of the Constitution,  
 
       (1) in sub-paragraph (1), in second proviso 
for the words “the State of Assam” the words “the 
States of Assam and Mizoram” shall be inserted; 
 
        (2) in sub-paragraph (1), in sub-clause (a), 
of the second proviso after the words “[Part I]” the 
words “[Part I and III]” shall be inserted; 
 
        (3) in sub-paragraph (1), in clause (b), [(1A) 
sub-clause  
         (i), for the “the State of Assam ” the State of 
Assam” the words “the States of Assam and 
Mizoram” hall be substituted,” 
 
         (4) in sub-paragraph (1), in [(1A) sub-clause 
 
 
 
 
(8) to ( 11)   There is no 
proposal to amend Article 275 
of the Constitution. For 
increasing the financial 
resources of the Councils, 
Article 280 is proposed to be 
amended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

197 
 
(ii), for the words “the State of Assam ” the words 
“the States of Assam and Mizoram ” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
(10)     Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, 
Diphu –  
 
              Article 275 is specially made for the 
Sixth Schedule Areas.  Article 280 is a direction 
to Finance Commission for distribution of fund 
between the Union and the States. If the areas 
governed by Sixth Schedule are to get direct 
funding from the Finance Commission of India, 
the phrase “and Tribal Areas of Paragraph 20 of 
the Sixth Schedule ” should be inserted between 
“the States ” and ”of the net proceeds ” in clause 
(3) (a) of Article 280.  Or, the sub-clause, “the 
tribal areas specified in [Part I] of the table 
appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule 
and referred to Article 275 (1) (a) ” may be 
inserted for channelizing fund to Article 275 or for 
sending fund directly to the Autonomous 
Councils.  We demand that this should be done 
by the government. 
 
 
(11)   Shri Dilip Kr. Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Officers Welfare Forum – 
 
              Article 275 (1) and (2) may be 
accordingly amended to ensure enhance flow of 
fund for development of the Autonomous Council/ 
State area in Tripura also. 
 

198 
 
11. Article 282 of the Constitution Shri Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief Executive 
Member, Chakma Autonomous District 
Council, Mizoram –  
 
In Article 282 of the Constitution, after the words 
‘for any public purpose ’ the words ‘including for 
specific problems of Autonomous District Council 
area as referred to in clause (2) of Article 244 ’ 
shall be inserted. 
 
There is no proposal to 
amend Article 282 of the 
Constitution. 
12. Paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule (1)    Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(2)  Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
 
Amendment of Paragraph 1 –  
(1) In sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the 
Sixth Schedule, for the words “The Governor 
may, by the public notification ”, the words “The 
Parliament may, by law” shall be substituted. 
 
(2)  The first and second provisions to sub-
paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth 
Schedule shall be omitted.  
 
(3)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram -   
 
Following is proposed: 
 
In the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.   
(a)   in paragraph 1,- 
 
(1) to (6)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
1 of the Sixth Schedule. 
Constitution has delegated to 
the Governor a part of the 
power conferred on 
Parliament itself by paragraph 
21 of the Sixth Schedule. 
 

199 
 
      (i)  in sub-paragraph (3), for the words the 
Governor may, be public notification ”  the words 
“Parliament may, by Law” shall be substituted:  
 
      (ii)  in sub-paragraph (3), the first and the 
second provisos shall be omitted: 
 
(4)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(5)     Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U Hynniewtrap 
–  
 
        In Paragraph 1, a new proviso shall be 
added namely:-  
               Provided also that the Governor shall 
exercise his powers under this paragraph after 
due consultation and consent of the Autonomous 
District Council/Autonomous Territorial Councils. 
 
 
(6)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
Following is proposed – 
                It is also demanded that all the powers 
specified under sub-paragraph 3 of paragraph 1 
should be vested to the Parliament of India and 
any bill(s), resolution(s) or decision(s)/rule(s)/ 
regulation(s) which is /are brought, taken and / or 
passed by the legislative assembly of TTAADDC 
shall be bound to give assent by the Governor 
within reasonable time of 6 months whichever 
may be placed before him for making it into 

200 
 
effect. 
 
Amendment  of Paragraph 1: 
 
           (1)  In sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of 
the Sixth Schedule, for the words “The Governor 
may, by the public notification:, the words “The 
Parliament may, by law” shall be substituted. 
           (2)  The first and second provisions to 
sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Sixth 
Schedule shall be omitted. 
 
13. Paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule (1)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –   
 
(2)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
              After proviso to sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“1A. There shall be a Legislative Assembly for 
Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council. 
 
          Provided further that in respect of 
Autonomous District Council in Tripura – 
(i) The members of the elected members in the 
Council shall consist of not more than fifty 
members, of whom six members including at 
least three tribal women members shall be 
nominated by the Chief Executive Member and 
three non-tribal members shall be nominated by 
the Governor. 
 
(1) to (5)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
2 as suggested. 
 

201 
 
(ii) The existing elected three non-tribal seats 
shall be converted to elected tribal seats. 
 
(3)   Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
After proposed sub paragraph 8 of paragraph 2, 
a new sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely; 
 
         “(9) A department of North East 
Autonomous Council Affairs shall be  created 
under the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government 
of India to look after the smooth and proper 
functioning of the Autonomous District Council 
and Autonomous Territorial Council Constituted 
under Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
                Provided further that a wing shall also 
be created in the governors ’ secretariat of the 
state concerned to look after Autonomous 
Territorial Council and Autonomous District 
Council in their respective States. 
 
 
(4)    Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, Diphu 
–  
 
           The insertion of “with the approval of the 
governor” by an amendment at Paragraph 2, 
Sub-Paragraph 7 in 1970, is unconstitutional, 
because it violates the basic structure of the 
constitution.  This amendment must be repealed. 
 
(5)     Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 

202 
 
Amendment  of Paragraph 2: 
 
            (1)  After proviso to sub-paragraph (1) or 
paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
            “1A  There shall be a Legislative 
Assembly for Tripura Tribal Autonomous State 
Council”. 
              “Provided further that in respect of 
Autonomous District Council in Tripura- 
 
            (i) The members of the elected 
members in the Council shall consist of not more 
than fifty members, of whom six members 
including at least three tribal women members 
shall be nominated by the Chief Executive 
Member and three non-tribal members shall be 
nominated by the Governor. 
             (ii)  The existing elected three non-tribal 
seats shall be converted to elected tribal seats. 
 
14. Paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule (1)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(2)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
 
           After paragraph (2) of the Sixth Schedule, 
the following paragraph shall be inserted to the 
State of Tripura, namely:- 
 
          No acts in respect of a “reserve forest ” 
means any area which is reserved forest under 
(1) & (2)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
2 as suggested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

203 
 
the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891 or under any 
other law for the time being in force in the area in 
question shall not be applicable in any area of 
Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council. 
 
 
(3)   Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(4)    Shri Pitor Debbarma, General Secertary, 
All Tipra Indigenous Student Association -   
 
          After proviso to sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
“1A. There shall be a Legislative Assembly for 
Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council. 
 
          Provided further that in respect of the 
Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council – 
 
(i)     The numbers of the elected member in the 
Council shall consist of not more than fifty 
members of whom at least two women members 
shall be nominated by the Chief Executive 
members of whom at least two members shall be 
nominated by the Governor from the non-
representative from the non-representative tribe. 
 
(ii)  The existing elected three non-tribal 
members shall be converted to elected tribal 
seats. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) & (4)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
2 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 
15. Paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule (1)       Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
(1) to  ( 13)   There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 

204 
 
 
(2)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
Amendment in paragraph 3 
 
(1)  In clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, between the 
words “occupation or use ” and the words “or the 
setting apart”, the words “transfer and acquisition 
of land and property” shall be inserted. 
 
(2)  In proviso to clause (a) of sub-paragraph 3 of 
the Sixth Schedule, for the words “the 
Government of the State ”, the words 
“Autonomous State Council” shall be substituted. 
 
(3) After sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3 of the 
Sixth Schedule, the following proviso shall be 
added, namely: 
              “provided that the power to make laws, 
as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation 
should not be stalled at the State level for year, 
while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with 
the provisions of the Constitution and relevant 
Union and State laws.” 
 
(4)  After paragraph 3B of the Sixth Schedule, the 
following shall be inserted in its application to the 
Autonomous Council of Tripura, namely:- 
 
“Provided additional powers of the Tripura Tribal 
Autonomous State Council to make laws: 
 
3 as suggested in the 
representations.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

205 
 
(i)  As vested additional powers of North Cachar 
Hills Autonomous Council and Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council in paragraph 3A in sub-
paragraph 1 
 
(ii)  All laws made under paragraph 3 or under 
this paragraph shall in so far they relate to 
matters specified in List III of the Seventh 
Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the Governor 
who shall reserve for the consideration of the 
President. 
 
(iii)  when a law is reserved for the consideration 
of the President, the President declare either that 
he assents to the said law or that he withholds 
assents therefrom: 
 
         Provided that the President may direct the 
Governor to return the law to the Tripura Tribal 
Autonomous State Council, together with the 
message requesting that the said Council will 
reconsider the law or any specified provisions 
thereof and, will consider the desirability of 
introducing any such amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when the law is 
so returned, the said Council shall consider the 
law accordingly within a period sixth months from 
the date of receipts of such message and, if the 
law is again passed by the said council with or 
without amendment it shall be presented again to 
the President for his consideration.” 
 
(d) in paragraph 3,-  
 
(i) in clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1), between 

206 
 
the words “occupation or use ” and the words “or 
the setting apart ” the words “transfer and 
acquisition of land and property shall be inserted: 
 
(ii) the proviso in clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1), 
for the words “Government of the State ”, the 
words “Autonomous Territorial Council ” shall be 
substituted: 
 
(iii) after sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3, the 
following proviso shall be added, namely:- 
 
     “Provided that the power to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be respected 
in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be 
stalled at the State level for year, while ensuring 
that they are not inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Constitution and relevant Union and the 
State Laws.” 
 
 
(3)      Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
              They have proposed the similar 
provision in respect of Paragraph 3 (from point 
(1) to (3)) as suggested by Shri Rebati Tripura, 
MP (Lok Sabha), 2-Tripura East (Tripura). 
 
 
(4)   Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –  
 
(5)     Shri Pitor Debbarma, General Secertary, 
All Tipra Indigenous Student Association -   

207 
 
Insertion of the following – 
 
          In Clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph (3) of the Sixth Schedule, between the 
words, “occupation or use ” and the words “or the 
setting apart”, the words “transfer and acquisition 
of land and property” shall be inserted. 
 
 
(6)    Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya –   
 
             We suggest that the ADCs in Meghalaya 
need to be strengthened and more subjects need 
to be inserted in the paragraph 3 of the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution.  ADCs should be 
empowered to legislates on the important 
subjects such as Transfer and alienation of land, 
Protection and promotion of Traditional arts, 
cultural activities and other cultural Tourism 
related activities, Traditional Knowledge and 
practices, Regulation of customary Tool by the 
Traditional institution, regulation on entry and 
settlement of Non-Indigenous people in Tribal 
area etc. 
 
(7)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –   
 
Following is proposed: 
 
In paragraph 3,- 
           
          (i) in clause (a) of sub-paragraph (I), 
between the words “occupation or use ” and the 

208 
 
words “or the setting apart ” the words “transfer 
and acquisition of land and property shall be 
inserted: 
          (ii) the proviso in clause (a) of sub-
paragraph (1), for the words “Government of the 
State”. The words “Autonomous Territoria l 
Council” shall be substituted: 
         (iii) after sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3, 
the following proviso shall be added, namely:- 
 
           “Provided that the power to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be respected 
in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be 
stalled at the State level for year, while ensuring 
that they are not inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Constitution and relevant Union and State 
Laws”. 
 
(8)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(9)    Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U Hynniewtrap 
–  
  
The following is proposed: 
 
             3(1) (a) in the first line of Paragraph 3(1) 
(a), the word “transfer” to be followed by a coma 
“(,)” shall be inserted before the word “allotment”, 
and after the word “of land” to be followed by the 
words “including land records and codification, of 
land holding system” shall be inserted. 
 
              After the word “the” and before the word 

209 
 
“acquisition” the word “compulsory” shall be 
deleted from the Proviso. 
 
The following shall be inserted after the Proviso 
to Para 3(1) (a):-  
 
              “Provided further that the word land shall 
include both surface and sub – surface rights 
which shall include major and minor minerals 
owned privately or otherwise.” 
 
The following shall be inserted in Para 3(1) as a 
new provision as Para3(1) (k) to read as follows:- 
 
             “Promotion of ethnic language and 
protection of ethnic identity” 
 
           After sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3 a 
proviso shall be inserted namely:- “Provided that 
when a Bill has been passed by the Autonomous 
Territorial Council in Session, it shall be 
submitted to the Governor and Governor shall 
within a period of sixty days declare either that he 
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent 
therefrom or that he reserves the Bills for 
reconsideration. 
 
              Provided further that the Governor may, 
as soon as possible after the submission to him 
of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with 
a message requesting that the Council will 
consider the Bill or any specified provisions 
thereof and, in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such Bill or 
amendments as he may recommend in his  

210 
 
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the 
Territorial Council shall reconsider the Bill 
accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the 
Territorial Council with or without amendment 
and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, 
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
 
(10)   Shri James Lyngdoh, Working 
President, Meghalaya Pradesh Congress 
Committee, Shillong –   
 
           To append the words, “To protect the 
language and ethnic identity of the indigenous 
tribe” 
 
(11)    Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous 
District Council (TTAADC), Tripura – 
 
              This is a soft copy of power point 
presentation. 
They had demanded to bring TTAADC within the 
purview of the para 3A (additional powers) of 
Sixth Schedule.  
 
(12)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
Amendment  of Paragraph 3: 
 
           (1)   In clause (a) sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, between the 
words “occupation of use ” and the words “or 
setting apart ”. The words “transfer and 
acquisition of land and property ” shall be 
inserted. 

211 
 
            (2)  In proviso to clause (a) of sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of the Sixth 
Schedule, for the words “the Government of the 
State”, the Words “Autonomous State Council ” 
shall be substituted. 
            (3)   After sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 
3 of the Sixth Schedule, the following proviso 
shall be added, namely: 
                  
                 “Provided that the power to make 
laws, as permitted by this paragraph, should be 
respected in its true spirit and draft legislation 
should not be stalled at the State level for year, 
while ensuring that they are not inconsistent with 
the provisions of the Constitution and relevant 
Union and State laws.” 
 
(13)    Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, KAAC –  
 
                As the subject of land alienation is 
already contained in Paragraph 3A Sub-
paragraph (o) the proviso of Paragraph 3 Sub-
paragraph 1 (a) may be deleted. 
16. Paragraph 3B of the Sixth Schedule (1)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
          They had proposed to introduce a new 
paragraph in Sixth Schedule providing the 
powers as given to BTC to the State of Mizoram. 
 
           After paragraph 3B, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted in its application to 
the State of Mizoram namely: -  
3C. Additional powers of the Chakma 
(1) to (4)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
3 as suggested in the 
representations.    
 

212 
 
Autonomous Territorial Council, the Mara 
Autonomous Territorial Council and the Lai 
Autonomous Territorial Council to make Laws: 
 
(2)   Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
              After paragraph 3B, the following 3C 
shall be inserted. 
3C.    Additional powers of the Autonomous 
District/Territorial Council in Mizoram to make 
laws. 
 
(3)      Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, Indigenous 
People’s Front of Tripura –  
 
Following is proposed – 
            Providing additional powers to the 
Tipraland Territorial Council to make laws; 
 
            1.  As vested additional powers of 
Bodoland Territorial Council in Paragraph 3B:- (i) 
to xl). 
 
            2.     All laws made under paragraph 3 or 
under this paragraph 3 or under this paragraph 
shall in so far they relate to matter pacific in list III 
of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith 
to the Governor who shall reserve for the 
consideration of the President. 
 
(4)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
               After paragraph 3-B of the Sixth 

213 
 
Schedule, the following shall be inserted in its 
application to the Autonomous Council of Tripura, 
namely:- 
 
              “Provided additional powers of the 
Tripura  Tribal Autonomous State Council to 
make laws: 
 
             (1)  As vested additional powers of North 
Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council of  in paragraph 3-
A in sub-paragraph 1 clause:- (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), 
(f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n) and (o) and 
additional powers of Bodoland Territorial Council 
in paragraph 1 clause:- (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), 
(vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii), (xiv), (xv), (xvi), 
(xvii), (xviii), (xix), (xx), (xxi), (xxii), (xxiii), (xxiv), 
(xxv), (xxvi), (xxvii), (xxviii), (xxix), (xxx), (xxxi), 
(xxxii), (xxxiii), (xxxiv), (xxxv), (xxxvi), (xxxvii), 
(xxxviii), (xxxix), and (xl). 
            (2)     All laws made under paragraph 3 or 
under this paragraph shall in so far they relate to 
matters specified in List III of the Seventh 
Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the Governor 
who shall reserve for the consideration of  the 
President. 
            (3)  When a law is reserved for the 
consideration of the President, the President 
declare either that he assents to the said law o 
that he withholds assents therefore: 
 
               Provided that the President  may direc t 
the Governor to return the law to the Tripura 
Tribal Autonomous State Council, together  with 
the message requesting that the said Council will 

214 
 
reconsider the law or any specified provisions 
thereof and, will consider the desirability of 
introducing any such amendments as he may 
recommend in his message and, when the law is 
so returned, the said Council shall consider the 
law accordingly within a period sixth months from 
the date of receipts of such message and, if the 
law is again passed by the said council with or 
without amendment it shall be presented again to 
the President for  his consideration.   
           (4) After paragraph (2) of the Sixth 
Schedule, the following paragraph shall be 
inserted to the state of Tripura, namely:- 
No acts in respect of a “reserve forest ” means 
any area which is reserved forest under the 
Assam forest Regulation, 1891 or under any 
other law for the time being in force in the area in 
question shall not be applicable in any area of 
Tripura Tribal Autonomous State Council. 
 
17. Paragraph 4 of the Sixth Schedule (1)    Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
            After paragraph 4, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
4A. Powers and Accountabilities of the Home 
Ministry over the Autonomous Territorial Councils 
in the North-East India: 
 
(1)     There shall be a separate Department in 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India 
(1) and (2)      There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
4 as suggested in the 
representations. 

215 
 
to look after the smooth and proper functioning of 
the Autonomous Territorial Council in the North-
East India. 
 
18. Paragraph 5 of the Sixth Schedule (1)    Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(2)  Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
        
Amendment of Paragraph 5 – 
 
“5. The Autonomous Territorial Council or courts 
constituted by such Autonomous Territorial 
Council or any officer of such council appointed 
in that behalf by the Governor shall be conferred 
powers to try the suits or cases arising out of any 
law in force in any autonomous district being a 
law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or to 
try offences punishable with death, transportation 
for life, or imprisonment for a term of not less 
than five years under the Indian Penal Code or 
under any other law for the time being applicable 
to such district in accordance with the provisions 
of the Code of Civil Procedure or the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, as the case may be.” 
 
(3)    Ms. Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & Angela 
Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, Meghalaya – 
 
Following proviso to be inserted – 
 
           “That nothing dealing with cases regarding 
Crimes against women shall be taken up by 
(1) and (3)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
5 as suggested in the 
representations. 

216 
 
District Council/Village Council/Traditional Chief ’s 
Courts” 
19. Paragraph 6 of the Sixth Schedule (1)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In paragraph 6, after sub-paragraph (2), the 
following is proposed: 
 
             (4)   With the consent of the Autonomous 
Territorial Council, the Governor may, be rules, 
have the power to allocate all or any of the 
functions specified under Eleventh and Twelve 
Schedules of the Constitution to their respective 
Municipal Councils or Village Councils as may be 
necessary to enable them function as institution 
of self-governance”. 
 
(2)   Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In sub-paragraph (1) of Paragraph 6 the following 
subjects shall be inserted namely – 
 
         (i) Agriculture, including agricultural 
education and research, protection against pests 
and prevention of plant diseases; (ii) Animal 
husbandry and veterinary, that is to say, 
preservation, protection and improvement of 
stock and prevention of animal diseases, 
veterinary training and practice, cattle pounds; 
(iii) Co-operation; (iv) Cultural Affairs; (v) 
Education, that is to say, primary education, 
secondary schools, higher secondary including 
vocational training, adult education, college 
education (general); (vi) Fisheries; (vii) Food and 
(1) to (4)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
6 as suggested in the 
representations.    
 

217 
 
civil supply; (viii) Forests (other than reserved 
forests); (ix) Handloom and textile; (x) Health and 
family welfare, (xi) Intoxicating liquors, opium and 
derivatives, subject to the provisions of entry 84 
of List I of the Seventh Schedule; (xii) Irrigation; 
(xiii) Labour and employment; (xiv) Land 
(including ownership and transfer) and Revenue; 
(xv) Library services (financed and controlled by 
the State Government); (xvi) markets and fairs; 
(xvii) Town Committee, Village Council and other 
local Authorities; (xviii) Museum, ancient and 
historical monuments and records other than 
those declared by or under any law made by 
Parliament to be of national importance; (xix) 
Rural Development including District Rural 
Development Agency; (xx) Planning, 
development and programme implementation ; 
(xxi) Printing and Stationery; (xxii) Public health 
engineering; (xxiii) Public works department; 
(xxiv) Publicity and public relations; (xxv ) 
Registration of births and deaths; (xxvi) Relief 
and rehabilitation; ( (xxvii) Sericulture; (xxviii ) 
Small, cottage and rural industry subject to the 
provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the 
Seventh Schedule; (xxix) Social Welfare; (xxx) 
Soil conservation; (xxxi ) Sports and youth 
welfare; (xxxii) Statistics; (xxxiii) Tourism; (xxxiv) 
Transport (roads, bridges, ferries and other 
means of communications not specified in List I 
of the Seventh Schedule, municipal tramways, 
ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon 
subject to the provision of List I and List III of the 
Seventh Schedule with regard to such 
waterways, vehicles other than mechanically 
propelled vehicles); (xxxv ) Tribal research 

218 
 
institute controlled and financed by the State 
Government; (xxxvi) Urban development —town 
and country planning; (xxxvii ) Weights and 
measures subject to the provisions of entry 50 of 
List I of the Seventh Schedule; and (xxxviii ) 
Welfare of backward classes (xxxix) Hospital and 
Primary Health Centre.     
 
(3)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong – 
 
             After sub paragraph (2) of paragraph 6 a 
proviso shall be inserted namely:-  
 
             “Provided that when a Bill has been 
passed by the Autonomous Territorial Council in 
Session, it shall be submitted to the Governor 
and the Governor shall within a period of sixty 
days declare either that he assents to the Bill or 
that he withholds assents therefrom or that he 
reserves the bill for reconsideration. 
 
              Provided further that the Governor may, 
as soon as possible after the submission to him 
of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with 
a message requesting that the Council will 
reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions 
thereof and in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such Bill or 
amendments as he may recommend in his 
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the 
Territorial Council shall reconsider the Bill 
accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the 
Territorial Council with or without amendment 
and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, 

219 
 
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
 
(4)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
Amendment of Paragraph 6:  
 
            After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6 of 
the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraph shall 
be added, namely:- 
            
                 “(3) With the consent of the 
Autonomous Territorial Council, the Governor 
may, by rules, have the power to allocate all or 
any of the functions specified under the Eleventh 
and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution to their 
respective Traditional Municipal Councils or 
Traditional Village Councils as may be necessary 
to enable them to function as institution of self-
governance”. 
20. Paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
              In paragraph 7, after sub-paragraph (2), 
the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted 
namely, - 
              “(2A) The Autonomous Territorial 
Councils shall receive salary and non-salary 
funds in a specified time by way or evolving 
criteria on the basis of population, need, 
backward, fixed Council share and area for the 
developmental activities to run the 
(1) to  ( 11)   There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
7 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

220 
 
administration”. 
 
              After paragraph 7, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
                “7A. The Autonomous Territorial 
Councils shall have powers to approve their own 
budget subject to the ceiling of the funds 
sanctioned by the Government of India and state 
Government to the Autonomous Territorial 
Councils.” 
 
 
(3)     Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(4)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
(5)      Shri Nityananda Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Employees Association (TTEA) 
–  
 
(6)       Shri Brishaketu Debbarma, Indigenous 
People’s Front of Tripura –  
 
(7)   Shri Dhananjay Tripura, President, Youth 
Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura –  
 
(8)   Shri Ahalas Jamatia, President, All Tipra 
Indigenous Students Association –  
 
           1.     After sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 
7 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 

221 
 
1A. Consolidated Fund of the Tripura Tribal 
Autonomous Council: 
 
(i) As the central Government, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this 
behalf, all revenues received in the Councils by 
the Government of India or Administrator of the 
Council in relation to any matter with respect to 
which the Legislative Assembly of the Council 
has power to make laws, and all grants made 
and loan advances to the Council from the 
Consolidated Fund of India and all money 
received by the Council in repayment of loans 
shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled 
“the Consolidated Fund of the Council. 
(ii)  No money out of the Consolidated Fund of 
the Council shall be appropriated except in 
accordance with, and for the purposes and in the 
matter provided, in this Act. 
 
(iii) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the 
Council, the payment of moneys into such fund, 
the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and all other 
matters connected with or ancillary to those 
matters shall be regulated by rules made by the 
Administrator with the approval of the President.” 
 
2.      After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7 of 
the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-paragraph 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
            “2A. The Autonomous Territorial Councils 
shall receive salary and non-salary funds in a 
specified time by way of evolving a criteria on the 
basis of population and area for the 

222 
 
developmental activities and to run the 
administration. Single window system for release 
of funds to the Councils shall be established.” 
 
3.    After paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, the 
following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“7A. The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall 
have powers to approve their own budget subject 
to the ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the 
Government of India and State Government to 
the Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
 
 
(9)   Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(10)      Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secertary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association -   
 
Insertion of the following – 
 
7A.     The Autonomous Territorial Council shall 
approve powers to approve their own budget 
subject to ceiling of the funds sanctioned by the 
Government of India and the State Government 
to the Autonomous Territorial Councils.” 
 
 
(11)   Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
–  
 
             As the State Government has failed to 

223 
 
make financial rules for Karbi Anglong the power 
of which was delegated to the Governor by the 
Sixth Schedule amendment effected by the 
Assam Reorganization Act, 1969, the power to 
make financial rules must be restored to the 
Council in Paragraph 7. 
 
21. Paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –   
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In Paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule –  
 
            (i) In sub-paragraph (4) between the 
words “this paragraph” and the words “and every 
such” the words “including clause (zz) of sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 3C ” shall be 
substituted: 
 
              (ii) after sub-paragraph (4), the following 
proviso shall be added, namely,- 
 
            “Provided that the power of the 
Autonomous Territorial Councils to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be respected 
in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be 
stalled at the State level for year, while ensuring 
that they are not consistent with the provisions of 
the Constitution and relevant Union and State 
Laws” 
 
 
(3)   Views and suggestions of KHADC, 
(1) to (7)      There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
8 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 

224 
 
JHADC and GHADC –  
 
(4)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
 
After sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8 a proviso 
shall be inserted namely:-  
 
             “Provided that when a Bill has been 
passed by the Autonomous Council in Session, it 
shall be submitted to the Governor and the 
Governor shall within a period of sixty days 
declare either that he assents to the Bill or that 
he withhold assents therefrom or that he reserves 
the Bill for reconsideration. 
 
               Provided further that the Governor may, 
as soon as possible after the submission to him 
of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with 
a message requesting that the Council will 
reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions 
thereof and, in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such Bill or 
amendments as he may recommend in his 
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the 
Council shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and 
if the Bill is passed again by the Council with or 
without amendment and on resubmission to the 
Governor for assent, the Governor shall not 
withhold assent therefrom:” 
 
 
(5)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  

225 
 
 
(6)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
After sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8 of the 
Sixth Schedule, the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:- 
 
“Provided that the power to make laws, as 
permitted by this paragraph, should be respected 
in its true spirit and draft legislation should not be 
stalled at the State level for year, while ensuring 
that they are not inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Constitution and relevant Union and State 
laws.” 
 
(7)    Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
–   
 
           As the Subject of revenue is already 
included in the proposed additions of Paragraph 
3A, the provision of Paragraph 8 Sub-paragraph 
1 may be rationalized in respect of Karbi Anglong 
by replacing the words “the principles for the time 
being followed by the Government of the State in 
assessing lands ” with the words “the principles 
for the time being adopted by the Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council”. 
 
22. Paragraph 9 of the Sixth Schedule (1)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong – 
 
             After sub paragraph (1) of paragraph 9 a 
proviso shall be added namely:-  
(1)    There is no proposal to 
amend Paragraph 9 as 
suggested in the 
representation. 
 

226 
 
            “Provided that such share(s) shall be paid 
to Territorial Council regularly on or before the 
end of the financial year alongwith details of the 
total share collected.” 
 
A new Paragraph 9A shall be inserted Paragraph 
9 namely:- 
              “Paragraph 9A – Share of the profit 
accruing by power companies corporation, 
boards; Shares out of the profit accruing by 
power companies, corporations, and boards 
whether hydro, thermal, nuclear or non-
conventional shall be paid to the Autonomous 
and Territorial Council as the Governor may 
determine subject that it shall not be less than 
5% of the gross profit of such companies, 
corporations, and boards”. 
 
23. Paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram – 
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In paragraph 10, - 
 
(i) after sub-paragraph (1), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
                “Provided that for the purposes of this 
Schedule and any Act, Regulations and Rules 
made thereunder, the expression “resident” shall 
mean a person who has born in such 
autonomous district or either of whose parents 
was born in the said district” 
(1) to (6)     There is no 
proposal to amend paragraph 
10 as suggested in the 
representations. 

227 
 
Note: - It does not mean a person who has been 
ordinarily resident in such autonomous district. 
 
(3)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(4)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
After sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 of the 
Sixth Schedule, the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:- 
 
             2A. For the purpose of this schedule and 
any acts, regulations and rules made thereunder, 
the expression “resident” shall mean a person 
who was born in such autonomous district or 
either of whose parents was born in the said 
district. It shall not include a person who is 
ordinarily residing in such autonomous district. 
 
 
(5)    Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
Re-insertion of para 10 of Sixth Schedule as 
below- 
 
        “10. ‘Power of District Council to make 
regulations for control of Money-lending and 
trading by Non-Tribals’- 
 
         (1)  The District Council of an Autonomous 
Council may make regulations for the regulation 
and control of Money-lending or trading within the 

228 
 
District by persons other than Scheduled Tribes 
resident in the District. 
 
         (2)(d) Prescribed that no person who is not 
a member of Scheduled Tribes resident in the 
District shall carry on wholesale or retail business 
issued in that behalf by the District Council. 
 
(6)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –   
 
             After sub paragraph (3) of paragraph 10 
a proviso shall be inserted namely: 
 
             “Provided that when a Bill has been 
passed by the Autonomous Territorial Council in 
Session, it shall be submitted to the Governor 
and the Governor shall within a period of sixty 
days declare either that he assents to the Bill or 
that he withholds assent therefrom or that he 
reserves the bill for reconsideration. 
 
              Provided further that the Governor may, 
as soon as possible after the submission to him 
of the Bill for assent, return the Bill together with 
a message requesting that the Council will 
reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions 
thereof and, in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such Bill or 
amendments as he may recommend in his 
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the 
Territorial Council shall reconsider the Bill 
Accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the 
Territorial Council with or without amendment 
and on resubmission to the Governor for assent, 

229 
 
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
 
24. Paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
(3)  Lai Autonomous District Council, Mizoram 
–   
             After paragraph 10, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“10A. Powers of Autonomous Territorial Councils 
in the North-East India for the execution of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes”: 
 
(1)  The Autonomous Territorial Councils shall 
have the powers to execute of all centrally 
sponsored Schemes, Central sector Schemes 
etc.  within their respective Councils such as 
Development Agencies-DRDA etc.  and 
Programmes-ICDS, ICDP etc. 
 
(2)  They shall have the powers to submit 
projects/schemes proposals directly to the 
Central Government of India and shall also have 
the powers to implement such schemes either on 
the basis of matching share or complete cent per 
cent sponsored. 
(3)  Every Ministries of the Union Government of 
India may assign the Territorial Councils as 
Implementing Agencies for implementation of 
various developmental schemes within their 
(1) to (3)     There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
10 of the Sixth Schedule on 
the lines suggested in the 
representations. 

230 
 
respective jurisdictions. 
25. Paragraph 11 of the Sixth Schedule (1)       Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief Executive 
Member, Chakma Autonomous District 
Council –  
 
           In Para 11, the following words shall be 
inserted “Provided that all laws, rules and 
regulations made under this schedule by a district 
council or regional council if the Governor has no 
objection to, shall be assented within six months 
from the date of submission.” 
 
 
(2)    Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –   
 
Amendment of Paragraph 11:  
 
          For paragraph 11 of the Sixth Schedule, 
the following proviso shall be added, namely:- 
 
 In paragraph 11, for the words, “published 
forthwith in the official gazette of the State and 
shall on such publication have the force of law ”, 
the words, “published forthwith in the official 
gazette of the Union and shall on such 
publication have the force of law ” shall be 
substituted. 
 
(1) and (2)    There is no 
proposal to amend paragraph 
11 of the Sixth Schedule as 
suggested in the 
representations. 
26. Paragraph 12 of the Sixth Schedule (1)    Shri Robertjune Kharjahrin, Chairman, 
COMSO, Shillong, Meghalaya –   
 
            The State of Meghalaya deserve the 
power to exempt and modify any Act of 
Parliament in the State of Meghalaya through the 
(1) to (5)      There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
12 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 

231 
 
Governor Notification and the word ‘President’ in 
the paragraph 12 A(b) needs to be replaced by 
the word ‘Governor’. 
 
(2) Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(3)   Shri James Lyngdoh, Working President, 
Meghalaya Pradesh Congress Committee, 
Shillong –   
 
(4) Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U Hynniewtrap 
–  
 
            In sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 12(A), 
the word ‘President’ shall be substituted by the 
word ‘Governor’. 
 
 
(5)   Shri Renikton L. Tongkhar, MLA General 
Secretary, Hill State People ’s Democratic 
Party, Meghalaya –  
 
            They had requested to amend the Sixth 
Schedule on the Para 12A (b) by replacing the 
word ‘President’ by the word ‘Governor’. 
 
27. Paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –   
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
  
             Paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule shall 
(1) to (5)     There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
13 as suggested in the 
representations. 

232 
 
be substituted by the following paragraph, 
namely.- 
 
             “The Government of India shall make 
separate allocation of salary and non-salary 
funds for the autonomous territorial councils while 
releasing grants- in-aid to the State Government 
and the estimate receipts and expenditure 
pertaining to such autonomous district which are 
to be credited to, or is to be made from, the 
Consolidated fund of the State shall be first 
placed before the Autonomous Territorial Council 
for discussion and then after such discussion be 
shown separately in the annual financial 
statement of the State to be laid before the 
Legislature of the State under Article 202”. 
 
 
(3)     Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(4)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
  
         For sub-paragraph 13 of the Sixth 
Schedule, the following paragraph shall be 
substitute, namely:- 
 
         “13.  The Government of India shall make 
separate allocation of salary and non-salary 
funds for the Autonomous Territorial Councils 
and the estimate receipts and expenditure 
pertaining to such autonomous district which are 
to be credited to, or is to be made from, the 
Consolidated Fund of India shall be first placed 

233 
 
before the Autonomous Territorial Council for 
discussion and then after such discussion be 
shown separately in the annual financial 
statement of the India to be laid before the 
Parliament under Article 202” 
 
(5)   Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
–   
 
             A proviso may be inserted in Paragraph 
13 with the words “Provided that the Autonomous 
Council shall prepare the annual budget of all 
departments under its administrative control 
taking into account the special needs, physical 
resources and priorites required for the Council 
area as per the intended allocation set earlier by 
the State and the Union Government for the 
year”. 
 
28. Paragraph 14 of the Sixth Schedule (1)   Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
In paragraph 14,-  
 
(a) In sub-paragraph (1), after the word “state” 
the words “including matters specified in clause 
(c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph (3) of 
paragraph 1 of this schedule,” shall be omitted. 
 
 
(3)     Shri Mg. Anthony Debbarma, Convener, 
(1) to (5)     There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
14 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 

234 
 
Joint Action Committee of Civil Society –  
 
(4) Shri Swapnati Reang, Secretary, 
Indigenous Women’s Welfare Society –   
 
(5)  Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, Tribal 
Engineers’ Society, Tripura –   
 
Insertion of the following – 
 
          “14A. The Governor shall make quarterly, 
or whenever so required by the President, a 
report to the President regarding the 
administration of the Tribal areas by the District 
Councils in the State and the executive power of 
the Union shall extend to the giving of directions 
to the State as to the administration of such 
areas”. 
 
29. Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule (1)  Shri Latiplang Kharkongor, Chief 
Executive Member, KHADC, Shillong –  
 
(2)    Shri Ka Synjuk Ki, General Secretary, 
Nongsynshar Shnong, Ka Bri U Hynniewtrap 
–  
            Proviso of sub paragraph (2) in paragraph 
20 may be deleted. 
 
 
(3)   Shri James Lyngdoh, Working President, 
Meghalaya Pradesh Congress Committee, 
Shillong –  
  
             Para 20 of the Sixth Schedule clause (2) 
sub-clause (20) to be deleted. 
(1) to (3)      There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
20 as suggested in the 
representations. 
 

235 
 
30. Paragraph 20BA of the Sixth 
Schedule 
(1)    Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
–  
 
At the end of paragraph 20BA of the Sixth 
Schedule, the words “as soon as possible ” are 
required to be added. 
 
To amend the paragraph 20BA by deleting the 
words “the Council of Ministers ” after the words 
“after consulting”. 
 
(1)      There is no proposal to 
amend Paragraph 20BA as 
suggested in the 
representation. 
31. Paragraph 20BB of the Sixth 
Schedule 
(1)  Lai, Mara, Chakma BJP Coordination 
Committee, Mizoram –  
 
(2)  Mara Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
           In paragraph 20BB, after the words 
“functions under ” the words “sub-paragraph (2) 
and (3) of paragraph 1, ” and after the words 
“Council of Ministers, and the words “if he thinks 
necessary,” shall be omitted. 
 
(3)   Shri Chitta Ranjan Debbarma, Tipraland 
State Party, Agartala –  
 
Following is proposed – 
               
             The provision so mentioned in paragraph 
20BB, caption as Exercise of discretionary power 
by the Governor in the discharge of his functions 
relating to the sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3 
contradicts with the provisions so envisaged in 
Paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (3) caption as 
(1) to (3)    There is no 
proposal to amend Paragraph 
20BB as suggested in the 
representations. 

236 
 
Powers of the District Councils and Regional 
Councils to make laws. 
             Therefore, we place demand to keep a 
separate proviso in the amendment for not to 
apply in Tripura so proposed as Tipraland 
Territorial Council the particular provision so 
mentioned in Paragraph 20BB relating to 
Paragraph 3(3) as this provision supersedes the 
powers so provided in paragraph 3(3) in caption 
Powers of the District Councils and Regional 
Councils to make laws. 
 
32. Extension of area of ADCs (1)      Rasik Mohan Chakma, Chief Executive 
Member, Chakma Autonomous District 
Council –  
 
            Extension of area of Chakma 
Autonomous District Council to other contiguous 
Chakma areas of Mizoram. 
(1)     There is no proposal to 
extend area of Chakma 
Autonomous District Council 
as suggested. 
33.  (1)      Shri Rebati Tripura, MP (Lok Sabha), 2-
Tripura East (Tripura) –  
 
(2)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
1.   (1) The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, 
and the conduct of all elections to the District 
Councils shall be vested either in the Election 
Commission or the Regional Commissioner 
appointed under Article 324(4) of the Constitution 
of India. 
 
            (2)  The Autonomous Territorial/State 
Councils may, by law, make provision with 
respect to all matters relating to, or in connection 
(1) and (2)    There is no 
proposal to amend the Sixth 
Schedule as suggested in the 
representations. 

237 
 
with elections to the Autonomous Territorial 
Councils, Traditional Municipal Councils, 
Traditional Town Committee or Councils, 
Traditional Village Councils. 
 
2.    All Centrally sponsored schemes, Central 
Sector Schemes, NEC Schemes, External Aided 
Schemes shall be implemented by the 
Autonomous Territorial/State Councils in their 
respective areas and the development agencies 
such as DRDA etc. shall be merged with the 
Councils and programmes such as ICDS, ICDP 
etc. shall be handed over to such councils. 
 
3.   A separate wing exclusively to look after the 
welfare of Autonomous Territorial Councils shall 
be created in the North-East Division of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and such newly created 
wing shall be under the charge of Additional or 
Special Secretary to handle the affairs of 
Autonomous Territorial Councils in the North-
East and a separate Development Commissioner 
may be designated to act as an intermediary 
between the Government of India and the 
Councils. 
34. Additional Powers to the 
Autonomous Councils 
(1)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–    
 
(2)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee –  
 
The TTAADC should be brought under the 
purview of Paragraph 3A to the Sixth Schedule of 
the Constitution of India to avail additional 
(1) to (12)     Paragraph 3A is 
specific to Karbi Anglong and 
Dima Hasao Councils as per 
the Memorandum of 
Settlement with them. 
 
         Paragraph 3B is specific 
to the Bodoland Territorial 
Council as per the 
Memorandum of Settlement 

238 
 
powers like KAAC and NCHAC. 
 
 
(3)   Shri Nityananda Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Employees Association (TTEA) 
–  
            After paragraph 3B of the Sixth Schedule, 
the following may be inserted, namely; 
 
            Provided additional powers of the 
Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council to 
make laws; 
 
(1) As vested additional powers of Bodoland 
Territorial Council in Paragraph 3B :-  (i) to (xl) 
 
(2) All laws make under paragraph 3 or under this 
paragraph shall in so far they relates to matter 
pacific in list III of the Seventh Schedule, be 
submitted forthwith to the Governor who shall 
reserve for the consideration of the President. 
 
(4)   Shri Mg. Anthony Debbarma, Convener, 
Joint Action Committee of Civil Society –   
 
(5)  Shri Swapnati Reang, Secretary, 
Indigenous Women’s Welfare Society –    
 
(6)       Shri Er. J. Debbarma, Secretary, Tribal 
Engineers’ Society, Tripura –  
 
          The existing additional powers of the North 
Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council under paragraph 
3A of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of 
with them. 
 
          There is no such 
proposal in respect of 
TTAADC. 

239 
 
India as provided in sub-paragraph 3A (1) (a) to 
(o) to makes laws and the proposed amendment 
in paragraph 3A of sub-paragraph (1) (i) (ii) (iii) 
and (p) to (zs) should be provided to the “Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council”. 
 
           The existing additional power of the 
Bodoland Territorial Council under paragraph 3B 
of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution of India 
as provided in sub-paragraph 3A (1), (2) & (3) 
should also be provided to the “Tripura 
Autonomous Territorial Council ” by necessary 
amendment. 
 
(7)  Smt. Swapna Debbarma, General 
Secretary, Indigenous Women ’s Front of 
Tripura –   
 
(8)  Shri Budha Debbarma, Office Secretary, 
Indigenous Peoples’ Front of Tripura –  
 
(9)   Shri Sukla Charan Noatia, General 
Secretary, Youth Indigenous People ’s Front 
of Tripura –  
 
             Additional powers of the present North 
Cachar Hills Autonomous Territorial Council and 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Territorial Council 
under para 3A of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution to make laws should be extended to 
our Tipraland Autonomous Territorial Council 
including education up to College Level. 
 
 
(10)   Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 

240 
 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(11)     Shri Pitor Debbarma, General 
Secertary, All Tipra Indigenous Student 
Association -   
            In line with the North Cachar Hills 
Autonomous Council and Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council, the Tipraland Autonomous 
Territorial Council should have the power to 
make laws as inserted in the paragraph 3A of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. 
 
35. Direct funding to the Autonomous 
District Councils. 
(1)  Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–  
 
(2)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura  Pradesh Congress Committee – 
  
 
           Direct funding is a must for empowerment 
of the inhabitant of TTAADC and accordingly the 
constitution of India be amended. 
 
(3)   Shri Bimal Chakma, Member of Core 
Committee, BJP, Tripura –  
 
Following is proposed – 
 
             Direct Fund to the proposed TTAADC is 
vital for its empowerment/Survival.  It is proved 
over the years that State Government has 
diverted the funds of the TTAADC. Thus 
rendering the TTAADC ineffective.  Therefore it is 
demanded to provide financial power to TTAADC 
(1) to (5)     There is no 
proposal with regard to Direct 
Funding in the Amendment 
Bill. The proposed 
amendment in Article 280 of 
the Constitution will increase 
the financial resources of the 
Council. 

241 
 
with Direct and separate allocation of fund from 
the Centre, 
 Therefore, amendment of Article 280 for 
providing direct and separate allocation of funds 
from Central to TTAADC and amendment of 
Article 275 is urged in order to insert Part II-A of 
the Table appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule so that the grands- in-aid funds may 
directly channelize to TTAADC from Central 
Government. 
 
(4)   Shri P.H. Jamatia, Jt. secretary, BGM, 
Jamatia Hoda, Tripura – 
 
             Direct funding to the ADC from the 
Central Govt. 
           
(5)     Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, KAAC –   
 
          Direct funding mechanism must be 
established for the following funds: 
 
          (a)   All Centrally sponsored schemes 
          (b) All DoNER and NEC sponsored 
schemes  
          (c)   All flagship programmes. 
          (d)  All allocations to be made by NITI 
AYOG 
 
36.  (1)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–  
 
(2)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
(1) to (3)      The suggestion 
is not related to the 
Constitution (One Hundred 
and Twenty Fifth 
Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

242 
 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee –  
 
           We demand the inclusion of KOKBOROK 
in Roman Scripts in the Eight Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. 
 
(3)   Shri P.H. Jamatia, Jt. secretary, BGM, 
Jamatia Hoda, Tripura – 
 
         Kokborok language should be entered in 
the 8th Schedule. 
 
37.  (1)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–  
 
(2)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee –  
 
          We strongly object to the Citizen 
Amendment Bill, 2016 in its present form. 
 
(1) & (2)     The suggestion is 
not related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
38.  (1)   Shri Subal Bhowmik, Chief Convener, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) 
–  
 
(2)  Shri Rajeshwar Debbarma, Ex MLA, 
Tripura Pradesh Congress Committee –  
 
           We also demand that the elections to 
TTAADC be conducted by the Election 
Commission of India (ECI). 
(1) & (2)   The proposed 
amendment in Para 2(8) of 
the Sixth Schedule is to 
provide for superintendence, 
direction and control of 
elections in District Council, 
Village Council and Municipal 
Council by the State Election 
Commission. There is no 
proposal to hold election 
through Election Commission 
of India. 
 

243 
 
39.  (1)  Shri Pramod Boro, Coordinator, 
Coordination Committee of the Tribal 
Organizations of Assam –  
 
                 Opposing the Constitution (Schedule 
Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2019 for 
inclusion of 41 communities as Scheduled Tribe 
including (i) Moran, (ii) Matak, (iii) Chutia, (iv) 
Koch Rajbongshi and (v) Tai Ahoms in Assam.  
 
(1)    The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
40.  (1)   Smt. Gita Debbarma, President, Tipra 
Nationalist Employees’ Association –   
 
(2)      Shri Pitor Debbarma, General Secretary, 
All Tipra Indigenous Student Association -   
 
              There are no judicial courts under the 
existing TTAADC for trial of cases. As such, it is 
proposed that judicial courts should be 
constituted for trial of suits and petty cases as per 
the customary laws. 
 
(1) & (2)      Paragraph 4 of 
the Sixth Schedule provides 
for administration of Justice in 
Autonomous Councils and 
Autonomous regions. 
41.  (1)   Shri Gautam Das, Secretary, CPI (M), 
Tripura State Committee –  
 
             Demand for three-tier elected bodies- 
Village Council in the grass root level, Block 
Council in the Block level and District Council in 
the District level.  
(1)       There is no proposal 
to have three tier elected 
bodies in Scheduled areas. 
The proposal is for District 
and Village/Municipal 
Councils. 
42.  (1)      Shri Denang T. Sangma, Chairman, 
Garo Hills Autonomous Council, Tura, 
Meghalaya –  
 
            They had stated that the Garo Hills 
Autonomous District Council has unanimously 
(1)       The comments of 
MHA in respect of the 
recommendations of the 
Committee notified by the 
Government of Meghalaya 
are already there in 

244 
 
resolved to urge the Govt. of India through the 
State Govt. of Meghalaya to accept the 
recommendation of the State Committee 
constituted to re-visit the proposed amendment of 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India.  
           
Annexure-I. 
43.  (1)    Shri J. Lyngdoh, Commissioner & 
Secretary, District Council Affairs 
Department, Government of Meghalaya – 
 
          This is comments/views of the Government 
of Meghalaya dated 05.01.2016 and 07.01.2013 
on the proposed amendment Bill. 
(1)      The comments of the 
Government of Meghalaya 
were taken into account while 
finalizing the Amendment Bill. 
44.  (1)      Ms. Agnes Kharshiing, Civil Society 
Women’s Orgnaisation, Meghalaya & Angela 
Rangad, Thma U Rangli Juki, Meghalaya – 
 
             They had requested to amend the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
Amendment Bill as under: 
 
            5(d):    To provide for reservation of at 
least one third seats for women in the District 
Councils and provide reservation of not less than 
one-third seats for women in village and 
municipal councils. 
 
(1)    The suggestion with 
regard to making changes in 
the Statement of Object and 
Reasons of the Bill is not 
tenable. 
45.  (1)     Shri Yum Prasad Ghimre, President, 
Bharatiya Gorkha Parisangh, Assam – 
 
The following is proposed – 
 
             (i) The Gorkhas of Six scheduled areas 
be recognized as “Special Protected Class ” by 
the proposed 125th constitutional Amendment bill. 
(1)     The suggestion at (i) 
and (iii) are outside the 
domain of the Constitution 
Amendment Bill. 
 
           With regard to 
suggestion at point (ii), the 
issue of voting and 

245 
 
 
             (ii)  Ensure the right to vote and to be 
elected in Autonomous Territorial Council, 
Municipal Council and Village Council. 
 
             (iii)  Proposed Constituency Delimitation 
should be on the basis of Geographical and 
Natural boundary, so that representation of 
Gorkha by election can be ensured. 
preparation of electoral rolls is 
entrusted to the State 
Election Commission in the 
Bill. 
46.  (1)    Dr. Biswajit Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Janjati Sebuk Sangha, Tripura –  
 
(2)   Shri Bipin Debbarma, Chairman, Tripura 
Student’s Association –  
 
(3)  Shri Dipakar Debbarma, President, Tripuri 
Youth Association, Tripura –  
 
(4)   Dr. Partha Debbarma, Executive Member, 
Tripura Kshatriya Samaj, Tripura –  
 
Following is proposed – 
 
Administrative 
 
           1. To strengthen the council and for better 
administrative management, we propose a 3 tier 
system in 3 level – Village Level, Sub-zonal Level 
and Zonal Level. 
           2. All powers should be entrusted amongst 
Village Committee, Sub-Zonal Committee and 
Zonal Committee, in the line of Panc hayati raj 
institution. 
           3. Zonal Development Officer should be 
renamed Zonal Magistrate, the powers of Zonal 
(1) to (4)       The suggestions 
are related to the Tripura 
Areas Autonomous District 
Council (TTAADC) and needs 
to be addressed by the Govt. 
of Tripura.  

246 
 
Magistrate under TTAADC/ Territorial Council 
should be same as that of District Magistrate of 
the state. 
           4. TTAADC should be empowered to have 
is own police force recruited by the council. 
            5. Non-Tribal infiltration must be stopped 
by State/Central Govt. The area should not be 
used for settlement of non-tribal people. 
 
Employment and Empowerment: 
 
             1. TTAADC should to have its own 
recruitment policy. 
             2. TTAADC should be allowed to 
establish its own service Selection board.  
             3. TTAADC should be empowered to 
establish Public service commission. 
             4. 100% of employment should be 
reserved for the tribals. 
 
Economy & Revenue 
 
              1. A separate budget for the Tripra State 
territorial council should be earmarked by Central 
Government, like that of the state. 
              2. While preparing the Budget, it should 
be prepared proportionate to the area of 
TTAADC to state and not in terms of population. 
              3. 50% of the SGST collected must be 
shared with the Territorial Council. 
              4. For better development and prosperity 
of the area under TTAADC, a Planning 
Commission should be formed as per the 
structure laid by Niti Ayog. 
 

247 
 
Land Right 
 
              1. Land transfer record, allotment, 
transfer, settlement should be brought under the 
purview of TTAADC. 
             2. Areas where tribal population is in 
majority in non ADC area should be brought 
under the TTAADC and all such areas should be 
included within the council jurisdiction. 
             3. No further exclusion of TTAADC land 
should be allowed by any reasons and must be 
stopped forth with. 
             4. The TLR and LR Act should be 
enforced from the date of enactment not for the 
cut of date 01-01-1969. 
             5. The land rights as enshrined I Entry 18 
& 45 of List-II OF THE 7 TH SCHEDULE of the 
constitution of India to be given to TTAADC. 
 
Forest Rights 
 
           1. Reserve Forest land, proposed forest 
land and other forest area which are falling under 
TTAADC should be brought under the control 
and administration of TTAADC. 
           2. TTAADC should empowered to de-
reserved forest under ADC to carry out the 
developmental works under ADC as an wherever 
required in the interest of tribal people and 
general public at large. 
           3. Under the Forest Right Act 2006, 
TTAADC should be empowered to allot forest 
land to tribal residing in the forest area. 
 
Educational Prospects 

248 
 
 
            1. The TTAADC should be empowered to 
establish separate Secondary Education board, 
colleges and universities in ADC areas. 
            2. The TTAADC should be empowered to 
establish and run school education upto higher 
secondary level and college level. 
            3. The TTAADC should be empowered to 
establish technical institutes, medical colleges 
nursing institutes etc under its jurisdiction. 
 
Health Facilities 
 
            1. The TTAADC should be empowered 
with to establish full-fledged separate health 
directorate. All health institutions under TTAADC 
should be brought under the control of health 
directorate of the council. 
            2. The TTAADC be empowered to 
establish tertiary level care hospital and its 
recurring costs to be bore by Central 
Government. 
 
Culture and Heritage 
 
             1. Historical, cultural, religious, 
archaeological monuments and other cultural 
religious pilgrims place should be nominated from 
tribal women. 
 
Farther Strengthening of TTAADC 
 
             1. The TTAADC council members should 
be increased to 56. 
             2. Out of 56 members – 3 should be 

249 
 
nominated from non represented minority tribal 
communities and 3 members should be 
nominated from tribal women. 
              3. 50 members should be elected by 
adult voters. 
              4. The name of TTAADC should be 
change to Tipra State Territorial Council. 
              5. All the govt. establishment/institution 
fallen within the TTAADC should be brought 
under the administrative control of TTAADC. 
 
47.  (1)     Shri P.H. Jamatia, Jt. secretary, BGM, 
Jamatia Hoda, Tripura –  
 
Following are proposed – 
 
          1. Re-demarcation the area of 
T.T.A.A.D.C. 
          2. To empower for Land & Revenue 
purpose with full power to the said Territorial 
Council and Assam forest regulation 1891 should 
not be applicable in Tripura Area. 
          3. Judiciary and Home affairs to be 
empowered. 
          4. Forest Act etc. should be empowered 
with full saving by the ADC Authority. 
 
(1)    The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
48.  (1)     Shri T. Darlong, Addl. Director, Tribal 
Welfare Department, Government of Tripura – 
 
            They had forwarded the comments of 
Government of Tripura on the Questionnaire sent 
by the Deptt. related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs in respect of the 
Constitution (125th Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
(1)     The comments of MHA 
in respect of the 
Questionnaire received from 
Deptt. related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs had been sent 
to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat. 

250 
 
49.  (1)     Shri Dilip Kr. Debbarma, President, 
Tripura Tribal Officers Welfare Forum –  
 
Following are proposed – 
          1.     Article 244 (1) and (2) may be 
amended to include Tripura State within it ’s 
preview and the existing TTAADC may be 
upgraded to Autonomous State to provide 
adequate safeguard to the indigenous Tripuri 
peoples who are already reduced to minority 
(only 31%) in their own ancestral State. 
           2.  Law and order and Land 
Revenues/land transfer power may be 
transferred to TTAADC. 
           3.    All forest areas management power 
including forest areas under Central and State 
reservation may be transferred to TTAADC. 
           4.     Presently, around 2.5 lakhs non-tribal 
peoples are living within TTAADC areas and their 
number is increasing fast. There is apprehension 
and concern among the indigenous Tripuri 
peoples that if this trend continues, then Tripuri 
people will be reduced to minority even within 
TTAADC areas in near future. Therefore, further 
settlement of non-tribal peoples and khasland 
/forest land transfer to non-tribal peoples should 
be prohibited by law that may be included in the 
125th Constitution Amendment Bill 2019. 
           5.      Plan fund may be determined for 
TTAADC by Govt. of India (Niti Aayog) following 
the twine norms of population and area criteria to 
ensure adequate flow of plan fund for TTAADC 
areas at the level of rest of the State. 
           6.    At present, legislative power of 
TTAADC is subject to approval of the Governor 
(1)     The suggestions are 
related to the Tripura Areas 
Autonomous District Council 
(TTAADC) and needs to be 
addressed by the Govt. of 
Tripura. 

251 
 
of the concerned State (Cabinet approval) as per 
Sixth Schedule provision, many legislative 
proposals are still pending for long time without 
approval of the State Cabinet. Therefore, 
approval of the State Cabinet. Therefore, 
approval of any legislative proposal (Bill) passed 
by the Autonomous Council be vested with the 
Governor exclusively without involving the 
Cabinet of the concerned State as the special 
power of the Governor in respect of TTAADC. 
          7.   A separate judicial system based on 
customary law of the Tripuri people may be 
introduced in TTAADC to settle all disputes 
occurring among the indigenous Tripuri peoples. 
          8.   We also submit before the Hon ’ble 
Committee that the parliament may by law 
provide the consolidated fund of India in each 
year as grant-in-aid of revenues of TTAADC. The 
fund as needs by the ADC is to be determined 
and fixed by the parliament in its financial 
statement of each year. This is for speedy 
Development of the ADC areas the 
backwardness of backward area of the country 
so as to rise the level of administration of the 
scheduled areas therein to that of the 
administration of the ADC. 
          9.    We proposed to include that the 
TTAADC shall have power to approve their own 
annual budget subject to the ceiling of Funds 
sanctioned by the Govt. of India and state Govt. 
to the TTAADC. 
          10.   It is apparent that the Acts, 
Regulation, and Rule made in the TTAADC have 
been remained without assent of the Governor of 
Tripura and thereby no any Gazette notification 

252 
 
could publish years after years in respect of the 
subject specified in paragraph 3(1) (a)(b)(c)(d)(e) 
establishment of Town Committee (f)(g)(h)(i) (j) of 
the constitution. 
           11.     The jurisdictional flexibility of the 
TTAADC area covers an area of 7132.56 sq.km. 
i.e.68% of the geographical area of the state 
extending to all eights Revenue District of Tripura 
which 73.04% comprises Forest area. This 
existing area 7132.56sq.km. shall be freezed and 
no any other way be reduced in future so as to 
protect and safeguard the Indigenous people of 
the state from the sophisticated outsiders, the 
Bangladeshis. 
 
50.  (1)     Lai Autonomous District Council, 
Mizoram –  
 
            Review of the Scheduled Tribe list of the 
state of Mizoram under the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order 1950 under Article 342 
(2): 
 
It is seen that in; 
 
S/No. 2. Dimasa (Kachari), 
S/No.3. Garo, 
S/No.4. Hajong, 
S/No.6. Khasi and Jaintia (including Khasi, 
Synteng or Pnar, War, Bhoi or Lyngngam),  
S/No.11. Mikir, 
S/No.12. Any Naga Tribes and 
S/No.14. Synteng 
  
             under Part XVII-Mizoram Scheduled 
(1)     The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

253 
 
Tribe list, who are not indigenous tribes to the 
state of Mizoram, has to be removed and deleted  
from the Scheduled Tribe list of Mizoram as they 
have their own Land in the state of Assam and 
Meghalaya. 
 Moreover, S/No.8. Lakher and S/No.13. 
Pawi has to be substituted as Lakher into Mara 
and Pawi into Lai. 
 
51.  (1)     Shri J.I. Kathar, President, APHLC, 
Diphu –   
 
              The Constitution (One hundred Twenty-
fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019 is for removal of 
Autonomy from the Autonomous District Council. 
The word “autonomous” is not mentioned 
anywhere. The government seems to propose 
replacement of Autonomous Council by ordinary 
District Council under Panchayati Raj System. 
We pray to Government not to impose 
Panchayati Raj on the Hill Tribes people. 
 
(1)     The suggestion is not 
tenable. 
52.  (1)     Shri Ramlal Chauhan, President, Karbi 
Anglong Hindi Bhasta Sanstha Central 
Committee –  
 
(i)  In the Matter of Land Rights in Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council:    
 
 The Hindi Bhasi people have been allotted 
Miadi Pattas/Pattas prior to independence of the 
country in the British regime.  In 1951, when  the 
district was formed, some parts of land were 
taken from Sivasagar (now Golaghat), Nagaon, 
Cachar and United Khasi and Jayantia Hills 
(1)     The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

254 
 
district of present Meghalaya etc and thus they 
naturally joined in the Karbi Anglong District and 
Dima Hasao (North Cachar Hills).  Since, then 
those people were recorded in the land 
settlement and allotted ‘Touzi, Annual Patta and 
Miadi Patta.  But the major problem is that voices 
are raised to scrap the land rights from time to 
time by different Tribal Organisations from Karbi 
Anglong.  So, in this connection we would like to 
request you to look into the matter of land rights 
and allot the physical and documental possessed 
land to these people. 
 
(ii)   In the matter of Voting Rights in Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council:  
 
 The Hindi Bhasi people had been casting 
their votes in all the forms of elections in the 
arena of Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council i.e. 
M.P. and Town Committee elections.  Also , 
contesting elections and representing their 
candidates in Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council 
from time to time. But, from some years the 
voices are raised to scrap the voting rights and 
election contesting rights from Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council from time to time by 
different Tribal Organizations.  In these 
connections, we would like to request you to 
interfere into the matter and preserve such rights. 
 
(iii)  In the Matter of Kheroni Professional Grazing 
Reserve (PGR) Land: 
 
 More than 10,000 peoples predominantly 
Karbi, Nepali, Hindi Bhasi peoples etc residing in 

255 
 
Kheroni Professional Grazing Reserve (PGR) 
from generation to generation. They are earning 
their livelihood and running their families. There 
are number of public offices and institutes, 
Schools, temples, Bibah Bhawan, PMGSY road, 
ASEB etc. in this Reserve area.  This reserve is 
now fully converted into human habitation since 
long back. 
 Also, we would like to inform you that a 
number of memorandums have been submitted 
before higher authorities regarding the de-
reservation of PGR land from time to time.  So, 
we request before you to inquire into the matter 
and allot the PGR land to all the settled people 
having physical possession of land in the arena 
of Kheroni Professional Grazing Reserve (PGR). 
Also, we expect a special endeavour into the said 
land for better future of the peoples residing in 
the arena of Kheroni Professional Grazing 
Reserve (PGR). 
 
 
53.  (1)     Shri L. Kuki, President, Indigenous 
Peoples Forum, NC Hills, Assam –  
 
           (i)  To set up a separate Autonomous 
District for the Indigenous non-Dimasa populace 
under the provision of 2(1) of Article 244(2) and 
275(1) of the Sixth Schedule in the Constitution 
of India based on the Report of the Task Force 
headed by Sri. P.P. Varma, IAS, Chief Secretary 
(Retd.) and the then Addl. Chief Secretary of 
Assam. 
 
           (ii)    Announcement for Bifurcation of the 
(1)     The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

256 
 
district during the last Budget Session: The Govt. 
of Assam made an announcement for creation of 
a new district bifurcating the present Dima Hasao 
(erstwhile North Cachar Hills) district during the 
Budget Session in the month of Feb, 2019 . The 
Indigenous Peoples Forum (IPF) have submitted 
its proposed Map and also have made request to 
the Govt. several times to retain the original 
name of the district, “North Cachar Hills ” for the 
name of the new district being bifurcated out of 
the Dima Hasao District. However, the 
announcement is yet to be implemented even 
after the lapse of almost one year since the 
announcement was made. 
             (iii)   Not to include the areas inhabited 
by the non-Dimasa Tribes within the Dima Hasao 
Territorial Council or any political setup whose 
name is in Dimasa’s dialect. 
              (iv)  To Demarcate Boundaries of the 
new District being created as per the proposed 
Map of the Indigenous People’s Forum (IPF). 
 
54.  (1)     Shri Mohan Hajong, President, All India 
Hajong Welfare Association, Shillong – 
 
To keep provision in the amendment bill of Sixth 
Schedule to nominate members in the 
Autonomous District Council from our Hajong 
(Scheduled Tribe) community as and when there 
is no elected representative from our community 
in the District Council for over-all development of 
the Hajong tribe in the State. 
          For social administration and to promote 
better social justice in a particular village or area, 
Gaonburahs are elected/selected and 
(1)     There is already a 
provision in the Amendment 
Bill, 2019 for nomination of 
unrepresented communities 
in the Khasi and Jaintia 
Autonomous District Council  

257 
 
subsequently approved by the Autonomous 
District Council which should be incorporated in 
the amendment of sixth schedule and hence be 
continued to be implemented to take care of the 
distinct social and customary system of Hajong 
community.  
 
  (1)     Shri Tuliram Ronghang, Chief Executive 
Member, KAAC –   
 
           On the issue of land acquisition raised by 
the Government of Assam: 
 We urge the Committee to impress upon 
the Union Government and the Parliament of 
India to squarely reject the State Government 
proposal on land acquisition in the instant Bill to 
preserve and protect the tribal indigenous rights 
over their land. 
 
 (1)     The suggestion is not 
related to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Twenty 
Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2019. 
 