PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 130
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16  APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF THE
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 16 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 16 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(H.A.)-251

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ....................................................... 2—12
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee
does not desire to pursue the matter in view of the
Government’s replies ...................................................................... 13—16
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ............................................................................ 17—24
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
the final replies of the Government have not yet
been received by the Committee ................................................. 25—29
4. O
BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS /CONCLUSIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE —
AT A G LANCE ........................................................................................................................ 30—32
5. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 33—36

COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
(Constituted on 5 August 2007)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Vacant
3. Vacant
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Vacant
8. Vacant
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
13. Shri Ilyas Azmi
14. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
15. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
16. Shri Biren Singh Engti
17. Shri Tapir Gao
18. Vacant
19. Shri Naveen Jindal
20. Shri Ajit Jogi
21. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
*22. Shri Amitava Nandy
23. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
24. Shri Sachin Pilot
25. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
26. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
27. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
28. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
29. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
30. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
31. Shri Mohan Singh
(i)
* Nominated w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 vice  Shri T.K. Hamza who is nominated to Standing Committee on Commerce.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 26th April, 2007.
3. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and
Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee on 18th September, 2007. The Minister for Home Affairs
made a Statement in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on the status of implementation of
recommendations contained in the said report of the Committee on 4th and 5th December, 2007,
respectively pursuant to the Direction of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24th September, 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
11th April, 2008.
5. The Recommendations/Observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
11th April, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry
of Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty Sixth Report
(of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs) on Demands for
Grants for 2007-08. The Report was presented/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
on the 26th April, 2007.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of
the recommendations contained in the Report. Subsequently, the Minister for Home Affairs laid on
the Table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha a statement on the status of implementation of
recommendations contained in that report. Those have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter—I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government: Para Nos. 8.7, 14.5, 15.6, 15.7, 15.10, 15.11 & 15.12, 16.5, 16.6, 18.1,
19.3, 20.18, 21.9 and 24.5.
2.1 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted all its recommendations
as contained in Chapter—I of the Report.
(ii) Chapter—II: Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire
to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 11.10,
14.6, 21.7, 21.8, 24.3 & 24.4.
(iii) Chapter—III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Para Nos. 9.2, 10.4, 11.8,
11.11, 13.9, 14.8, 17.8 & 24.6.
2.2 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter—III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect
of these recommendations.
(iv) Chapter—IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of
the Government have not yet been received by the Committee: Para Nos 11.7, 12.3,
13.7, 16.7, 17.3, 17.7, 20.19 and 23.6.
2.3 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter—IV , the Ministry has either furnished
the interim replies or couched its response in vague terms. The Committee, therefore, desires that
the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in
Chapter—IV in detail and to the point as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of
the Committee.
3. The details of the ATNs have been discussed in the various Chapters of the Report.

2
CHAPTER–I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.1 Civic Action Programme of Border Guarding Forces
1.1.1 The Committee feels that Civic Action Programme in the border areas is a very important
task. If undertaken well, it will infuse confidence among the border area populace, develop
infrastructure there and promote the feeling of national integration. For all these to happen, the
people should have confidence in the persons who are undertaking such activities. However, people
are skeptical about the uniformed personnel. The Committee therefore recommends that the
implementation of Civic Action Programme by the BGFs need to be re-looked in its entirety.
(Para 8.7)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The C ivic Action Programme was thoroughly discussed, in a meeting held on 25.5.2007
under the Chairmanship of Home Secretary with Border Guarding Forces.
1.1.3 The DGs were unanimous in their opinion that the Civic Action Programme has enabled the
CPFs to win the goodwill of the border population and has had a very positive impact. Therefore
the programme should continue with higher fund allocation. Accordingly, the allocation for Civic
Action Programme undertaken by CPFs has been enhanced substantially in the current financial year.
1.1.4 During the review of the programme, apart from the type of activities taken up at present
under the programme, it was also decided that CPFs could usefully act as a facilitator for better
delivery of various important Government Schemes in the far flung areas of the country where
practically only they have the reach. Towards this objective, consultation with various Ministries
is in progress. Some joint programmes with Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports have already been
worked out.
Committee’s Observation
1.1.5 The Committee notes that allocation for Civic Action Programme has been enhanced.
The activities proposed to be taken, if implemented in the right earnest, would go a long
way in infusing a sense of confidence in the people of border areas.
Recommendation
1.2 Naxalism
1.2.1 The Committee notes that the Government is taking steps on different fronts including the
developmental fronts. The Committee has also recommended in successive reports for a holistic
approach in tackling the naxal problem. The Committee however, feels that there is no perceptible
change on the socio-economic front. Though the socio-economic development cannot be quantified,
it can be perceived and if such a perceptible change is there, undoubtedly it will have a lasting
impact. The Committee while reiterating the earlier recommendation that an effective developmental
approach may be adopted, further recommends that various schemes under the Ministries of Rural
Development and other Ministries may also be implemented for the socio-economic development in
2

3
the naxal affected areas. There needs to be an effective monitoring mechanism on the
implementation of these schemes with the involvement of all the concerned Ministries and agencies.
(Para 14.5)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee that a holistic approach,
comprising both the security and developmental aspects is required to tackle the naxal problem. The
Central Government is supplementing the efforts and resources of the State Governments on both
these fronts. The aim is that development schemes, both of the Central Government and of the
concerned State Governments, are effectively implemented.
1.2.3 An Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has been set up under Additional Secretary (Naxal
Management) with officers from development Ministries/Departments (including Rural
Development) and Planning Commission to oversee effective implementation of development
schemes in naxal affected States. This is intended to ensure accelerated socio-economic
development in these areas by improving overall implementation of development schemes.
1.2.4 Union Home Secretary inter alia also reviews development issues of naxal affected States
in quarterly meetings of Coordination Centre in which the concerned State Governments are
represented by Chief Secretaries and Directors General of Police. Inter-Ministerial discussions are
also proposed at the level of Union Home Secretary with Ministries of Rural Development,
Panchayati Raj, Environment and Forests and Tribal Affairs in order to work out a methodology
for more focussed action in respect of the implementation of development schemes in the States
affected by naxal activities.
1.2.5 An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) has also been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Union Home Minister, which includes the Union Ministers of concerned
development Ministries like Rural Development, Tribal Welfare and Panchayati Raj and is
empowered to determine and monitor various aspects of the integrated strategy required to be
followed to deal with the naxalite problem.
Recommendation
1.3 Modernisation of Police Forces
1.3.1 The Committee takes note of the Mid-Term evaluation of the Modernisation of State Police
Forces Scheme by BPR&D. One of the findings made by the BPR&D in the Study which causes
concern to the Committee is that more than 50 per cent of the fund is utilized in the police housing
and police building activities. The Committee is of the view that with the new technological
advances taking place in a feverish pitch and in view of the fact that the Police Forces in India
function with age-old equipments and gadgets, much of the scheme of modernization should
concentrate on providing modern gadgets, improving technology, providing IT facilities etc.
Spending more than 50 per cent on building activities defeats the very purpose of the Scheme. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may review the
scheme in the light of pattern of expenditure incurred by the States and prepare a list of activities
which should lay thrust on improving technology and providing modern gadgets, etc.
(Para 15.6)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The concerns expressed by the Committee regarding large amount of funds being utilized
for police housing and police building activities and the need for giving mere emphasis on induction
of modern technology is appreciated and duly noted. Accordingly, in the meetings held in the
Ministry for considering the Annual Action Plans, under the Scheme for Modernisation of State

4
Police Forces (MPF) for the year 2007-08, the State Gevernments were advised to rationalize the
allocation on police housing, etc., and to lay greater emphasis on other aspects of police
modernization such as procurement of modern gadgetry, sophisticated equipments/weaponry etc.
1.3.3 In this regard, it may be noted that the Annual Action Plans under the Scheme for
Modernisation of State Police Forces (MPF) are formulated by the State Governments after
assessing their urgent local requirements. These plans are discussed in the meetings held by the
Central Level High Powered Committee, which are attended by the State representatives also. All
critical items like construction of residential/non-residential buildings, modern weaponry, vehicles,
communication equipment, office equipment, surveillance/intelligence/security equipments, training
facilities, forensic science equipment etc. are covered under the Scheme. Construction of police
station buildings and residential buildings (barracks) for lower subordinates are major components
of the scheme. These are also considered essential as they enhance the morale of the State Police
Forces and are therefore, directly concerned with their efficiency. The improvement in police
performance due to modernization, to a considerable extent, will also depend on the provision of
the basic necessary infrastructure in all the police stations as well as in the district police
headquarters.
1.3.4 Emphasis is also being laid on providing IT facilities. A Project called “Common Integrated
Police Application” (CIPA) is being implemented in all the States to ensure a uniform framework
and mechanism for computerization of the crime registration, investigation, etc. at the police station
level. NIC is the implementing agency for the project, which is being implemented in all the States
in a phased manner.
1.3.5 The Ministry is now planning major thrust on technology upgradation in the functioning of
police at all levels. This is proposed to be done by widening the scope of the CIPA project in terms
of the applications and by extending it from the police stations to the other higher level formations
in the police hierarchy e.g. the circle/districts/range/zonal offices and the police headquarters, for
consolidating the police station databases at a central location and providing appropriate software
interfaces for interaction and sharing of crime related information. At present, CIPA essentially has
crime registration, investigation and prosecution modules. It is now proposed to provide all
functionalities and integrate appropriate technologies, such as, fingerprinting and other forensic
science applications in a large network, so that the information and technology can be shared by
all concerned. For this purpose, the police stations and other higher police formations are also
proposed to be linked through a broadband/CDMA/VSAT network. A comprehensive composite
proposal has been sent to the Planning Commission for including the project under the Eleventh
Five Year Plan (2007-12). When accepted, larger share of funds shall become available within the
Modernisation of Police Forces (non-plan Scheme) for spending on the other essential requirements
like modem weaponry, equipment, construction of secure police stations, etc.
Further Recommendation
1.3.6 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has forwarded the
“Comprehensive Composite Proposal” to the Planning Commission for technology
upgradation in the functioning of police at all level through a pr oject called CIPA—crime
registration, investigation, and prosecution modules to be linked through a broadband/
CDMA/VSAT network. The Committee desires that the Planning Commission may clear the
project at the earliest.
Recommendation
1.4 Modernisation of Police Forces
1.4.1 The Committee is constrained to note that there wa s an unspent balance of Rs.47.81 crore

5
under the Scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces as on 31.12.2006. Though the Ministry have
stated that they are pursuing vigorously with the States for better and full utilization of funds, the
Committee desires that they may lay a condition stating that further funds would be released only
after the full expenditure of the previous balance. It should be insisted upon all the States to send
Utilization Certificates and receipt thereof may also be put as one of the conditions for further
release of funds. These are necessary to ensure that States spend the funds meant for
Modernization of Police Forces in a better manner and as per the schedule.
(Para 15.7)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The Government is in full agreement with the recommendation. The importance and
urgency of full utilization of funds is being repeatedly impressed upon all the States and it is a pre-
requisite for release of Central funds under the Scheme. While inviting action plans under the
Scheme for 2007-08, the Ministry had advised the States to utilize all the unspent balances
pertaining to previous financial years. This issue was also taken up with States during the High
Powered Committee meetings held for discussing their Annual Action Plans for 2007-08. It has
been emphasized to the States to fully utilize the unspent balances lying with them, failing which
the release of Central funds during 2007-08 to the concerned States would be reduced to that
extent.
1.4.3 Further, as a part of monitoring of the Scheme, it is now proposed to have intensive
discussions with the States in smaller groups of two to three States to review the progress of
utilization of the funds, physical progress and carry out an impact assessment of the scheme.
Recommendation
1.5 Modernisation of Police Forces
1.5.1 The committee notes with satisfaction the launching of the Scheme of Modernisation of
Police Forces in UTs. Since it was initiated in 2006-07 only, it would be too early to assess the
scheme. The Committee notes that UTs were asked in 2006-07 to implement this scheme
effectively by having savings. Though ultimately additional allocation had to be made as UTs could
not effect savings, such a situation could have been avoided by making allocation initially which
would have enabled the UTs to start implementation immediately. The Ministry may therefore from
time-to-time monitor the implementation of the scheme and ensure that the physical as well as
financial targets are achieved in time by the State and Union Territories.
(Para 15.10)
Action Taken
1.5.2 The Police Modernisation Scheme for UTs was approved by the Cabinet on
21st February, 2006. Due to paucity of time, provision for the year 2006-07 could not be made
in the BE 2006-07.
1.5.3 A committee constituted in MHA scrutinized the Action Plan drawn by UTs and Delhi
Police and recommended an amount of Rs.65.67 crore for all UTs and Delhi Police during
2006-07. The Union Territories were requested to start implementation of the Scheme from
available grant for 2006-07. The Budget Division, MHA was, therefore, persuaded to provide
funds and accordingly an amount of Rs.40 crore for UTs and Delhi Police was provided during
2006-07 by re-appropriation of savings under Police Grant. The following amounts were provided
to UTs and Delhi Police during 2006-07 for implementing the Scheme of Modernisation of Police
Force:

6
A&N Islands — Rs.9.30 crore
Chandigarh — Rs.1.40 crore
Dadra and Nagar Haveli — Rs.5.20 crore
Daman and Diu — Rs.4.50 crore
Lakshadweep — Rs.3.36 crore
Puducherry — Rs.6.24 crore
Delhi Police — Rs.10.00 crore
T
OTAL: — Rs.40.00 crore
1.5.4 The above-mentioned amount was released to the UTs towards the end of March, 2007.
They are in the process of implementing the Scheme. The recommendation of the Committee for
monitoring the implementation of the Scheme would be done in earnest during 2007-08. During the
current financial year i.e. 2007-08, a substantial provision of Rs.176.80 crore has been made for
UTs and Delhi Police for implementation. The UT-wise details are given below:
A&N Islands — Rs.26.80 crore
Chandigarh — Rs.1.40 crore
Dadra and Nagar Haveli — Rs.5.20 crore
Daman and Diu — Rs.4.50 crore
Lakshadweep — Rs.3.30 crore
Puducherry — Rs.13.20 crore
Delhi — Rs.122.40 crore
T
OTAL: — Rs.176.80 crore
1.5.5 The Annual Plan for the current year have been received and are presently under
consideration. Thereafter, the plan for the current year will be cleared. As regards last year’s
allocation of Rs.40 crore, the expenditure position is as shown below:
(Rs. in crore)
Name of UT Amount Status of implementation
released
12 3
A and N Islands 9.30 Codal formalities in respect of various items are under
process and likely to be completed shortly.
Chandigarh 1.40 The UT utilised the funds from their savings.
Dadra and Nagar 5.20 All codal formalities in respect of most of the cases have
Haveli been completed and only payment is to be released against
the supply orders.
Daman and Diu 4.50 All codal formalities in respect of most of the cases have
been completed and only payment is to be released against
the supply orders.
Delhi 10.00 The entire amount of Rs.10.00 crore has been utilised.

7
12 3
Lakshadweep 3.36 Codal formalities in respect of various items are under
process and likely to be completed shortly.
Puducherry 6.24 Rs.2.00 crore has been utilised.
1.5.6 It may be mentioned that the funds for the implementation of the scheme was released only
on the closing of the financial year 2006-07, due to which, the utilisation of the funds has shown
slow progress as various codal formalities are required to be completed for administrative approval/
expenditure sanction. However, the progress of the expenditure will be monitored by this Ministry
on monthly basis.
Recommendation
1.6 Modernisation of Police Forces
1.6.1 The Committee is given to understand that Special Branches in States/UTs Police Forces
play an important role in collection of intelligence through technical surveillance and the real and
actionable intelligence at the micro-level comes through human assets. However, the Committee is
of the view that the Special Branches neither have sufficient infrastructure nor modern equipment
and gadgets, etc. In view of the current internal security situation and the growing naxalite and
terrorist activities, strengthening and modernization of Special branches acquire. significance.The
Committee, therefore, feels that the Special Branches in the States/Union Territories Police Forces
need to be revamped by enhancing their manpower by way of filling up of vacancies by posting
of competent officers with reasonable tenure, dedicated staff for intelligence work right upto the
police station level and reactivating beat constable system and above all making available modern
equipment and gadgets for interception and special training for personnel posted therein.
1.6.2 The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon
the State/Union Territories Governments/Administrations to strengthening their Special Branches.
The Ministry may also allocate some of the funds under Modernisation of State Police Forces
Scheme for strengthening and modernization of Special Branches.
(Para 15.11 and 15.12)
Action Taken replies
1.6.3 The Ministry fully agrees with the Standing Committee with regard to their recommendation
regarding the need for revamping of Special Branches in the States and Union Territories and this
matter has been taken up with the States from time to time. Recently, this has also been discussed
during the High Powered Committee meetings held in the Ministry for considering Annual Action
Plans of States under the MPF Scheme, 2007-08. The States have been advised to earmark up to
5% of the total MPF allocation towards strengthening of their Special Branches in terms of modern
equipment, gadgets for communication and special training for personnel posted in Special
Branches. It has been emphasized that the States should take action to suitably enhance the
manpower in the Special Branches form their resources. Further, to begin with, four naxal affected
States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa have been asked to include a specific sub-plan
for strengthening of Special Branches under the MPF Scheme, 2007-08. Accordingly, revised plans
submitted by these States contain the Sub-plan, as required. These Sub-plans, inter alia have
provisions for modern equipment, gadgets and training, and have been prepared in consultation
with the Central intelligence agencies. These States have allocated amounts ranging from 5.83% to
35.53%, towards the Special Branches component.

8
1.6.4 The observations of the Committee for  strengthening of Special Branch in States/UTs is
noted and UTs and Delhi Police have been asked to make efforts in this regard.
Recommendation
1.7 Modernisation of Prison Administration
1.7.1 The Committee reiterates its observation made in its 119th Report that the Scheme, if
implemented in the right earnest, would go a long way in improving the conditions in the prisons
and the inmates thereof.. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that more emphasis is
laid under the Scheme on the construction work, repairs and renovation than improving the actual
conditions inside the jails for the prisoners. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
the Government may redesign the guidelines for the scheme laying more emphasis on improving
the facilities/conditions of the prisoners.
(Para 16.5)
Action Taken
1.7.2 The Scheme for Modernisation of Prisons consists of four components, namely,
construction of new prisons, repair and renovation of existing prisons, water and sanitation
facilities and construction of staff quarters. All these activities are directly related to improvement
of conditions in jail. However the recommendations of the Committee have been noted and efforts
will be made to see what additional facilities could be provided which will further improve the
condition of prisons’ and prisoners.
Committee’s Observation
1.7.3 The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of  the
scheme. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee a separate and detailed report
would be presented by the Committee to  the Parliament.
Recommendation
1.8 Modernisation of Prison Administration
1.8.1 The Committee also expresses its concern that even though the scheme started in
2002-03, no evaluation of its performance has been made so far. The Ministry’s reply that a study
evaluation is normally carried out after completion of the scheme shows a casual approach of
dealing with the matter. Whenever any scheme is launched, a mid-term evaluation is carried out.
Since the scheme has been extended by two more years with effect from 01.04.2007, the
Government may conduct a mid-term evaluation immediately to assess its efficacy.
(Para 16.6)
Action Taken
1.8.2 The recommendation of the Committee to conduct a mid-term evaluation immediately, has
been accepted by the Ministry of Home Affairs. A Committee has been constituted to undertake the
evaluation.
Committee’s Observation
1.8.3 The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
scheme. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee a separate and detailed report
would be presented by the Committee to the Parliament.

9
Recommendation
1.9 Repealing of Obsolete Acts
1.9.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may have a fresh look at these
laws and bring them in line with the present times. The Committee also recommends that the
obsolete laws need to be repealed from time to time and this should be appropriately included in
the Action Plan of the Ministry.
(Para 18.1)
Action Taken
1.9.2 Review of existing laws is a continuous process. So far as repealing of obsolete laws is
concerned, a Commission to Review the Administrative Laws was set up, with the approval of
Prime Minister, under the Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain on 08/05/1998. The Jain Commission, in
its report, had recommended repeal/amendment/amalgamation of more than 1300 Central laws. Out
of these laws, the Ministry of Home Affairs was concerned with. 86 Laws, of which 68 were
recommended for repeal and 18 for amendment/amalgamation by the Commission.
1.9.3 The Ministry had carried out an extensive review of laws recommended for repeal/
amendment/amalgamation by the Jain Commission. The present status of action taken in this regard
is as follows:—
Action taken on acts recommended by Jain Commission for repeal/amendment/
amalgamation:
Status as on 3/7/2007
Review for repeal of the 68 Acts.
Number of Acts Number of Acts No. of Acts reviewed No. of Acts being
recommended for repealed so far and examined for repeal
repeal retained
68 21 41 *6
Review for amendment/amalgamation of the 18 Acts.
Number of Acts Number of Acts No. of Acts reviewed No. of Acts being
recommended for amended. and retained without examined for
amendment/amal- amendment amendment
gamation
18 8 8 **2
* These Acts relates to Center-State relations and are as follows:—
(i) The Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949.
(ii) The Central Provinces (Laws) Act, 1875.
(iii) The Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act, 1954.
(iv) The Laws Local Extent Act, 1874.
(v) The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951.
(vi) The Himachal Pardesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution and Proceedings) Validation
Act, (56 of 1958).
(i)** Arms Act, 1959 and IP.e. 1860

10
1.9.4 B esides the above, the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 is proposed to be
replaced by a new legislation called Foreign Contribution Regulation Bill, 2006. The Bill was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 18/12/2006 and is under examination before the Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
Recommendation
1.10 Demand No.94–Andaman and Nicobar Islands
1.10.1 The Committee feels that though an elaborate thinking has gone into the planning and
construction of permanent shelters, the delay in completion of the construction is cause of
concern. The allocation of shelters should be completed as per the targets. The Committee also
feels that the action plan prepared for improving tourism, particularly involving private sector is the
need of the hour. The action plan may be implemented immediately.
(Para 20.18)
Action Taken
A. Permanent Shelters
1.10.2 Presently, 9797 permanent shelters (7001 in Nicobar District and 2796 in South Andaman
District) are under construction at 70 locations in ten islands. CPWD is constructing 7966
permanent shelters and APWD 1072 and rest are being constructed by NGOs. Out of 7966 units,
CPWD has already awarded for foundation work of 7646 units and foundation work of all shelters
will be completed by September, 2007 and schedule of completion is as follows:
Sl. No. Date of Completion No. of Units
1. September, 2007 1710
2. December, 2007 3103
3. June, 2008 4648
4. December, 2008 336
T
OTAL: 9797
1.10.3 Internal quality control mechanism by independent staff of APWD is already in place. Third
party quality control is being entrusted to Quality Evaluation System Team Ltd. (QUEST) and
MOUs are being finalized.
B. Development of tourism
1.10.4 In a pre-IDA inter-ministerial meeting held recently, the A and N Administration was directed
to develop 50 sites selected at 15 islands in association with private parties. A and N Administration
has taken/propose to take following steps to overcome shortage of tourist accommodation:
• Introduced Paying Guest Accommodation Scheme to overcome the shortage of tourist
accommodation.
• Introduction of 50% subsidy-cum-Ioan scheme for development of tourism
infrastructure (hotel, resort, etc.) in rural areas through ANIIDCO.
• Concession is extended to applicants who apply for conversion of land into commercial
for tourism purpose as an incentive for development of tourism infrastructure.
• It is proposed to develop quality eco-friendly resorts at the sites of Tourism Department
at Neil, Havelock, Long Island and Little Andaman through private participation.

11
1.10.5 Following schemes have been included in the Annual Plan 2007-08 :
• Creation and maintenance of wayside amenities like pay toilet facilities, access of
drinking water facilities, catering of restaurant, sit out with roof etc.
• Providing grant-in-aid to voluntary organizations/local bodies for maintenance and
upkeep of beaches.
1.10.6 The Tourism Department of the UT Administration has located four sites for inviting private
investments for developing these sites. Process of issuing technical and financial bills is in the final
stage.
Further Recommendation
1.10.7 The Committee desirers that the 50 sites identified for development may be taken
up immediately. Development of the sites would give employment opportunities to a large
number of people in the area.
Recommendations
1.11 Closure of Schools in the residential areas of Chandigarh
1.11.1 In regard to closure of schools in residential areas of Chandigarh, the Committee feels that
the issue has become very sensitive in view of the fact that it is likely to affect the future of many
students. Even though the Finance Secretary has informed the Committee that the second shift has
been started in some of the schools to accommodate the students form the closed schools, all the
students will not get admission in such second shifts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Chandigarh Administration should not allow this to happen and ensure that every student from
all such closed schools may be immediately provided admission in the existing schools by opening
second shift and or increasing the class strength whichever is necessary. The Chandigarh
Administration should also impress upon the managements of the closed schools to start their
schools in the new campuses as early as possible. The Chandigarh Administration may regularly
monitor the situation and find a lasting solution to this problem.
(Para 21.9)
Action Taken
1.11.2 All the Schools of Manimajra, running in residential buildings, have been closed on the
directions of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and notices have been issued by the Municipal
Corporation, UT, Chandigarh.
1.11.3 To overcome the situation arising due to closure of private schools in Manimajra running
in the residential buildings, the following actions were taken:—
(i) Second shift has been started in all the Govt. Schools of Manimajra.
(ii) Strength of students has been increased in each section and more sections were
added to each class.
(iii) Community Centre in Manimajra has been taken over from M.C., Chandigarh and a
double shift school has been started in it.
(iv) A double shift school as the extension of Govt. Model High School, Manimajra
Housing Complex has been started. Second shift has also been started in Little Flower
School.
(v) Un-adjusted children have been admitted in all the Govt./Pvt./Aided schools either by
adding sections or in a second shift.

12
(vi) All the T eaching and Non teaching staff deputed for the second shift have been paid
salary by the Deptt. 50% of water electricity bill is also paid by the Deptt.
(vii) V edic school, Manimajra has been given further extension for one year as Deptt. was
facing difficulty to adjust girls students. If court exempts this school, Administration
shall make alternative arrangement to accommodate the girl students.
(viii) Six additional school sites have been earmarked by the Architecture Deptt. UT
Chandigarh out of which construction on 5 sites is being started shortly.
1.11.4 The High Power Committee constituted on the directions of the High Court of Punjab and
Haryana also decided that Playway Schooll Creches can continue to function from residential
buildings.
Recommendation
1.12 Demand No. 98–Lakshadweep
1.12.1 Among the priority sectors proposed to be taken up during the current financial year,
implementation of perspective plan for shipping sector is an important one. Ships, ferries, landing
barges, oil barges, etc., are proposed to be acquired besides two helicopters. The Committee
endorses the proposal for taking up shipping sector as a priority area during 2007-08 and all the
proposed activities may be completed as targeted.
(Para 24.5)
Action Taken
1.12.2 Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways vide their letter dated 16-4-2007 has
granted approval for acquisition of two 250 Passenger-cum-l00 MTCargo V essels and six Landing
Barges for the UT of Lakshadweep. Department of Shipping has already directed the Lakshadweep
Administration to ensure timely acquisition of the ships/barges.
1.12.3 Three ships of 150 passenger capacity have been received by UT Administration in
June, 07. Two ships of 250 passenger capacity are expected to be available by 2010 from Colombo
Shipyard. Three 50 passenger capacity ships from Malaysian Shipyard have been delivered at Kochi
and UT Administration will take possession of these ships shortly. As regards acquisition of barges,
tender documents for purchase of 6 barges are under preparation.

13
CHAPTER–II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation
2.1 National Disaster Management Authority
2.1.1 The Committee feels that a lot of work is still to be completed in regard to setting up of
Tsunami Warning System. The Committee recommends that all the necessary steps may be taken
for expeditious setting up of Tsunami Warning System. Steps may also be taken for establishing
the Central Receiving Station at New Delhi and parallel connectivity at INCOIS, Hyderabad.
(Para 11.10)
Action Taken
2.1.2 Department of Ocean Development (DOD), Ministry of Earth Sciences is setting up
Tsunami Early Warning System (TEWS) for Mitigation of Oceanogenic Disaster, Tsunami and
Storm Surges in Indian Ocean. The total estimated cost of the system is Rs.125 crore.
2.1.3 The progress is being monitored and as per the latest report submitted by Ministry of Earth
Sciences, envisaged seismic network of 17 Field Stations will be ready by September, 2007. A
Central Receiving Station is being established at IMD, New Delhi with parallel connectivity at
Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad. Tsunami Buoy
Systems which includes Surface Buoy System and Bottom Pressure Recorders have been installed
in Indian Ocean and Data from 2 Bottom Pressure Reorders and 5 Surface Buoy Systems out of
12 envisaged to be placed in Indian Ocean (Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea) is being received. As
regards developing Decision Support System, 24x7 Interim Warning Centre is operational at
INCOIS,V-SAT Communication at INCOIS Hyderabad, for receiving real time data from National
Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), has been established and at present real-time data is being
received at INCOIS through V-SAT Connectivity from tide gauges and Bottom Pressure Recorders.
2.1.4 As against total budget outlay of this project i.e. Rs.125 crore, Rs.87 crore have already
been spent and the system is scheduled to be operational by September, 2007.
Recommendation
2.2 Naxalism
2.2.1 The Committee also reiterates its observation made earlier that the naxal problem is no
longer a problem of a few States. It has acquired a national dimension posing gravest threat to the
national security. The naxal activities have spread to more than twelve States and are reported to
be having links with external agencies including ISI. The Committee is therefore, of the considered
view that taking into account the growth and influence of the Naxal groups in several States and
the grave threat posed by it to the internal security of the country, it is high time that the Ministry
constitute a Unified Command to effectively tackle the menace. Besides the Central Paramilitary
Forces, State Police Forces may also contribute to the Unified Command. The Committee also
takes note of the observation made by the Home Secretary that naxal attacks on several occasions
take place due to non-observance of ‘Standard Operating Procedure’ (SOP) by the State Police
13

14
Forces. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that Government may consider creating a
Unified Command common to all the naxal affected States.
(Para 14.6)
Action Taken
2.2.2 Law and Order is a State subject. The Central Government is supplementing the efforts and
resources of the State Governments through a variety of measures, including deployment of Central
Para Military Forces which work under the command of the concerned State Governments,
strengthening of the local Police and Intelligence agencies through the Scheme for Modernisation
of State Police Forces, provision of financial assistance through the Scheme of Security Related
Expenditure, sharing of Intelligence and bringing about inter-State coordination.
1.2.3 For review, coordination and evaluation of the naxalite situation, among other institutional
mechanisms like an Empowered Group of Ministers under the chairmanship of Union Home
Minister with Chief Ministers of concerned States as special invitees and a Coordination Centre
under the Chairmanship of Union Home Secretary, a Task Force under Special Secretary (Internal
Security), consisting of officers of Intelligence agencies, Central Para Military Forces and
concerned State Police Forces, has also been set up to deliberate upon the various steps needed
to deal with the activities of naxalites and to bring about co-ordination between authorities of
different States as may be necessary.
1.2.4 The system of a Unified Command can be implemented within a particular State, as has
been done in some States affected by violence (for example, Jammu and Kashmir) with the
objective of ensuring coordination between State and Central agencies involved in internal security
duties within the State. Any such mechanism. is not constitutionally or otherwise feasible with
reference to multiple States being brought under any kind of a unified command. However, the
need for inter-State coordination has been fully recognized, and that is the reason for setting up
of the Task Force referred to above. It is constantly the endeavour that this mechanism functions
in the most effective manner and, towards that end, the Task Force has also been having
discussions and interactions with different groups of States with reference to the specific inter-
State coordination requirements in different areas from time to time.
Recommendation
2.3 Demand No. 95–Chandigarh
Rehabilitation of slum dwellers in Chandigarh
2.3.1 The Committee appreciates the ambitious programme of UT Administration of Chandigarh
to rehabilitate the slum dwellers by constructing dwelling units and giving them on rent for Rs.800
to Rs.1000 per month. Even though the Finance Secretary has stated that the rent is a very
reasonable amount which they will be paying and that their monthly income is around Rs.3000 to
Rs.4000 per month, the Committee is apprehensive about the capacity of the slum dwellers to pay
Rs.1000 per month as rent. The Committee, therefore, feels that this aspect may be taken care of.
The Committee also desires that the construction of units may be started and completed at the
earliest so that shifting of slum dwells may also be done as early as possible. The target of three
years for completing the construction may strictly be adhered to.
(Para 21.7)
Action Taken
2.3.2 Chandigarh Housing Board (CHB) has been designated as the nodal agency for

15
implementation of the Slum Rehabilitation Programme under the Chandigarh Small Flats
Scheme-2006. 25728 families are proposed to be rehabilitated under the scheme. .
2.3.3 The Government of India has approved the two proposals sent by the Administration for
grant under JNNURM and accordingly Rs.300.10 crore and Rs.96.02 crore have been approved as
grants for two projects under the scheme, namely construction of 19360 small flats and
construction of 6368 small flats, respectively.
2.3.4 CHB has already rehabilitated 2133 families under the scheme, whereas tenders for
construction of 8064 units at five locations i.e. S/49, S/38 (W), Ram Darbar, Maloya-II and
Maulijagran-II under the scheme have been floated by CHB. The process of calling of tenders for
construction of remaining Units at Maloya-II, Dhanas and Maulijagran-I has also been initiated. The
entire earmarked land under the scheme is in the possession of CHB except for Maloya-1 wherein
the process of acquisition of land is under way.
2.3.5 As far as the issue regarding fixing of monthly license fee is concerned, the relevant
provisions under the scheme have been made only after careful examination of all the related issues
keeping in view the monthly earnings of the beneficiaries. The Administration will try to adhere to
the time schedule stipulated.
Recommendation
2.4 Early completion of Technology Park in Chandigarh
2.4.1 In regard to technology park started in Chandigarh, the Committee is happy to note that
much progress has already taken place in setting up of the park and already 1,000 engineers have
started working there. Several companies have already been allotted land. This technology park is
the only park of its kind in Northern India and the Committee recommends that all efforts may
be made to ensure that the Technology Park is completed in all respects at the earliest.
(Para 21.8)
Action Taken
2.4.2 Chandigarh Administration is taking all steps to expedite further development of the Rajiv
Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park. Presently, more than 4,500 professionals are working in the
RGCTP and the software exports for the financial year 2006-2007 were approx. Rs.200 crore.
RGCTP has also attracted investments of Rs.500 crore.
2.4.3 Land allotment has been finalized in Phase I and II of RGCTP wherein Campus sites have
been allotted to Infosys, Wipro, eSys, Tech Mahindra and Airtel. 13 BTS sites have also been
allotted to various IT Companies such as IDS Infotech, Virsa Systems, Second Foundation, Karen
Informatics, Microtek, FCS Software Solutions, Amadeus, KMG, RT Outsourcing, Netsolutions,
Netsmartz, Alchemist and Bebo Technologies.
2.4.4 Most of these allottee companies have started the construction or are in the process of
finalizing their plans. It is expected that by the end of 2008 more than 11000 IT professionals will
be working in the RGCTP and approximately Rs.700 crore of software exports will be generated.
The above figures are expected to cross 60000 and Rs. 5000 crore for employment and exports,
respectively, by 2010 once Phases I, II and III are fully operational.
2.4.5 The Administration is adopting a proactive approach for speedy development of the project.
Single window clearance system has been provided to companies for expediting the process of
approvals and clearances. A special plan approval committee has also been formed for constantly
monitoring the progress of the projects of various companies.

16
Recommendation
2.5 Demand No. 98–Lakshadweep
2.5.1 The Administrator, Lakshadweep, during the course of his oral evidence before
the Committee, stated that though the Plan Allocation has increased from Rs.209 crore at RE
2006-07 to Rs.222.11 crore in BE 2007-08, it was way below the projection of Rs.402 crore made
by the Lakshadweep Administration before the Planning Commission. The main reason for
projecting Rs.402 crore was that the growth rate during the Tenth Five Year Plan had become very
fast and they wanted to maintain that tempo. He further stated that discussions were held with
the Planning Commission but they were told that the outer limit of the allocation would be
Rs.222 crore only though they appreciated the presentation made by the Administration.
2.5.2 The Committee feels that the allocation made is too meager as compared to the projections
made by the Lakshadweep Administration in view of the necessity for sustaining the tempo of the
growth rate. The Planning Commission may consider increasing the allocation to a reasonable
extent at RE level so that Lakshadweep may go ahead with its planned activities. This is necessary
because Lakshadweep has a large potential for tourism and unless adequate infrastructure is
created, tourism cannot Improve.
(Para 24.3 and 24.4)
Action Taken replies
2.5.3 The Union Territory Administration of Lakhadweep will be submitting a proposal for
enhancement of Plan Allocation at RE 2007-08 stage but will restrict its requirement to Rs.250
crore only since time will not be adequate to let the UT Administration utilize its initial demand of
Rs.402 crore even if this was agreed to by the Planning Commission. However, Ministry of Home
Affairs would be supporting Lakshadweep’s demand for higher Plan and Non-Plan allocation for the
next financial year to fund the requirement for creating infrastructure and develop tourism.

17
CHAPTER–III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
3.1 Relief and rehabilitation measures for J&K migrants
3.1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated before the Committee that as it is a reimbursement
scheme, as soon as proposals for rehabilitation are received from the State Government, the grants
are provided accordingly. The Ministry further stated that the schemes were not forthcoming from
the State of J&K. As a result of this, though migrants are living in sub-human conditions in
rehabilitation camps, funds allocated for that purpose are not utilized fully. In view of this, the
Committee in its 119th Report had recommended that Government should impress upon the J&K
Government to come forward with schemes in time and implement them without delay. But inspite
of this, the Committee is disturbed to learn that against the BE 2006-07 provision of Rs.120 crore
the expenditure during 2006-07 is expected to be only Rs.70 crore. The Committee once again
strongly urges upon the Ministry to further impress upon the J&K Government about the necessity
of sending schemes expeditiously and implement them in time so that all the J&K migrants are
rehabilitated without further delay.
(Para 9.2)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The concern expressed by the Parliamentary Committee has been noted and conveyed to the
State Government through letters dated June 8, 2006, October 5, 2006 followed by a d.o. letter
dated January 19, 2007 requesting State Government to make efforts to utilize the funds provided
for in the Budget under the head SRE Relief and Rehabilitation. The issue was also discussed with
the State Government officials in the SRE Standing Committee meeting held on 25th July, 2007.
The State Government was requested to take necessary steps to expedite the expenditure under this
Head.
3.1.3 The relief and rehabilitation schemes of the Ministry are meant for Kashmiri Migrants,
Border Migrants, ex-gratia payment to the next of kin of security force personnel and civilians
killed in terrorist violence and compensation for damaged civilian property and incentives for
surrendered militants.
3.1.4 The State Government has also made efforts to utilize the funds available under this head.
Since the State Government could not utilize the allocated amount, a sum of Rs.12 crore remained
unspent last year under the sub-head for cash relief to Kashmiri Migrants. The arrears of
enhancement of the cash relief w.e.f. 1.7.2006 have been disbursed at the revised rates by the State
Government. There was a saving of Rs.10.50 crore on ex-gratia and surrender of militants.
Expenditure on this count is incident driven. The State Government could not utilize the major
portion of the allocated fund for rehabilitation of Border Migrants in view of delay in acquiring land
due to a stay granted by the Court which led to a saving of Rs.27 crore on this account. It has
now been informed by the State Government that the stay granted by the Court has since been
vacated and this will facilitate the implementation of the rehabilitation scheme for the Border
Migrants resulting in the better utilization of funds this year.
17

18
3.1.5 To further facilitate the State Government in improving their fiscal management, a special
audit of SRE related expenditure has been undertaken. The ongoing scheme for return of Kashmiri
Migrants, such as two-room flats at Budgam are being expedited for which Rs.18 crore has
been released so far. The State Government has assured that this scheme would be completed by
November, 2007. The Ministry is conducting regular reviews for monitoring the expenditure under
SRE.
Further Recommendation
3.1.6 The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study on the
select and Rehabilitation measures for J and K Migrants. After the study is completed, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon.
Recommendation
3.2 Coastal Security Scheme
3.2.1 The Committee feels that as there is a greater risk of infiltration from coastal belts, the
scheme needs to be implemented in the right earnest. This requires co-operation of all the States.
However, the Committee is constrained to note that some of the States have not yet sanctioned
the manpower. The Ministry may impress upon the State Governments concerned to take early
action in the matter. The Committee also recommends that the process of acquiring boats may be
completed at the earliest, as they are an essential component for coastal security surveillance. In
regard to the request of some State Governments to the Centre to meet manpower cost, the Centre
may hold consultations and take a final view in the matter at the earliest.
(Para 10.4)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The Coastal Security Scheme was approved in January, 2005 for the 9 coastal States
(Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and West
Bengal) and 4 UTs (Puducherry, Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu and Andaman and Nicobar Islands)
for implementation in 5 years commencing from 2005-06. The progress in the implementation of
the Scheme is being monitored periodically by this Ministry.
3.2.3 Under the Scheme, manpower is to be provided by the States and Union Territories.
Manpower for the executive posts has been sanctioned by all the States. Manpower for the
technical posts for boats has been sanctioned by the Governments of Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Goa, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. Proposal for sanction of
technical manpower is under consideration of the Governments of Goa and Orissa. In the case of
Union Territory Administrations, proposals for sanctioning manpower are under consideration of
this Ministry.
3.2.4 Boats for coastal patrolling by the coastal police stations are being procured centrally by the
Ministry of Home Affairs. Technical specifications of the boats have been finalized. M/s Goa
Shipyard Ltd. (GSL), Goa and M/s Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. (GRSE), Kolkata
have been nominated to construct and deliver the boats to the States on the western and eastern
coasts, respectively.
3.2.5 A Price Negotiation Committee (PNC) has been constituted under Joint Secretary (PM),
MHA to arrive at a negotiated price for the boats. The PNC has held discussions on
15th November, 2006, 4th January, 2007, 2nd March, 2007, 13th April, 2007 and 5th July, 2007.
The price negotiations, in progress, are at the final stages.

19
Further Recommendation
3.2.6 The Committee is constrained to note that even though the scheme was approved in
2005 for implementation in five years several proposals are still in approval stage. The
Committee recommends that all the proposals may be given approval at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the Price Negotiation Committee of MHA may complete
all the formalities for purchase of boats.
Recommendation
3.3 National Disaster Management Authority
3.3.1 Similarly, the Committee also expresses its concern over the slow pace in the formulation
of National Policy on Disaster Management. The Committee takes a strong exception on the delay
and recommends that Government should finalise the policy at the earliest.
(Para 11.8)
Action Taken
3.3.2 A draft of the National Policy on Disaster Management has been prepared by the National
Disaster Management Authority. The same is being considered by this Ministry, inter-alia, in the
light of the recommendations contained in the 3rd Report of the 2nd Administrative Reforms
Commission (ARC) titled ‘Crisis Management – From Despair to Hope’, which contains a number
of recommendations on disaster management and a decision on these recommendations will also
have a bearing on the National Policy.
Further Recommendation
3.3.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should expeditiously
consider the Draft National Policy on Disaster Management as prepared by the National
Disaster Management Authority and finalize the policy at the earliest. The country can not
wait for a disaster to happen before the policy is finalized.
Recommendation
3.4 National Disaster Management Authority
3.4.1 The Committee has also been infonned that the Disaster Response Fund and Disaster
Mitigation Fund have not so far been constituted. It shows the lax attitude of the Ministry in
constituting such important funds for which the legislation was passed in 2005 itself. The
Committee disapproves of this laxity and recommends that steps may be taken for immediate
constitution of the funds.
(Para 11.11)
Action Taken
I. National Disaster Response Fund
3.4.2 The Group of Ministers (GoM) in the meeting held on 12th April, 2005, had conceptualized
that ‘convergence of National Calamity Contingency Fund (NCCF) and Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)
with the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) and State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)
respectively, will ensue, after the law is enacted, over a period of time.
3.4.3 In an inter-ministerial meetipg taken by Secretary(BM) MHA, the MOF expressed the view
that time is not ripe for constituting the NDRF, as the Schemes of CRF/NCCF existing for the

20
same purpose are working satisfactorily. Further, Schemes of CRF and NCCF have been fonnulated
based on the recommendations of the successive Finance Commissions constituted under the
provisions of the Constitution of India, for the purpose of deciding on the devolution of finances
from the Central Government to the State Governments. The Ministry of Finance further expressed
the views that discontinuing the existing Schemes of NCCF/CRF and merging them with NDRF/
SDRF without the recommendation from the Finance Commission will adversely affect the federal
principles relating to financial devolution. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance suggested that these
issues may be referred to the Thirteenth Finance Commission for its consideration and
recommendations, as and when it is constituted.
3.4.4 After detailed deliberations the Inter-Ministerial meeting observed that more than a year has
lapsed since enactment of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and therefore it may not be
appropriate to say that time is not ripe for constituting the NDRF as envisaged in the Act and a
note for Cabinet may be prepared to give effect to the Provisions of DM Act and in pursuance
of the decision of GOM regarding creation of NDRF. Accordingly, a draft Cabinet Note, after the
approval of Hon’ble Home Minister, has been circulated to the concerned Central Ministries/
Departments for Inter-Ministerial consultations. After the receipt of comments/views from them,
the note will be submitted to the Cabinet for consideration.
II. National Disaster Mitigation Fund
3.4.5 The modalities for creation of National Disaster Mitigation Fund have been discussed in an
inter-ministerial meeting taken by Secretary (BM), MHA with the Ministry of Finance, the National
Disaster Management Authority and Planning Commission. Accordingly, a proposal for creating the
Fund is being processed for seeking approval of the competent authority.
Further Recommendation
3.4.6 It is unfortunate that the constitution of NDRF is still at consultation stage. The
Government should take early action in the matter and see that NDRF is in place
converging CRF/NCCF.
3.4.7 The Committee notes that a provision for creation of National Disaster Mitigation
Fund was made way lack in DM Act, 2005. Undue delay has taken place in discussion of
MHA with the Ministry of Finance, the National Disaster Management Authority and
Planning Commission. The Committee recommends that the process of creating the fund
may be completed at the earliest.
Recommendation
3.5 India-Bangladesh Border Fencing Work
3.5.1 The Committee is very much concerned about the problems being faced by the people
residing at the Border areas. It is a fact that there are properties of the border people where
agricultural activities are carried out and in some areas, people are also residing in this 150-yard
area. The Committee is anguished to note that people face lot of problems under the current
dispensation and no solution has been found so far for this problem. The Committee recommends
that the Government may hold discussion with Bangladesh in consultation with the Ministry of
External Affairs for a settlement of the problem. In consultation with all concerned, the fencing
may be taken nearer to the border instead of 150 yards away from  the border. In case it is not
possible, the Government may buy the land within this ISO-yard of the Border so that the people
who have properties within this area may not face problems any more. The Ministry of Home
Affairs may hold discussions with all concerned, including the Ministry of External Affairs and find
a permanent solution at the earliest.
(Para 13.9)

21
Action Taken replies
3.5.2 The matter has been under discussion with Bangladesh during each DG Level BSF-BDR
Talks since 2004 including the last DG Level Talks, held in March, 2007. BDR, however, did not
agree to the proposal of allowing construction of the fence within 150 yards.
3.5.3 In the Home Secretary Level Talks between India and Bangladesh held on October 27-
28, 2005, the Indian side emphasized that border fencing within zero to 150 yards of the border
was primarily due to human settlements in the area. The details of areas where border fencing are
required within 150 yards of International Border (265 stretches - 297 KIns) were sent to
Bangladesh side through Diplomatic channel in March, 2005. The Bangladesh side requested for
further details of these patches. These details were communicated to Bangladesh High Commission
by MEA. This issue was again discussed in the Home Secretary Level Talks between India and
Bangladesh on August 2-3, 2007. The Bangladesh side informed that the scrutiny of Indian proposal
was under process and would be completed soon.
3.5.4 The matter relating to buying of land falling within 150 yards has been considered by the
Government. The Government does not contemplate taking away vast stretches of cultivable land
from the farmers falling within 150 yards as it will deprive them of their main source of
sustenance. Further, the land will not be used by Government for productive purposes.
Further Recommendation
3.5.5 The Committee has constituted a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
Border fencing and Floodlighting projects. After the study is completed, the Committee will
present a separate report thereon.
Recommendation
3.6 Naxalism
3.6.1 The Committee agrees that naxal threat is a big menace for any industry, including the
private sector. The issue needs to be examined to see that private sector industries are also
protected in the naxal-affected areas. The Ministry of Home Affairs may examine the matter in
consultation with all concerned and take an early decision.
(Para 14.8)
Action Taken
3.6.2 Law and order is a State subject. The Central Government supplements and coordinates the
efforts and resources of the State Governments to enable them to combat the Naxal problem. 33
Battalions of Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs) have been deployed for assisting the State
Police forces in the Naxal affected States. 29 India Reserve Battalions have been sanctioned.
3.6.3 The security aspects in respect of the Private Sector industries have to be seen in the
context of the overall law and order situation. Some Private Sector industries also make their own
arrangements for security by employing their own security personnel or by engaging personnel
from private security agencies. The State/local police also responds to their problems as part of
its normal duties.
3.6.4 Security related issues are also being discussed regularly during interactions with the State
Governments, in the context of threats from/activities of terrorist/extremist elements, and action as
required to strengthen the arrangements in specific vulnerable areas is being taken on a continuing
basis.

22
Further Recommendation
3.6.5 Naxalism is no longer the problem of one State. As part of holistic approach, the
Private Sector also needs to be protected. The economic development of naxal affected areas
can happen only if Private Sector also contributes to this. Therefore, there is need for
making a policy for protecting industries including Private Sector.
Recommendation
3.7 Housing for Delhi Police Personnel
3.7.1 The Committee expresses its concern that even after three years of allotment of land at
Mandoli, the construction has not started. It is very strange that the issue of land use is being
considered now after three years of allotment of land. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry may intervene in the matter and get the clearance from DDA at the earliest so that
construction of the flats may commence without further delay.
(Para 17.8)
Action Taken replies
3.7.2 540 flats are to be constructed at Mandoli but construction work has not been started due
to non-clearance of the building site which has been shown as ‘Jail’ in the Zonal Plan by MCD
and requires change of land use by DDA.
3.7.3 The revised administrative and expenditure sanction for the construction of work of above
project has been obtained. The Technical Committee of DDA has approved change of land use of
10 acres from public and semi-public facilities to residential (police housing). The above
recommendation was considered and approved by the D.D.A. under the chairmanship of Lt.
Governor, Delhi.
3.7.4 Building Plans have been submitted to MCD. PWD has initiated the tender process and the
tender will be floated on the receipt of approval from MCD.
Further Recommendation
3.7.5 The Committee was appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
Housing for CPMF and D elhi Police. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee, the
Committee will present its detailed report thereon.
Recommendation
3.8 Acquiring of weapons by Sportspersons
3.8.1 The Committee feels that use of advanced and imported weapons is essential for shooters
who participate in National and International championships. To enable the shooters to excel in
international events, it is necessary for the Government to allow them to import advanced weapons.
The Government may consider all the aspects relating to permission for acquiring of imported
weapons by the shooters and take an early decision in the matter. The Committee also suggested
that the sportspersons, so permitted to acquire imported weapons, may also be permitted to dispose
them of after every three years as the use of the weapons may involve wear and tear and
technological changes may make it obsolete.
(Para 19.3)
Action Taken
3.8.2 To enable the shooters to excel in international events, the Government has already allowed

23
“Renowned Shooters” to import the advanced weapons ( i.e. four per event subject to a maximum
of ten).
3.8.3 W ith a view to enable a larger number of shooters to have an opportunity to import
sophisticated weapons for practice at private ranges etc. and to come upto international level of
shooting sports, the Government has decided to enlarge the definition of “Renowned Shooter” as
follows :—
“Renowned Shooter” means a person who has participated in a National Shooting
Championship in an open Men’ s Event or open Women’ s Event or open Civilian’s Event
whether through Qualifying Tournament or Wild Card Entry and has attained the Minimum
Qualifying Score prescribed by the National Rifle Association of India.’’
3.8.4 The matter relating to sale of imported weapons by renowned shooters after three years has
also been considered and it has been decided that “Renowned Shooters” who maintain their status
of “Renowned Shooter” for three consecutive years, may be allowed to sell their imported weapons
after three years from the date of acquisition. Other “Renowned Shooters” can sell their outdated
weapons after 5 years from the date of acquisition.
Further Recommendation
3.8.5 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by one of its member that the
following conditions imposed by the Ministry make disposal of weapons by renowned shooter
difficult:—
(a) Before allowing disposal of weapons by the renowned shooters, the condition of
the weapons may be assessed by a 3-member committee proposed to be
constituted under the Chairmanship of the Executive Director (Teams), Sports
Authority of India, with a representative each from NRAI and the National
Coach of Shooting as other members and disposal will be allowed only on the
recommendation of this committee.
(b) While disposing of such weapons, it would be ensured that these are being sold
to other upcoming shooters only subject to production of certificate to this effect
from the concerned State Association. A promising shooter would be one who
would have finished among the first three in the preceding State level
championships. After disposal, intimation to this effect will be given by the
renowned shooter to the NRAI, the Sports Authority of India and the Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports.
3.8.6 The Ministry, however, did not bring the above conditions to the notice of the
Committee.
3.8.7 The Committee is of the considered view that the above mentioned conditions would
create problems in the smooth disposal of outdated weapons by renowned shooters. The
meeting of the three member committee to decide disposal of weapons may not be held for
months together and the players would have no option but to wait for the outcome of the
decision of the Committee which may affect his practice/profession. Moreover, fulfilling the
condition of disposal of weapons only to promising shooters who have finished among the
first three in the preceding State level championship, would be a herculean task for the
seller shooter. The shooters who finished first three may no longer be interested in buying
outdated weapons. The Committee therefore recommends that Government may remove the
conditions of the endorsement by the three member Committee and instead straightway
allow sale of weapon by a renowned shooter to any shooter registered with Rifle Clubs/
District/State/National Rifle Association.

24
Recommendation
3.9 Demand No. 98–Lakshadweep
3.9.1 Necessary steps may be taken to implement the proposal for opening all islands for tourism
and open up public-private participation in tourism, so that tourism may develop as a major activity
in the islands which has the potential to provide employment.
(Para 24.6)
Action Taken replies
3.9.2 Lakshadweep Administration has already given one uninhabited Island (Bangaram) on lease
to a private party for running a resort. In recent years, approval has been given to two cruise
operators to visit various islands with certain conditions so that the environment/ecosystem of the
island is not disturbed.
3.9.3 Interest has been shown in the development of Tinnakara, an uninhabited island, for
development as a tourist site by certain private parties who have formed a society with local tribal
residents of the Lakshadweep Islands for the purpose. However, this arrangement has been
challenged in Kerala High Court on the grounds that such a project should be taken up only by
way of global tendering and a stay has been given on any further processing of this project. The
final arguments have been completed and it is expected that the Hon’ble Court would be handing
down a verdict soon.
Further Recommendation
3.9.4 The Committee is of the view that not much have been done in the direction of
opening the islands for tourism. The Government may again look into this aspect and take
all steps to open up the islands to tourism as this may increase employment opportunities
to the people of the area.

25
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT YET
BEEN RECEIVED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
4.1 National Disaster Management Authority
4.1.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the Rules relating to National Disaster Response
Force (NDRF) have not yet been notified. These Rules are very essential for the functioning of
the Force. The Committee desires that the Rules may be finalized and notified at the earliest.
(Para 11.7)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The NDRF Rules have been framed by Ministry of Home Affairs and after approval by
Hon’ble Home Minister have also been vetted by Ministry of Law and Justice. Now they are in
the process of being notified.
Further Recommendation
4.1.3 The Committee recommends that the process of notifying the NDRF Rules may be
completed at the earliest.
Recommendation
4.2 Revamping of Civil Defence
4.2.1 The Comm ittee while commenting on the issue in its 119th & 124th Reports has observed
that the implementation of the revamping of Civil Defence has been tardy and taking unduly long
time. It is understandable that Govenunent wants to have the views of National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) as the said scheme was to be integrated in Disaster Management.
But the Committee is at a loss to understand about consultations being held now with State
Governments which could have been done when the scheme was conceived and formulated. Now
it is causing unnecessary delays. The Committee, therefore, recommends again to expedite the
process of consultation with States and set a time limit so that the scheme may take off this year.
(Para 12.3)
Action Taken
4.2.2 A Committee was constituted by Ministry of Home Affairs during February, 2006 under
Member, National Disaster Management Authority to analyze the existing roles, duties and functions
of the Civil Defence Organisation particularly with reference to its increasing roles in Disaster
Management and suggest changes required to bring in tune with the current realities/ situation of
war preparedness and disaster management. The Report of this Committee has been received in
January, 2007.
4.2.3 The recommendations of the Committee would, inter alia , place substantial financial burden
on the States. Therefore consultation with State Governments has become indispensable. Though,
25

26
MHA has been vigorously pursuing this matter with State Governments, only three State
Governments have responded so far. Other State Governments have been requested to respond by
30.9.2007 positively. The scheme will be reviewed in the light of the comments of the State
Governments/Union Territories and processed for seeking approval of the Government.
Committee’s Observation
4.2.4 The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of Civil
Defence system and Rehabilitation of J&K migrants. After the study is complete, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon.
Recommendation
4.3 India-Bangladesh Border Fencing works
4.3.1 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that the allocations are not being spent.
Besides, the Ministry is also likely to take up Phase-III of the fencing work. The Committee
strongly recommends that the physical and financial targets may be achieved well in time and
Phase-II may be completed at the earliest so that Phase-III may be commenced as soon as
possible.
(Para 13.7)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The fencing in 2429 Km. sanctioned in Phase-II, was targeted to be completed by
March, 2007. However, 1652 km. fencing has been completed by July, 2007. Fencing in remaining
stretches could not be undertaken on account of riverine segments of the border, problematic
sections; due to presence of habitation within 150 yards of international border and objections
raised by Bangladesh Rifles for construction of fence (297 kms.) and dense forest stretches in
Mizoram State. Delay in land acquisition process and other constraints have also contributed to the
non-completion of fencing (165 kms.).
4.3.3 B order fencing in Mizoram started in the year 2005. 90 km. fencing has been completed
in Mizoram till July, 2007. The balance length i.e. 310 km. is scheduled to be completed in
2008-09.
4.3.4 The feasible stretches of Phase II are envisaged to be completed by March, 2009 and a
proposal to this effect has been approved in the 16th Meeting of High Level Empowered Committee
(HLEC) held on 26th June, 2007. A Cabinet note to this effect is being prepared.
4.3.5 The financial allocation made for fencing works for Indo-Bangladesh Border during the last
three years and expenditure made is as follows:—
(Amt. Rs. in cr.)
Year Fund Released Expenditure
2004-05 270.47 270.47
2005-06 439.40 439.40
2006-07 424.00 424.00
4.3.6 Commencement of Phase III i.e. replacement of Phase I fencing, is not linked with Phase
II works and it is being taken up separately.

27
Recommendation
4.4 Modernisation of Prison Administration
4.4.1 The Committee is presently examining the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill, 2006. One of the provisions in the Bill seeks to amend Section 167 of the Code for allowing
video conferencing between the jail and the Court for trial of an accused to avoid transportation
of the accused to the Court. To make this provision workable it is essential to modernize the jails,
especially enabling those with IT facilities, computers and all related equipments. Most of the jails
in the country do not have this facility at present. In case, the above mentioned amendment is
enacted, it would practically be of no use unless the required infrastructure is available in the jails.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that creation of infrastructure in the jails for enabling video
linkages between the jails and the courts, may be made part of the scheme of Modernization of
Prisons and if necessary a separate allocation may be made for that purpose.
(Para 16.7)
Action Taken replies
4.4.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs have noted the recommendation of the Committee for creating
infrastructure in the jails for enabling video linkage between the jails and in the Courts. The State
Governments have been requested to send their proposals for video conferencing and
computerization. A technical group is being constituted to study the facilities of video conferencing
set up in States like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra etc. so as to evolve parameters for
introducing video conferencing/computerization in a most cost effective manner and to also evaluate
the proposals received from States in this regard. Once the estimates have been worked out and
finalized, MHA will approach the Finance Ministry/Cabinet for a higher allocation during the current
phase for implementation of the aforesaid components.
Committee’s Observation
4.4.3 The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of schemes
relating to Modernisation of Prison Administration. After the study is complete, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon.
Recommendation
4.5 Housing for Central Police Forces (CPF) personnel
4.5.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the Plan Allocation approved by the Planning
Commission for the Tenth Five Year Plan of Rs.1037.50 crore was reduced to Rs.729 crore. The
originally projected expenditure for the Tenth Plan by the Ministry was Rs.l0,000 crore. The
Committee desires that the Planning Commission may make a realistic assessment of the
requirement of the scheme and make allocations accordingly. Had the projected expenditure of
Rs.2,000 crore under Plan and Non-Plan been spent during the Tenth Plan, the satisfaction level
of Twenty Five per cent would have been achieved. Due to reduction in allocation, that satisfaction
level may have gone down drastically. The Committee desires that at least 20% satisfaction level
in all the States needs to be achieved for which necessary allocation may be made. The Committee
also recommends that the Government may commission a review of the implementation of the
scheme with a view to critically analyze its implementation.
(Para 17.3)
Action Taken
4.5.2 A proposal for achieving the desired housing satisfaction level of about 21% in the Central
Para-military Forces (CPFs) in the Eleventh Plan period has been mooted, for which a requirement

28
of Rs.6584.10 crore during the Eleventh Plan has been projected before the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission has been apprised about the comments of the Standing Committee.
Further detailed discussions have been held with Planning Commission at the level of Home
Secretary and the matter is being pursued with them.
Recommendation
4.6 Housing for Delhi Police Personnel
4.6.1 The Committee is unhappy to note that none of the housing projects on hand of the Delhi
Police, has taken off so far. The project at Dwarka could not commence due to increase in plinth
area/covered area as per requirement of Delhi Urban Arts Commission. The Committee feels that
the outstanding issues should have been sorted out before the project was approved. Now that the
tenders have already been invited for starting the construction work, the Committee recommends
that the physical targets may be adhered to.
(Para 17.7)
Action Taken
4.6.2 A provision of Rs.26.78 crore was made in the year 2001 for construction of 342 houses
in Dwarka. The work was entrusted to RITES which prepared the building plan for the residential
quarters by 2004. The same were submitted to DDA for approval. After due scrutiny DDA referred
the building drawings to Delhi Urban Arts Commission in December, 2005. Approvals of the
Airports Authority of India and the Chief Fire Officer, Delhi were also obtained in the meanwhile.
Tenders were invited but only one firm qualifIed in the technical scrutiny since the bid amount was
more than the estimated cost of the project (R.E. Rs.48.05 crore), it was re-tendered. Now the
process of re-tendering is on.
4.6.3 The time taken in starting of the project is not attributable only to the increase in plinth area
as required by the Delhi Urban Arts Commission. A number of factors have contributed such as
time required for preparation of drawings by RITES, time taken for scrutiny by DDA and the Delhi
Urban Arts Commission and finally the non-availability of competitive bids for undertaking the
work.
4.6.4 The revised administrative and expenditure sanction for the construction of work of above
project has been obtained. The plans of the above project have been got approved from Local
Bodies. The Notice inviting tender for the execution of above work has been published in the
leading newspapers on 31.5.2007.
4.6.5 T echnical Bid has been evaluated by the Tender Committee and two reputed firms have
quoted. The financial bid has been opened and the bids are being examined.
4.6.6 In accordance with the observation of the Standing Committee, a mechanism would be put
in place to ensure close monitoring of progress so as to adhere to the physical targets as opined
by the Hon’ble Committee.
Further Recommendation
4.6.7 The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of Housing
Schemes for Delhi Police Personnel and Central Police Forces. After the study is complete,
the Committee will present a separate report thereon.
Recommendation
4.7 Demand No.94 – Andaman and Nicobar Islands
4.7.1 The Committee also understands that the Island Administration has a proposal of

29
procurement of two fixed wing aircrafts and two helicopters which is held up in Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The Ministry of Civil Aviation may clear the proposal at the earliest. The Ministry of
Home Affairs may also consult the Ministry of Civil Aviation for an early clearance of the proposal.
(Para 20.19)
Action Taken
4.7.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation has completed the Techno-Economic Evaluation of the proposal
and M/s Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. has been authorized to procure two 11-15 seaters helicopters
and two fixed wing aircrafts (one each of 9-10 seater and 15-19 seater) on behalf of A&N
Administration. M/s Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. has finalized EFC Memo for procurement of fixed
wing aircraft and the same has been sent to UT Administration for vetting. EFC Memo for
helicopters is still under preparation.
Further Recommendation
4.7.3 The Committee would like to be informed of the final outcome of the efforts made.
Recommendation
4.8 Demand No. 96–Dadra and Nagar Haveli; and
Demand No. 97–Daman and Diu
4.8.1 The Committee is constrained to note that both the Union Territories of Daman and Diu and
Dadra and Nagar Haveli have been getting very less grant as compared to the projections made by
them. In fact, Dadra and Nagar Haveli has been given about one-third of the projected amount
whereas Daman and Diu has been less than 50 per cent of the projected amount. With this
reduction in the allocations, the activities proposed to be taken up by the Union Territories would
be considerably affected. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the allocations for
both the Union Territories may be increased appropriately at RE level. The Ministry of Home Affairs
may also hold discussions with the Planning Commission about the necessity of the projects to be
taken up by the Union Territories. The Committee also recommends that the priority areas of
activities proposed to be taken up during 2007-08 may be completed as per the targets fixed.
Energy sector is an important area in which both the Union Territories proposed to set up new
sub-stations. Dadra and Nagar Haveli also proposed to augment the capacity of a sub-station and
Daman and Diu proposes to convert overhead lines to underground lines. These activities may be
undertaken on a priority basis and completed as per the targets fixed.
(Para 23.6)
Action Taken replies
4.8.2 The Union Territory Administration of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli have
taken up the matter with the Planning Commission to augment the Plan allocation to Rs.190 crore
and Rs.232 crore, respectively, at RE 2007-08 stage. Ministry of Home Affairs has also requested
Planning Commission in July, 2007 to consider the proposal of these UTs favourably. MHA has also
taken up with Planning Commission for revival of the practice of consultation/discussions with the
two UT Adminsitrations for finalizing their Annual Plan Outlays. Planning Commission has agreed
to revive the practice from next Annual Plan.
4.8.3 Necessary actions are being expedited to complete activities proposed to be taken up during
2007-08 as per the targets fixed.
Further Recommendation
4.8.4 The Committee would like to be informed the present status of various activities
taken up in 2007-08 along with the targets and achievements.

30
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—
AT A GLANCE
Civic Action Programme of Border Guarding Forces
The Committee notes that allocation for Civic Aviation Programme has been
enhanced. The activities proposed to be taken, if implemented in the right earnest, would
go a long way in infusing a sense of confidence in the people of border areas.
(Para 1.1.5)
1.3 Modernisation of Police Forces
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has forwarded the
"Comprehensive Composite Proposal" to the Planning Commission for technology
upgradation in the functioning of police at all level through a project called CIP A-crime
registration, investigation, and prosecution modules to be linked through a broadband/
CDMA/VSAT network. The Committee desires that the Planning Commission may clear the
project at the earliest. (Para 1.3.6)
1.7 Modernisation of Prison Administration
The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
scheme. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee a separate and detailed report
would be presented by the Committee to the Parliament. (Para 1.7.3)
1.8 Modernisation of Prison Administration
The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
scheme. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee a separate and detailed report
would be presented by the Committee to the Parliament. (Para 1.8.3)
Recommendation
Demand No.94–Andaman & Nicobar Islands
The Committee desirers that the 50 sites identified for development may be taken
up immediately. Development of the sites would give employment opportunities to a large
number of people in the area. (Para 1.10.7)
Relief and rehabilitation measures for J&K migrants
The Committee has appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study on the
select and Rehabilitation measures for J&K Migrants. After the study is completed, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon. (Para 3.1.6)
Coastal Security Scheme
The Committee is constrained to note that even though the scheme was approved in
2005 for implementation in five years several proposals are still in approval stage. The
Committee recommends that all the proposals may be given approval at the earliest. The
Committee also recommends that the Price Negotiation Committee of MHA may complete
all the formalities for purchase of boats. (Para 3.2.6)
30

31
National Disaster Management Authority
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should expediously
consider the Draft National Policy on Disaster Management as prepared by the National
Disaster Management Authority and finalize the policy at the earliest. The country can not
wait for a disaster to happen before the policy is finalized. (Para 3.3.3)
National Disaster Management Authority
It is unfortunate that the constitution of NDRF is still at consultation stage. The
Government should take early action in the matter and see that NDRF is in place
converging CRF/NCCF. (Para 3.4.6)
The Committee notes that a provision for creation of National Disaster Mitigation
Fund was made way lack in DM Act, 2005. Undue delay has taken place in discussion of
MHA with the Ministry of Finance, the National Disaster Management Authority and
Planning Commission. The Committee recommends that the process of creating the fund
may be completed at the earliest. (Para 3.4.7)
India-Bangladesh Border Fencing Work
The Committee has constituted a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
Border fencing and Floodlighting projects. After the study is completed, the Committee will
present a separate report thereon. (Para 3.5.5)
Naxalism
Naxalism is no longer the problem of one State. As part of holistic approach, the
private sector also needs to be protected. The economic development of naxal affected areas
can happen only if private sector also contributes to this. Therefore, there is need for
making a policy for protecting industries including private sector. (Para 3.6.5)
Housing for Delhi Police Personnel
The Committee was appointed a sub-Committee to make a detailed study of the
Housing for CPMF and Delhi Police. After the study is completed by the sub-Committee, the
Committee will present its detailed report thereon. (Para 3.7.5)
Acquiring of weapons by sportspersons
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by one of its member that the
following conditions imposed by the Ministry make disposal of weapons by renowned shooter
difficult:—
(a) Before allowing disposal of weapons by the renowned shooters, the condition of
the weapons may be assessed by a 3-member committee proposed to be
constituted under the Chairmanship of the Executive Director (Teams), Sports
Authority of India, with a representative each from NRAI and the National
Coach of Shooting as other members and disposal will be allowed only on the
recommendation of this committee.
(b) While disposing of such weapons, it would be ensured that these are being sold
to other upcoming shooters only subject to production of certificate to this effect
from the concerned State Association. A promising shooter would be one who
would have finished among the first three in the preceding State level
championships. After disposal, intimation to this effect will be given by the
renowned shooter to the NRAI, the Sports Authority of India and the Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports. (Para 3.8.5)

32
The Ministry, however, did not bring the above conditions to the notice of the
Committee. (Para 3.8.6)
The Committee is of the considered view that the above mentioned conditions would
create problems in the smooth disposal of outdated weapons by renowned shooters. The
meeting of the three member committee to decide disposal of weapons may not be held for
months together and the players would have no option but to wait for the outcome of the
decision of the committee which may affect his practice/profession. Moreover, fulfilling the
condition of disposal of weapons only to promising shooters who have finished among the
first three in the preceding State level championship, would be a herculean task for the
seller shooter. The shooters who finished first three may no longer be interested in buying
outdated weapons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government may remove
the conditions of the endorsement by the three member committee and instead straightway
allow sale of weapon by a renowned shooter to any shooter registered with Rifle Clubs/
District/State/National Rifle Association. (Para 3.8.7)
Demand No. 98–Lakshadweep
The Committee is of the view that not much have been done in the direction of
opening the islands for tourism. The Government may again look into this aspect and take
all steps to open up the islands to tourism as this may increase employment opportunities
to the people of the area. (Para 3.9.4)
National Disaster Management Authority
The Committee recommends that the process of notifying the NDRF Rules may be
completed at the earliest. (Para 4.1.3)
Revamping of Civil Defence
The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of Civil
Defence system and Rehabilitation of J&K migrants. After the study is complete, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon. (Para 4.2.4)
Modernisation of Prison Administration
The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of schemes
relating to Modernisation of Prison Administration. After the study is complete, the
Committee will present a separate report thereon. (Para 4.4.3)
Housing for Delhi Police Personnel
The Committee has appointed a sub-committee to make a detailed study of Housing
Schemes for Delhi Police Personnel and Central Police Forces. After the study is complete,
the Committee will present a separate report thereon. (Para 4.6.7)
Demand No. 94–Andaman & Nicobar Islands
The Committee would like to be informed of the final outcome of the efforts made.
(Para 4.7.3)
Demand No.96–Dadra and Nagar Haveli; and
Demand No.97–Daman and Diu
The Committee would like to be informed the present status of various activities
taken up in 2007-08 alongwith the targets and achievements. (Para 4.8.4)

33
MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 11th April, 2008 in Main Committee Room,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ajit Jogi
8. Shri Sachin Pilot
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
12. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
2. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
3. Shri D.K. Mishra, Deputy Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the following draft Reports of the Committee:—
(i) One Hundred and Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred and Twenty-sixth Report on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) One Hundred and Thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Report
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region;
(iii) One Hundred and Thirty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Home Affairs; and
35

36
(iv) One Hundred and Thirty-third Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region.
2.1 After some discussion, the Reports were adopted with some minor modifications suggested
by Members. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to carry out the necessary changes.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports in both Houses of Parliament on
16th April 2008. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence, Shri R.K. Dhawan,
to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Naveen Jindal and in his absence, Dr. Rattan
Singh Ajnala, to lay a copy each of the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.