 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020/Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
226 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available         
 
C.S. (H.A.)-444      
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2020-21) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
       
 (Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2020)  
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2020) 
 
      (Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021)                        
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020/Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iii) - (vi) 
4.  REPORT      1  -  62 
 Chapter-  I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2 - 16 
 Chapter- II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
17  -  25 
 Chapter-        III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
26  -  47 
 Chapter-        IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
48  -  62 
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
- AT A GLANCE 
63  -  72 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
74 - 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan 
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
4. #Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. *Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher 
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu 
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi 
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
29. Shri Ravneet Singh 
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
_____________________________ 
* Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 4th February, 2020 to fill the vacancy caused by resignation of  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas, 
MP, Rajya Sabha  from Committee w.e.f. 31st January, 2020. 
#  Shri Dinesh Trivedi nominated w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 consequent upon the vacancy arose on the expiration of term of Shri Manish Gupta from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2020.  
 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this Two Hundred Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
2. The Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha 
on 5th March, 2020.  After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof were sent to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the English Version of 
the Action Taken Notes on the above mentioned Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report to the Committee 
on 20rd July, 2020.   
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated                              
24th September 2004.   
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Twenty Sixth Report and adopted the same 
at its meeting held on 11th September, 2020. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
 
11th September, 2020 
New Delhi 
Bhadra 20, 1942 (Saka)                                                                                 
Anand Sharma 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
AR Assam Rifles 
A&NI Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
ANIMERS Andaman & Nicobar Islands Institute of Medical Sciences  
ADB Asian Development Bank 
BSF Border Security Force 
BBNL Bharat Broadband Network Limited  
BOPs Border Out Posts  
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
BESS Battery Energy Storage Station  
CHC Community Health Centers 
CCPWC Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children  
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory  
CMP Chandigarh Master Plan  
C- DAC Centre for Development of Advance Computer 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CVCF Central Victim Compensation Fund 
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CAPFIMS Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences  
CPC Central Pay Commission 
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
C&AG Controller and Auditor General 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
CCTNS Cyber Crime Tracking Network System 
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security 
CAP Community Awareness Programmes 
DG Director-General 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DSPTs Digital Satellite Phone Terminals  
DoT Department of Telecom  
DPR Detailed Project Report  
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DCPW Directorate of Coordination Police Wireless  
DMTC Disaster Management Training Corps  
DJB Delhi Jal Board 
DEA Deptt of Economic Affairs  
EWDS Early Warning Dissemination System 
EESL energy efficiency Services limited 
ERSS Emergency Response Support System  
FICN Fake Indian Currency Note 
GST Goods and Service Tax 
GoI Government of India 
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
ITMS Intelligent Traffic Management System  
ICPs Integrated Check Post 
I4C Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
IMCT Inter-Ministerial Central Team 
ITBP Indo Tibetan Border Police 
ICT Information & Communication Technology 
IVRS Interactive Voice Response System 
IB Intelligence Bureau 
IDA Island Development Authority  
INCB International Narcotics Control Board  
ICCC Integrated Command Control Centre  
LPAI Land Ports Authority of India 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
LED  Light Emitting Diode 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MPCS Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelters 
MPF Modernisation of Police Forces  
MSA Master Service Agreement  
MAC Multi-Agency Centre  
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoSJE Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
NATGRID National Intelligence Grid 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project 
NCB Narcotics Control Bureau 
NCR National Capital Region 
NGOs Non-Government Organisation 
NAFIS National Automated Fingerprint Identification System  
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan  
NPR National Population Register 
NMB National Memory Bank  
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
NDPS Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 
NSG National Security Guard 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau  
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation  
NVVN NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam  
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NICSI National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated  
NCC National Cadet Corps  
NAVAIDS navigational aid 
NGT National Green Tribunal  
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
NIWE National Institute of Wind Energy  
NSGM National Smart Grid Mission  
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
OFC Optical Fiber Cable  
OSINT Open-source intelligence  
OSVD Over Speed Violation Detection  
PMRP Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan 
PGP Pretty Good Privacy  
PRI Panchayati Raj Institutions 
PPPAC Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee  
PMC Prorate Manual - Cargo  
PMA Project Management Agency  
PMDP Prime Minister’s Development Package 
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Service 
RAW Research and Analysis Wing 
RES Renewable Energy Sources 
RFP Request for Proposal  
RRC Regional Response Centres  
RLVD Red Light Violation Detection  
RFQ Request for Qualification  
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme  
RRP Road  Requirement Plan 
RCPLWE Road Connectivity Project for LWE Affected Areas  
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund 
SIBs Special Intelligence Branches  
SMAC Subsidiary Multi-Agency Centre 
SSP School Safety Programmes  
SFC Securities And Futures Commission  
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal 
SRE Security Related Expenditure 
SPV Solar Photovoltaic  
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India 
SCUBA Self-Contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus 
SATTE South Asia Travel and Tourism Exchange 
SPIUs State Project Implementation Units  
SCIM Safe City Implementation and Monitoring  
SMS Short Messaging Service 
TPLs Tactically Pre-deployment Locations  
TMS Threat Management system  
TCIL Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd.  
TMS Transportation Management System  
ToR The Onion Router 
USOF Universal Service Obligation Fund  
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
(v) 

 
 
 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UTL Union Territory of Lakshadweep 
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime  
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India  
V-SAT Very Small Aperture Terminal 
WTP Water Treatment Plant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 

 
 
1 
 
Report 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry. The Two Hundred Twenty Fourth 
Report was presented to Rajya Sabha /laid on the Table of Lok Sabha, on 5th March, 2020. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
Chapter I: The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 2.2.6, 2.2.7, 2.2.9, 2.2.11, 3.2.2, 3.4.10, 4.2.3, 4.3.16, 4.3.18, 4.5.9, 4.8.9, 4.9.9, 
5.2.15, 5.2.19, 5.2.23, 5.6.6, 5.7.4  (of Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report)    
Total recommendations- 17  
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as 
mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Chapter II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.2.5, 3.4.11, 3.9.9, 3.9.10, 4.3.9, 4.3.12, 
4.5.5, 4.6.6, 5.2.24, 5.4.8, 5.5.6, 5.5.11, 5.5.14, 5.5.15, 5.7.9, 5.8.16, 5.8.17 (ibid)  
Total recommendations - 17 
 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further. 
 
Chapter III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 3.4.8, 3.4.13, 3.5.3, 3.6.7, 3.8.9, 3.9.13, 
4.2.4, 4.3.8, 4.3.19, 4.7.3, 4.9.8, 4.10.2, 4.11.3, 4.11.4, 4.12.9, 4.13.5, 5.2.2, 5.2.8, 5.2.10, 5.4.2, 
5.7.7, 5.8.19, 5.8.20, 5.8.22 (ibid)  
Total recommendations - 24  
 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish 
convincing action taken steps in respect of those recommendations.  
 
Chapter IV: The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received: Para Nos. 3.10.4, 4.4.7, 4.8.4, 4.8.14, 4.12.8, 5.2.4, 
5.2.13, 5.2.17, 5.3.4, 5.3.7, 5.3.11, 5.3.16, 5.3.18, 5.4.5, 5.6.4, 5.8.18, 5.8.22, 5.9.4 (ibid)  
Total Recommendations - 18  
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of the observations/recommendations made in all chapters 
of the Report.  
 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding chapters. 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
1.1 Allocation, projections and variations 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.1.1 The Committee also notes that there has been allocation of Rs. 105244.34 crore for the Police 
(Demand No.48) at BE 2020-21 that is around 7% more than last year’s allocation of Rs. 98202.23 
crore in BE 2019-20. The allocation made under the Revenue Head for the Police (Demand No.48) is 
Rs. 95397.97 crore at BE in 2020-21. The allocation made under  the Capital Head for the Police 
(Demand No.48) is Rs. 9846.37 crore at BE  in 2020-21 which is around 9% less than the allocation of 
Rs. 10790.28 crore under the capital head for the Police in BE 2019-20. This may hamper the creation 
of assets and negatively impact their capabilities. The Committee further observes reduction in 
allocation for the Border Infrastructure, Police Infrastructure, and Modernization of Police Forces in  
BE 2020 -21 over BE 2019-20. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
reconsider the requirements of the funds for the Police and Union Territories and pursue with the 
Ministry of Finance for increased allocation at the Revised Estimates stage. 
 
(Para 2.2.6 of 224th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The requirement of funds would be re-assessed at RE 2020-21 stage and Ministry of Finance 
would be approached for increased allocation of funds, as recommended by the Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.1.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.2 Allocation for the Union Territories 
  
Recommendation 
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes that the total allocation for the Union Territories in BE 2020-21 is Rs. 
52863.91 that is divided in to two parts. i.e. Union Territories (without legislature) is Rs. 19287.89 
crore and Union Territories (with legislature) is Rs. 33576.02 crore. The Committee notices that the 
total allocation for the Union Territories has been increased substantially mainly due to the allocation 
for the two newly created Union Territories of J&K and Ladakh. Further, for the Union Territories 
(without legislature), the allocation under the Revenue Head is Rs. 13787.02 i.e. 71.48% of total 
allocation to the UTs and Capital Head is Rs. 5536.57 i.e. 28.51% of the total allocation to the UTs. 
The Committee believes that the allocation under the Capital Head for the Union Territories (without 
legislature) should be increased for creation of assets particularly infrastructure, at a rapid rate and at 
the same time ensuring that the developmental projects of the UTs does not gets hampered due to 
shortage of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must review the capital 
requirements of these UTs in the first half of the next fiscal year, expedite the developmental projects in 
the UTs and project a higher demand for allocation to the Ministry of Finance at RE stage. 
(Para 2.2.7 ibid) 

 
 
3 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. All UT Administrations 
have been requested, vide this Ministry’s letter dated 06.05.2020, to expedite the developmental 
projects in the UTs and requirement of more/higher demand under Capital Head for allocation, if any, 
may be projected at RE/Supplementary stage, so that demands of UTs may be taken up with Ministry 
of Finance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.2.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.3 Allocation Under Demand-46 (MHA) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that up to 30th January, 2020 the Ministry was able to spend  only 59.79 
percent of the total allocation granted under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 48 in 
RE 2019-20. This was despite a reduction in allocation from Rs. 11129.62 crore in BE 2019-20 to Rs. 
10096.27 crore at RE stage under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 48. The 
Committee fails to understand the reasons for this poor capital expenditure and wonders as to how the 
Ministry would be able to spend around the remaining 40 percent of the allocation under the Capital 
Head in limited days remaining in the current financial year. The Committee feels that a large sum of 
capital funds may have to be surrendered by the Ministry and it may subject them to further cuts. The 
Committee expresses its displeasure at this sub-optimal capital expenditure by the Ministry. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should try to remove all operational bottlenecks and 
undertake corrective measures to address the issues underlying the poor capital expenditure specially 
under demand No. 48 (Police). 
(Para 2.2.9 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 It is submitted that major allocations under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 
48 were for Police Infrastructure, Border Infrastructure and Infrastructure for Disaster Management. 
 
1.3.3 Construction activities were speeded up after the monsoon season. Although the expenditure 
upto 30th January 2020 was only 59.79 percent of the total  budgetary allocation, at RE 2019-20 stage 
under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 48, the final expenditure has been to the tune 
of 96.45 percent. 
 
1.3.4 It may also be pertinent to mention that in October 2019, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
had halted all the construction activities in NCR of Delhi in the wake of very bad situation of pollution. 
This hampered various projects being undertaken by the Delhi Police and the construction of Central 
Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences (CAPFsIMS). 
 
1.3.5 Notwithstanding above, the Ministry is concerned with non-utilization of full budgetary 
provision under Capital Head of the Grants, especially under Demand No. 48- Police, and will take all 
corrective measures. 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.3.6 The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent around 96.45% percent of the total 
allocation granted under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 48 in RE 2019-20 at 
the end of the financial year 2019-20. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised about the 
completion status of the various projects being undertaken by the Delhi Police and the 
construction of Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences (CAPFsIMS). 
 
 
1.4 Allocation under Demand- 49-56 (UTs) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.4.1 The Committee notes that the UTs without legislature (excluding Ladakh) have utilized around 
79% of the total allocation made to them in RE 2019 -20. The Committee is aware that the Union 
Territories have been pleading for more funds every fiscal year for the developmental activities like 
construction of roads and bridges, disaster management, generation, transmission and distribution of 
power, urban development, etc. The fund utilization made by the UTs depicts that developmental 
projects are being executed in the UTs. The Committee is of the opinion that the Union Territories 
should always maintain strong fund utilization credentials so that they can get their projected 
allocations from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs may review the fund utilization status of every UT regularly and proactively and take corrective 
measures if found necessary. 
(Para 2.2.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 All UTs are required to furnish the expenditure status on monthly basis which is regularly 
reviewed in the Ministry. It have been requested time and again to UTs to submit monthly expenditure 
report of their respective UTs to this Ministry. However, it will now be ensured by the Ministry to 
review the same on monthly basis. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.4.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.5 Demand No. 46 - Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee observes that the expenditure incurred by the Ministry during 2019-20 under 
several heads viz. Relief and Rehabilitation for migrants and repatriates, National Cyclone Risk 
Mitigation Project, Census, Survey and Statistics/ Registrar General  of  India, Other Disaster 
Management Schemes, infrastructure for Disaster Management and Other Central Miscellaneous 
Expenditure is quite less than allocation at RE stage. The Committee expresses its displeasure at the 
failure of the Ministry to ensure full fund utilization and recommends that the Ministry needs to 
monitor the expenditure closely under these heads to achieve full utilization during the next fiscal year. 
 
( Para 3.2.2 ibid) 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 It  is  submitted  that  an  additional  amount  of  Rs.500.00  crore,  meant  for the Census 2021, 
was provided to Office of the RGI at RE 2019-20 stage. This amount was projected in the 2nd & Final 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2019-20, presented to the Parliament in the 
Budget Session. It is further submitted that the Ministry has been able to spend 97.38 percent of the 
budget allocation at RE stage under Grant No. 46-MHA at the end of the financial year. 
 
1.5.3 The Ministry regularly reviews the expenditure under all the heads of the Demands. The Budget 
Controlling Authorities are advised to closely monitor  the trend of expenditure throughout the year so 
that funds are utilized in full. However, special emphasis will be given on the heads in the next fiscal, as 
pointed out by the Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.5.4 The Committee notes the measures taken by Ministry to review and monitor the 
expenditures under all the heads of the Demands and  recommends that the Ministry needs to 
obviate the uneven distribution of fund utilization pattern during the fiscal year and achieve near 
uniform utilization pattern throughout the year so that the necessary funds are not surrendered 
at RE stage.  
 
 
1.6 National Disaster Response Fund 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 The Committee appreciates the work done by NDRF for disaster management in the country. 
The Committee also takes note of the efforts made by the MHA in setting up disaster management 
teams. The Committee recommends possession of adequate manpower and infrastructure in the 
regional response centres for the swift movement of the troops in case of a disaster. 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
Possession of Adequate Manpower 
 
1.6.2 Based on the vulnerability profile of the country and to minimize the response time, NDRF 
teams are permanently available at 12 Battalion Headquarters and 27 Regional Response Centres 
(RRCs). In addition to above, keeping in view the operational requirements, teams are also kept at 11 
Tactically Pre-deployment Locations (TPLs) throughout the year. As such, NDRF teams are kept 
alert at 50 locations throughout the year to respond to emergent situations. Also, as per the 
requirements of the States/UTs during disasters or disasters like situations, additional teams are 
placed in sufficient numbers to provide prompt response. 
 
1.6.3 Further, Government of India has approved raising of 04 additional battalions of NDRF (02 
Bn from ITBP & 01 each from Assam Rifles and BSF), out of which 01 Battalion of Assam Rifle is 
inducted and undergoing Disaster Management Training. Remaining 03 Battalions are likely to be 
inducted by 2021. Induction of these additional 04 battalions will enhance the presence and activities 
of NDRF in coming years. 
 
 
 

 
 
6 
 
Infrastructure in the Regional Response Centres (RRC) 
 
1.6.4 A total 28 RRCs have been approved by MHA. 
 
(i) Infrastructure created at 4 RRC locations: Siliguri, Kolkata, Dwarka and Dehradun. 
(ii) Construction of infrastructure  is  under  progress  at  5  RRC  locations: Bengaluru, 
Balasore, Kishangarh, Supaul  & Vishakhapatnam and likely be completed by March 
2021. 
(iii) Land has been acquired for RRC at Gandhinagar; construction work will start in current 
financial year. 
(iv) Land has been acquired for 8 RRCs locations at: Agartala, Ernakulum, Gangtok, 
Lucknow, Port Blair, Nurpur, Hyderabad & Gorakhpur. EFC proposal of infrastructure 
for these 8 RRCs is under examination. 
(v) Land acquisition process for 3 RRCs locations at: Chennai, Ranchi and Dimapur is 
under progress in the concerned States, which may be finalized in current financial year. 
(vi) At other 7 RRCs locations: Aizwal, Mumbai, Noida, Bhopal, Srinagar, Panchkula & R K 
Puram (New Delhi) accommodation is being provided by the concerned States. 
 
1.6.5 Thus, all 28 RRCs are functioning from their respective approved locations at its own 
infrastructure or suitable accommodation provided by the States. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.6.6 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee further recommends that 
infrastructure and manpower requirements of the NDRF may be reviewed periodically. 
 
 
1.7 Demand No. 48 (CAPFs and Delhi Police) 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.7.1 The Committee notes that the allocation under the Capital Head during 2019-20 has been 
reduced by 9% at the RE stage. The Committee understands that the Central Armed Police Forces have 
huge capital requirements and several projects such as border fencing and floodlighting also require an 
adequate amount of capital funds. The Committee expresses its displeasure on this reduction and 
recommends that the Ministry must undertake necessary measures to improve its capital expenditure in 
the upcoming fiscal year. 
(Para 4.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 All out efforts will be made to improve the capital expenditure in the upcoming fiscal year. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.7.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
 
1.8 Central Armed Police Forces 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 The Committee notes that the problem of poor mobile connectivity persists in areas of 
deployment of CAPFs personnel especially of Border Guarding Forces at Border out Posts. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to strengthen mobile and internet 
connectivity, if not by the State-owned service providers, then by providing for the presence of private 
mobile service providers in such difficult areas so that regular mobile and internet services can be 
availed by every jawan on their own mobile phone devices. The proposal for providing Optical Fiber 
Cable (OFC) connectivity to all Border Out Posts (BOPs) by connecting all villages through National 
Optical Fiber Network must be considered on priority. Further, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should periodically coordinate with the Ministry of Defence, DoT, Bharat Broadband 
Network Ltd. (BBNL) and other concerned agencies to address technical glitches, bottlenecks and 
delay in providing communication facilities to the CAPFs personnel particularly for them who are 
posted at borders. The Committee also desires to be apprised about the progress made in the ongoing 
proposal of diverting V-SAT terminals from Bharat Net Satellite GP Coverage Scheme and voice call 
facility using voice calling over the Internet/WiFi. 
(Para 4.3.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 Digital Satellite Phone Terminals (DSPTs) were sanctioned by MHA to CAPFs to enable their 
personnel to communicate with their family members from far flung/inaccessible areas of the country. 
These DSPT sites are provided subsidy from Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), Department 
of Telecommunication (DoT). However, DSPT services completely stopped functioning w. e. f. 
13.05.2019 due to satellite shutdown. As a stop-gap arrangement, I-Sat phones were provided to 
CAPFs, but the number of I-Sat phones are less than the number of DSPTs. 
 
1.8.3 To find out a permanent solution for the problem, a meeting was convened in DoT on 21st 
January, 2020 which was attended by officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Border Roads 
Organization, Ministry of Defence, Army HQ, DCPW and Bharat Broadband Network Limited 
(BBNL). During the meeting following decisions were taken: 
 
(i) As a permanent solution to re-activate the connectivity to these locations, BBNL has been 
authorized to take up the work by diverting V-SAT terminals from the ongoing Bharat Net 
Satellite GP coverage scheme; 
(ii) Providing voice call facility using voice calling over Internet/ WiFi. MHA has examined the 
security implications for using voice over internet calls with the help of smart phone and 
provided its inputs to the DoT. 
(iii) As requested by DoT, the MHA has provided the list of reconfirmed DSPTs in respect of all 
CAPFs. 
 
1.8.4 DoT has informed that as per the approval of Digital Communications Commission, the work 
for re-provisioning of DSPTs has been awarded to BBNL and the project is being implemented by 
Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd. (TCIL). USOF, DoT is closely monitoring the re-
provisioning of DSPTs on regular basis. Due to ongoing COVID-19 situation, the implementing 
agency is facing lot of difficulties in transportation of material and movement of installation team. 
However, BBNL & TCIL in close co-ordination with MHA/MoD agencies are trying their level best for 
operationalizing all the DSPT sites. 
 

 
 
8 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.8.5 The Committee notes the effort made in ensuring mobile connectivity for CAPFs 
personnel posted in far flung/inaccessible areas and recommends Ministry to coordinate with 
DoT regularly and monitor the re-provisioning of DSPTs. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.8.6 The Committee observes that just like Army Personnel, the CAPF personnel are also posted 
in the treacherous, mountainous and snowy terrains. Therefore, CAPFs personnel needs to be 
given the Risk and Hardship allowance as admissible to Army personnel. The Committee is of the 
opinion that parity on the payment of such allowances should be maintained between troops that are 
deployed in similar areas. This will go a long way in boosting the morale of the deployed CAPF 
personnel in tough condition and areas. 
(Para 4.3.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.7 Government has accepted recommendations of the 7th CPC for grant of Risk & Hardship 
Allowances to CAPF personnel at par with Defence Forces and orders were issued on 31.07.2017. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.8.8 The Committee is extremely happy that on the basis of its recommendation the 
Government has granted 'Risk and Hardship Allowances to CAPF' personnel at par with the 
Defence Forces which was also one of the recommendation of the 7th CPC. It will surely motivate 
of CAPF personnel who are posted at difficult terrains. 
 
 
1.9 Intelligence Bureau 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.9.1 The Committee notes that there are multiple agencies like IB, RAW, CAPFs, Army, State 
agencies, etc. in India which are collecting the intelligence inputs, This may be necessary keeping in 
view the size and political structure of the country. The biggest challenge, however, is how to 
coordinate, create and act upon the inputs/information gathered by these agencies. At times, due to 
lack of coordination, distrust amongst the intelligence agencies, timely action to prevent terrorist 
incidents could not be taken. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA should act as the focal 
point to coordinate amongst those intelligence agencies; device mechanism for collating intelligence 
inputs and sharing it on real-time basis through Multi- Agency Centre (MAC) to avoid any delay in 
taking necessary action on the ground level. The Committee further recommends for developing an 
effective mechanism to conduct validity checks on information obtained by the MAC from other 
agencies. As we are living in a globalized world which is inter-connected and inter-dependent, our 
intelligence agencies should strive for increased coordination and cooperation not only at District, 
State and Regional level but also at International level with friendly foreign counterparts in developing 
and sharing intelligence to mitigate and nullify threats. 
(Para 4.5.9 ibid) 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 Introduction: The Multi-Agency Centre (MAC) was created in December 2001 in the 
aftermath of the Kargil Conflict as a platform  to  share, collate  and analyze all intelligence 
relating to terrorism. It was strengthened in December 2008 following 26/11 Mumbai terror attack. 
The  forum,  along with its Subsidiary MAC (SMAC) units in all States, has emerged as the 
nationally recognised coordinating agency for intelligence on terrorism and insurgency. A 
dedicated, secure electronic network for real-time sharing has been extended across the country, 
with two custom-built software platforms (TMS and NMB) for sharing and databasing intelligence. 
 
1.9.3 MAC-SMAC Connectivity: MAC has established a comprehensive system  of communication 
and connectivity to share/disseminate terrorism related information/data. For this purpose, the 
national capital was connected with 25 Central member agencies and all State capitals. In the 
State capitals, the network links the SMAC (housed in the Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau/SIB), 
State Police Special Branch, and offices of all central and other counter-terror agencies. 
Accordingly, a total of 374 locations are presently on the network.  In phase III, the network is 
being extended to 475 districts selected in consultation with State police chiefs. Out of 475 
identified locations, 451 locations have been found feasible for providing connectivity, out of which 
174 districts have already been connected. When completed, the network will cover 825 locations 
around the country. 
 
(i) The network hosts two software platforms: an intelligence sharing tool called Threat 
Management system (TMS) and a database tool called National Memory Bank (NMB). TMS 
was developed in-house by technical staff from IB, while the NMB software was developed 
by C- DAC, Pune on specifications provided by IB. 
(ii) NMB software is deployed on all MAC and State Police servers. A large amount of data has 
already been uploaded onto the database by IB and some other agencies including some of 
the States. 
 
1.9.4 Intelligence Sharing: On an average, every day MAC gathers, collates, stores, shares and 
disseminates about 150 inputs to concerned agencies. Special alerts are also issued as and when 
called for. The inputs are broadly divided under four heads - J&K, North-East, Left Wing Extremism 
and Rest of India. LWE- related inputs form the largest proportion of total inputs received by MAC 
currently, reflecting the spread of the problem across several States. 
 
1.9.5 Meetings: Various meetings are held regularly across the country to bring together all 
concerned agencies. 
 
1.9.6 A daily meeting of Nodal Officers from each member agency of MAC is held every day at 
MAC Headquarters to review inputs. MAC also conducts some specialized meetings: 
 
(i) Monthly meeting on Cross-Border Terrorism in J&K. 
(ii) Monthly meeting on insurgent camps, FICN and other anti-India activities in 
Bangladesh and Myanmar. 
Fortnightly meeting on LWE introduced in 2012. 
(iii) Monthly meeting on Sikh militancy in Punjab started in 2015. 
(iv) Focus Group Meetings on sensitive inputs received from various agencies/ channels. 
 
1.9.7 Intelligence Sharing with neighbouring countries: Gol has designated MAC as the nodal 
point for sharing of intelligence with Bangladesh and Myanmar. In this capacity, inputs on 
terrorism are regularly shared with counterparts in these countries. 

 
 
10 
 
 
1.9.8 Control Room: 24 x 7 Control Rooms have been set up at Multi Agency Centre (MAC) at New 
Delhi and at the Subsidiary Multi Agency Centres (SMACs) at State level and at Headquarters of 
Intelligence Wings of other agencies to ensure timely sharing of information and better coordination 
between intelligence agencies. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.9.9 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.10 Central Police Organizations 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.10.1 The Committee notes the increase in drug seizure for the past three years. But this has not 
decreased illicit trafficking of narcotics. Moreover, with the increasing popularity of crypto-currencies, 
"darknet" markets have grown where drug traffickers are using encryption software to protect their 
communications, data and money which makes it difficult to track and seize drugs. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommends that efforts should be made to take effective measures against the 
Dark Net and ToR kind of software. Further, critical analysis of intelligence inputs on drug trafficking 
routes should also be done and officers of the NCB should be imparted requisite knowledge and skills 
through befitting training to prevent, investigate and disrupt drug trafficking. The Committee observes 
that as the types of drugs trafficked and the routes used are constantly evolving, it is essential to 
develop cooperation and information-sharing mechanism between regional, national and international 
law enforcement agencies. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the NCB should be 
provided with sufficient and sophisticated infrastructures, personnel, and coordinated enforcement 
mechanisms to combat the growing and fast-changing activities of drug traffickers especially on the 
International Borders. 
(Para 4.8.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.2 The drug traffickers are increasingly using the Dark Net for trafficking in drugs. The medium 
offers complete anonymity because of the use of onion routing, use of Crypto Currency for payment 
and PGP encryption. NCB’s expertise and capacity to deal with this need to be augmented. 
Nonetheless, with available resources the NCB arrested a Dark Net vendor who was operating as an 
active vendor   of   Psychotropic   Drug   in   Dark   Net   markets.   This   network  had international 
linkages spread across India, Singapore and USA. During the operation, approximately 135 Kg of 
different Psychotropic tablets were seizedand 4 persons were arrested. 
 
1.10.3 Keeping in view the constant changing pattern of Drug trafficking and its abuse and the need 
to develop skills of Officers to respond to the challenges arising out of the same, this Ministry has, in 
December, 2019 set up A Training Centre on Drug Law Enforcement within the campus of the 
Central Academy of Police Training, Bhopal. This institute is mandated to impart domain training to 
the Officers of NCB and those of other Central and State Agencies involved in drug law enforcement. 
 
1.10.4 For the purpose of Coordination among all States/Central Agencies in drug related issues, a 
Narco Coordination mechanism was set up by MHA in 2016 under the chairmanship of DG (NCB). 
This mechanism provides a common platform for all drug related issues in India. To provide for a 
more effective platform, the mechanism has been revamped in July, 2019 into a four tier structure- (1) 
Apex Committee headed by Union Home Secretary (2) Executive Committee headed by SS(Internal 

 
 
11 
 
Security) (3) State level Committee headed by Chief Secretary, (4) District Level Committee headed 
by Superintendent of Police of the District. The Committees have onboard the representatives of 
MoSJE, MoHFW, Department of Revenue and all Central and State Drug Law Enforcement 
Agencies. 
 
1.10.5 For cooperation and information-sharing at international level, the NCB has entered into 
agreement/MoU with 42 countries. In addition, the NCB liaise with International Narcotics Control 
Board (INCB) UNODC regulary. 
 
1.10.6 In this way, the issues of coordination among drug law enforcement agencies and the 
changing drug scenario are adequately addressed on a real-time basis. 
 
1.10.7 Revamped proposal is under active consideration. The proposal aims at redesigning the 
governance architecture of NCB, its capacity of investigation and intelligence and making it more 
professional and effective, and includes, inter-alia, the following- 
 
(i) Creation of 3689 posts in various grades up to level-15, thereby raising the strength of NCB 
from existing 1107 to 4751. 
(ii) Creation of 04 new regional offices, thus raising the number of regional offices from existing 3 
to 7 
(iii)Creation of 17 new zonal offices and upgrading all existing 12 sub-zonal offices into zonal 
offices thereby raising the number of field offices to 42 (including 13 existing regional 
offices) 
(iv) Creation of a dedicated Prosecution Wing to provide for in house expertise for legal advice 
and taking up all cases filed under NDPS Act. 
(v) A Canine Wing to identify drugs 
(vi) Drug Intelligence Unit 
(vii) Cyber Technical Cell to tackle the challenges arising out of modern technological methods 
used by drug traffickers. 
 
1.10.8  Once the proposal fructifies, the NCB will have necessary technical infrastructure, legal 
expertise and sufficient manpower to deal with the drug menace effectively. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.10.9  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.11 Modernization of Police Forces 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.11.1 Presently, the modernization involves the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, 
technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment capabilities. The Committee is of the 
opinion that the modernization in the present context must be defined and should include developing 
people friendly attitude of police. The Committee is aware of the fact that the modernization of Police 
Forces through the induction of new equipments, training and technological up-gradation of 
capabilities is important. Police Forces should be sufficiently equipped to meet the entire spectrum of 
security challenges. Therefore, the Committee, recommends that more budget is required for the 
modernization of the State police forces. Unfortunately, a major share of the modernization budget is 
going for improving the infrastructure of the police forces but training State Police Forces in relation 

 
 
12 
 
to its behavior  to public is essential to improve its image as modern day police forces. The Committee 
recommends that it should be mandatory for the State police forces to spend the allocated budget for 
giving better training to all police personnel. Further, the ministry should devise a mechanism to 
ensure that equipments purchased under modernization Programme are well maintained for their 
continuous use. 
(Para 4.9.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.2 Under the scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces(MPF), the States have been provided 
central assistance for acquisition of latest weaponry, training gadgets, advanced communication and 
forensic equipment etc. as per the proposals of the State Governments in accordance with their 
strategic priorities and requirements. The State Governments are regularly proposing up-gradation 
and equipping of their training facilities. 
 
1.11.3 Further, so far as developing people friendly attitude of police is concerned,  with the 
approval of umbrella scheme of Modernisation of Police Forces in September, 2017, a component 
of ‘incentives for police reforms’ was included in the implementation structure of the sub-scheme of 
‘Assistance to States for Modernisation of Police’. To incentivize the implementation of police reforms 
by the State Governments as recommended by various committees, a provision of keeping up to 10% of 
the total annual allocation of the scheme was made during 2018-19. This incentive fund has been 
increased to ‘up to 20%’ from the year 2019-20. Some of the reforms for implementation of which 
incentives were awarded during these years include transparent recruitment process, training of 
policemen at all levels for upgrading professional skills & for inculcating right attitude towards public 
and linkage of promotion with training. 
 
1.11.4 So far as ensuring maintenance of equipments purchased under modernization Programme is 
concerned, the same is responsibility of officers under the State Governments under various manuals 
and regulations. Accountability for financial loss due to lapses in maintenance of these equipments is 
fixed under the service rules of these officers. Lapses, if any, are pointed out in the performance audits 
by C&AG, which are submitted to the competent legislatures. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.11.5  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.12 Demand No. 49 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
 
Roads and Bridges 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.1 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over continuous under- utilization of 
grants under 'Roads and Bridges'. For an allocation of Rs. 175.09 crore under ‘Roads and Bridges’ in 
RE 2019-20, only Rs.138.94 crore has been spent till 31st January 2020 for the intended purpose. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends to fastrack the projects for construction of Roads and Bridges. 
The Committee also desires to be apprised about the reasons for the continuous under-utilization of 
funds under this head. 
(Para 5.2.15 ibid) 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2 An allocation made under the scheme ‘Roads & Bridges’ in the BE 2019-20 under the Revenue 
section has been reduced at the RE 2019-20 stage due to non-utilization of previous grants under 
Rural Road Sector which are required to be released to PRIs for creation of Capital Assets. However, 
additional funds  had been allocated to APWD under the Capital Section for undertaking construction, 
improvement & repair of State Highways, District Roads, Rural Roads etc. As against the final 
allocation under the aforesaid scheme, Rs.176.49 Crore have been spent during 2019-20. UT 
Administration is making all efforts for achieving optimal fund utilization and proactive corrective 
measures have been taken in order to achieve optimal utilization of funds. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.12.3 The Committee notes the Reply. 
 
 
Shipping 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.4 The Committee takes note of the ongoing infrastructure projects in the UT and recommends  
for  completion  of  the  projects  within  the  stipulated  time  and  without  cost overrun. The 
Committee also desires to be updated about the completion status of the ongoing projects. 
 
(Para 5.2.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.5 Administration is following the guidelines laid down for fixing responsibility for cost and time 
overrun in the projects/schemes issued by the NITI Aayog. Accordingly, Departments of the 
Administration have constituted Standing Committee to ensure the revised cost estimates, which 
requiring fixing responsibility are brought before the standing committee. The status of completion of 
ongoing projects is as under: - 
 
(i) Satellite bandwidth augmentation: BSNL has augmented the bandwidth from 2.118 Gbps to 
3.584 Gbps in August, 2019. BSNL is in the process of augmenting the bandwidth up to 
4.448 Gbps. Ground equipment for further augmentation of bandwidth is in transit and will 
arrive after the lockdown period is over. 
(ii) Construction of two 1200 pax-cum-1000 Ton cargo vessels (Mainland- Island), which are 
likely to be delivered by June, 2021 and December, 2021 respectively. 
(iii)M. V. Coral Queen continues to be under charter for inter-island services. 
(iv) District Hospital Garacharma: 25%foundation work has been completed. First floor slab 
completed and 2nd floor is in progress. Laundry building nearing completion. Incinerator 
room Tie beam is in progress. Post Mortem room foundation work is in progress. Project is 
expected to be completed by June 2021.  
(v) AYUSH Hospital, Junglighat: 2nd floor slab work, truss work and wall plastering work are 
completed. Project is expected to be completed by December 2020. 
(vi) Order for procurement of Cargo Handling Equipment for Haddo wharf, Port Blair have been 
placed and the equipment reached Port Blair and will be installed after COVID-19 
Lockdown, as Engineers have to come from mainland for installation. 
(vii) Hiring of Tug: Tugs have already been hired and is in operation. 
(viii) Maintenance dredging of Navigational area inside Mus Harbour in Car Nicobar has 

 
 
14 
 
commenced. However, due to restrictions imposed during lockdown period, further 
progress could not be made. The project is now expected to be completed by October 2020. 
(ix) Construction work for NAVAIDS at Katchal in Nancowrie group of Islands has been 
completed. Tenders for installing Navigational lights on these structures could not be 
invited due to restriction imposed due to lockdown. 
(x) Creation of Nature Park and Interpretation Centre: Work has been completed and inaugurated 
by the Hon’ble Vice President of India on 17th January 2020. 
(xi) Construction works of 31 Anganwadi Centres have been sanctioned and are under various 
stages of progress. These are expected to be completed by December 2020. 
(xii) Construction of Mini Bus Terminus at Bambooflat: Work awarded and earth 
works/levelling of land is in progress. 
(xiii) Construction and improvement of Rural Roads - 20 works have been completed. 
(xiv) Improvement of District Roads and State Highways – four works have been completed.  
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.12.6 The Committee notes the Reply. 
 
 
Tourism 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.7 The Committee notes that the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are one of the most sought after 
tourist destinations of India and therefore, there is a need to formulate a Tourism Policy for the UT. 
This will lead to the growth, promotions and sustenance of tourism and related activities in the A&N 
Islands. The Tourism Policy should give equal opportunities to all the stakeholders involved in the 
tourism-related activities like the local people, private sector and NGOs. It should include provisions 
to promote effective communication and greater intra-coordination within various Islands of A&N 
Islands. As tourism is mainly a private sector driven industry, it is important for the administration of 
the A&N Islands to act as a facilitator for tourism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue with the Ministry of Tourism and administration of A&N 
Islands and prepare a Tourism Policy for the UT at the earliest. The Committee further recommends 
that the UT Tourism Policy, upon release, must be placed in the public domain to gain wider publicity 
and promotion. The Committee further recommends that four tourism projects for setting up beach 
resorts in Long Island, Aves Island, Smith Island and Shaheed Dweep Islands as identified by Island 
Development Authority (IDA) should be completed on priority. 
 
(Para 5.2.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.8 Tourism Policy has been notified by Administration in the year 2009, which paves the way for 
development of Tourism by promoting the role of local people, private sector and NGOs in the sector, 
with Tourism Department being the facilitator & regulator. Based on the Policy, Tourism sector in 
Andaman has expanded manifold. Today there are 61 SCUBA Dive Centres, 73 Bed & Breakfast 
operators, and more than 100 Hotels & Restaurants operating in Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
 
1.12.9 Further, based on Water Sports Guidelines shared by Ministry of Tourism specific guidelines 
for activity like SCUBA Diving, Submersible Scooters, Sea Kart etc. have been made for A&N Islands 
after getting stakeholder comments by placing the draft guidelines in public domain. 

 
 
15 
 
 
1.12.10 Administration plays the role of a regulator of quality standards through inspection 
and a capacity builder by organizing training & marketing at various Tourism Fairs & Festivals. 
 
1.12.11 With regard to four Tourism projects for setting up Beach resorts in Long Island, Aves 
Island, Smith Island & Shaheed Dweep, Request for Quotation (RFQ) applications have been 
scrutinised and list of pre-qualified RFQ applicants have been finalised. PPPAC/SFC memo, RFP and 
Draft Concessionaire agreement is being submitted to GoI for approval. After approval, RFP and 
Concessionaire Agreement shall be issued to shortlisted applicants for finalisation of developers. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.12.12 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
1.13 Demand No. 53 - Lakshadweep 
 
Tourism 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.13.1 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para (2.1.8) of its 204th Report on 
Administration and Development of Union Territory of Lakshadweep that the growth of tourism in 
Lakshadweep is highly desirable as it would not only generate employment opportunities but also 
bring foreign exchange to Lakshadweep. However, reckless and unsystematic growth may prove to be 
counter-productive by harming the fragile ecosystem of the Islands. Hence, the Committee feels that 
the tourism plan of the UT Administration must strike a balance between the realization of tourism 
potential and the ecological sustainability of the Islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs must strive to develop the tourism in Lakshadweep on the development 
model adopted by Maldives and Mauritius, both of which focus on high-end and low-volume luxury 
tourism, along with continuing the current cruise-based tourism approach which would certainly help 
to regulate the number of visitors to the Islands and to generate substantial amount of revenue. 
 
(Para 5.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.2 Lakshadweep Administration is promoting eco-friendly low volume-high-end tourism in the 
islands, so as to develop tourism in a systematic manner by protecting the fragile ecosystem and 
environment. UTL Administration has take note of the limitations of the tourism development and is 
avoiding mass tourism as a conscious policy. As part of this eco friendly resorts have been developed 
in the islands of Kavaratti, Kadmat, Minicoy, Kalpeni & uninhabited Bangaram island. Tourism 
projects under the guidance of NITI Aayog are under consideration in Kadmat, Minicoy and 
uninhabited Sushil Islands. Also UTL Administration has plans to develop eco friendly Tent Resorts in 
Kiltan, Chetlat & Bitra Islands. The UTL Administration also attaches utmost importance to cruise 
line tourism in the islands. To develop cruise tourism in islands, Lakshadweep Administration has 
prepared a proposal for fabrication of a dedicated tourist ship. Lakshadweep Administration has also 
prepared a draft policy for promotion and tourism in Lakshadweep. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.13.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Administration of Lakshadweep  regarding 
promotion of eco-friendly low volume high end tourism in Lakshadweep. 
 
 
1.14 Demand No. 54 - Transfers to Delhi 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.14.1 The Committee observes that under the Sub-Head 'Contribution to Delhi Disaster Response 
Fund' the Expenditure for the FY 2018-19 and FY 2019-20 up to 31st January, 2020 has remained nil. 
The reason furnished for the same is that the pendency of accounting procedure for Delhi Disaster 
Response Fund with Government of National  Capital  Territory of Delhi (GNCTD). The Committee is 
very disappointed over the long delay in finalization of accounting procedure and therefore; 
recommends that the Ministry must pursue with the GNCTD again on a priority basis to finalize the 
accounting procedure. 
(Para 5.7.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 The accounting procedure of SDRF in r/o Govt. of NCT of Delhi has been finalized and 
approved by CGA vide letter dated 09.04.2020. Further, GNCTD has confirmed, vide letter dated 
16.04.2020, about creation of Delhi Disaster Response Fund. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
1.14.3 The Committee is glad to know that on the basis of its recommendation 'Delhi Disaster 
Response Fund' has been finally created and the Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi has also confirmed about the same vide their letter dated 16th April, 2020. 
 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
  
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the matter in 
view of the Government's reply 
 
 
2.1 Allocations, Projections and Variations 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the MHA has been allocated Rs. 1,67,250.63 crore in BE 2020-21. 
This is around 37% higher than the Budgetary allocation of last year that was Rs. 1,22,018.68 crore. 
This increase has been mainly due to the allocation of Rs. 5958 crore to the UT of Ladakh and Rs. 
30757 crore to the UT of J&K, following the reorganization of the State of J&K into two Union 
Territories. Of the total allocation to the MHA, around 63% is for Police (Including CAPFs and Delhi 
Police), around 32% to the UTs and remaining 5% for the disaster management, census, rehabilitation 
of refugees and migrants, etc. Further, there has been allocation of Rs. 4568 crore in BE 2020-21 for 
conducting Census of India 2021 and updating National Population Register. 
 
(Para 2.2.5 of 224th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 Observation is factual in nature.  
  
 
2.2 National Disaster Relief Fund 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee understands that vagaries of nature cannot be controlled through policy but 
sound policy can be evolved so that loss of lives, livestock and property can be minimized by taking 
timely steps to remain prepared for the disaster. However by taking adequate repair/compensation 
measures rehabilitation of the victims can also be done. The Committee notes that rehabilitation and 
infrastructure restoration, etc., has to be done by the concerned departments of the Central 
Government and the State Governments which creates compartmentalization of reaction to the 
disasters. Therefore the Committee recommends  that the MHA needs to strengthen its role to 
coordinate amongst all the agencies both in the States or in the Centre, who are involved in restoration 
and rehabilitation work, so that the relief measures are taken within a fixed time frame. 
(Para 3.4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 There are institutional mechanisms at the National and State level for effective management of 
natural disasters. In order to strengthen the existing disaster management system, the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 was enacted and notified on December 26, 2005. The Act provides for 
institutional mechanisms for drawing up and monitoring the implementation of the disaster 
management plans, which includes holistic, coordinated, and prompt response to any calamity 
situation in the country and ensures measures by various wings of government for prevention, 
coordination, mitigation and for minimizing the effects of calamities. Strengthening of the disaster 
management mechanism is a continuing process and efforts are continuously being made. 
 

 
 
18 
 
 
2.2.3 Keeping in view the institutional complexity of such multi-disciplinary subject, MHA always 
coordinates with and involves all agencies at the Centre and States in response, restoration & 
rehabilitation activities from time to time. 
 
 
2.3 Census, Survey and Statistics/ Registrar General of India 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee while discussing DFG (2020-21) for MHA on 18th February, 2020 observed 
that there is a lot of dissatisfaction and fear among the people regarding the upcoming NPR and 
Census. The Committee also feels that these apprehensions should have been duly ventilated in the 
media. The MHA must consider some way out so that the Census goes smoothly. Otherwise, there is 
quite a chance of the entire process being stymied in many States. 
(Para 3.9.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 Census is conducted in India under the Census Act, 1948 and Census Rules, 1990. As per the 
provisions contained in Section 15 of the Census Act, 1948, all individual level information collected 
in Census are confidential. In Census,  only aggregated data are released at various administrative 
levels. Like the earlier Censuses, wide publicity measures would be taken up for creating proper 
awareness among public so as to conduct and complete the Census 2021 successfully. Questionnaires 
for Census along with that of NPR have been tested at Pre-test conducted successfully across the 
country. It has been clarified at various levels in Government time and again that till now no decision 
has been taken to create National Register of Indian citizen. 
 
2.3.3 A 360 degree approach for communicating the right and clear message on the NPR has been 
planned to be followed. All kinds of media, i.e. social media, AV, Digital, Outdoor, print and word of 
mouth publicity tools are part of the planned media strategy. Right kind of messaging will be done to 
tackle the miscommunication and rumors around NPR and Census 2021. 
 
2.3.4 However, in view of outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the Phase I of Census 2021 and 
updation of NPR and other related field activities have been postponed until further orders. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.5 The Committee also observed that huge amount has already been spent on data collection 
under Aadhaar. But in BE 2020-21, Rs. 4568 crore has been allocated for RGI (census 2021). The 
Committee is of the view that Aadhaar data should be used in the upcoming Census to reduce the 
duplicacy and wastage of expenditure. 
(Para 3.9.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.6 NPR  was  envisaged  as  a  database  containing  comprehensive  demographic information 
as well as biometric information with photograph, ten fingerprints and two iris images of all usual 
residents. The scheme of allotting unique identity number to all usual residents i.e. Aadhaar number 
was planned by Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) using the demographic and 
biometric information. Subsequently, Aadhaar number has been developed as a separate database 
which is being used only for de-duplication purpose and authentication of beneficiaries of various 
Government schemes. 

 
 
19 
 
 
2.4 Demand No. 48- CAPFs and Delhi Police 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee again reiterates its recommendation given at Para 3.4.10 of its 215th Report on 
working conditions in non-border guarding central armed police forces (CISF, CRPF, NSG) that "the 
SSC conducts recruitment exams for a large number of posts throughout the year for various 
Government services. The recruitment process for CRPF takes approximately two years to be 
completed. The Committee believes that this period can be reduced to around one year by streamlining 
the recruitment process. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may request the 
recruitment agencies to undertake necessary technological measures to reduce the timeframe within 
which various tiers of recruitment examinations are conducted". 
(Para 4.3.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 To reduce the time taken for conducting recruitment process, computer based written 
examination for recruitment of CT/GD has been started from the exam year 2018. As there is huge 
number of vacancies of CT (GD) numbering 60210 reported for the exam year 2018, it is likely to take 
time to complete the recruitment process. However, from the year 2020 onwards, vacancies will be 
less and time taken to complete recruitment process may be reduced to around one year. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.4.3 While appreciating the fact that SCs and STs are well represented in CAPFs more than the 
prescribed percentage, the Committee observes that there are 27,076 women personnel in CAPFs 
which is around 3% of the posted strength of the CAPFs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
extra   measures need to be taken to provide prescribed representation to women in the CAPFs. 
(Para 4.3.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.4 Recruitment of reserve vacancies are conducted as per guidelines/provisions. However, for 
enhancement of representation of women in CAPFs, MHA had issued directions to all CAPFs vide ID 
No. 45015/16/2015/ Pers-I dated 05.01.2016 to reserve 33% posts at Constable level to be filled up by 
women in CRPF & CISF, to begin with and 14-15% posts at Constable level in Border Guarding 
Forces i.e BSF, SSB & ITBP. This reservation would be horizontal. 
 
 
 
2.5 Intelligence Bureau 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.5.1 The Committee notes that on Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) portal, anybody 
can register a complaint irrespective of the jurisdiction and the portal passes on thecomplaint to the 
concerned police station. The Committee recommends that there should be a support system and a 
three-digit helpline/emergency line, if somebody's credit card is stolen and the fraud is committed, he 
can dial that number and give the details to speed up blocking process. There is also a need to spread 
awareness about this portal among the people all across the country by adequately publicizing the 
portal and number via media and internet. 
(Para 4.5.5 ibid) 

 
 
20 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 A National toll free number 155260 has been made operational for citizens to get assistance in 
reporting incidents of cybercrime on the National Cyber Crime reporting portal 
(www.cybercrime.gov.in). The calls on this toll free number are routed to the concerned State/UT 
depending on the location of caller so that assistance may be provided in his/her own language. Steps 
are taken regularly to spread awareness about the portal through various means such as SMS, social 
media, campaign through FM radio, etc. 
 
2.5.3 As regards blocking of credit cards, it is submitted that there is legal liability of Credit card 
companies as per RBI guidelines and contractual obligations, depending on when the victim reports 
such fraud to the issuing bank/card company. Discussions have already been initiated with RBI and 
credit card companies to explore mechanism for speedy and systematic exchange of relevant 
information for expediting investigation of frauds pertaining to credit/debit cards. 
 
 
2.6 Police Infrastructure 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.1 The Committee recognizes the paramount need for good infrastructure and facilities for police 
forces to enhance the quality of policing. The Committee observes that given the massive 
infrastructural requirements of Police as elaborated above by the Ministry particularly the ongoing 
eight Projects under construction and ninteen Projects in Planning Stage under Delhi Police Building 
Programme which needs huge allocation. Further, the Committee also observes that only Rs. 3116.79 
crore has been utilized till 31st January, 2020 against the Rs. 4478.51 crore allocated in RE 2019-20 
which is around 70% of the funds allocated under this Head at RE stage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should focus on timely and expeditious utilization of allocated funds 
and take remedial measures against factors responsible for low utilization. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance for higher 
allocation under this head in RE 2020-21. 
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 As regards CAPFs, AR & NSG are concerned, the expenditure is 98.57% with reference to RE 
2019-20. Due to outbreak of COVID-19 and enforced  lockdown in the country, the works were held 
up in March 2020. So far as Delhi Police is concerned, the expenditure is 102.3% with reference to 
BE 2019-20. Additional funds over and above BE 2020-21, if required, will be projected at the time of 
RE 2020-21. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.6.3 The Committee also notes that Restricted Area Permit has been  removed  from certain areas to 
promote tourism. The Committee recommends that MHA should take up the issue with the 
administration of the UT of A&N Islands to consider the aspects related to the preservation of natural 
and cultural heritage i.e. eco-sensitive areas and tribal culture while making proposals for the 
development of tourism in the UT. 
(Para 5.2.24 ibid) 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.4 Proposals for tourism development in the islands are prepared in consultation with 
stakeholders and taking into consideration the ecological and tribal concerns. Necessary clearances 
under CRZ Regulation, Forest Conservation Act and Tribal Welfare Department are taken, wherever 
required. Even after  removal of Restricted Area Permit and Permission, specific approval from the 
Competent Authorities is required for visiting Reserve Forest, Wildlife Sanctuaries & Tribal Reserves. 
 
2.6.5 Applicable environmental clearances have already been obtained for setting up of ready to 
launch projects identified by the IDA and none of the projects fall in tribal area, thereby ensuring 
preservation of natural and cultural heritage and harmonious and balanced development. 
 
 
2.7 Demand for Mini-Legislative Assembly 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.7.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the Legislative Assembly do provide due representation 
particularly to the various tribal communities and women and their participation in the administration. 
The Committee also notes the point that there are elected representatives at the local/district level. 
Keeping all this in view, the Committee is of the opinion that the MHA may reconsider the proposal 
for establishment of a mini-legislative assembly that will lead to a broader representation and 
participation of elected representatives on various policies/plans  that  will fulfil the aspirations of the 
people of the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu. 
(Para 5.4.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 The UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu is a small Union Territory having only 
three Districts viz. Daman, Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The total population of Daman District as 
per 2011 census is 1,91,173 with an area of 72 Sq Km., population of Diu District is 52,074 with an 
area of 40 Sq. Km. and population of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is 3,43,709 with an area of 491 
Sq.Km. 
 
2.7.3 Total area of the UT is 603 Sq. Km. and total population is 5,86,956. The citizens residing in 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu have  adequate share in participatory democracy. The will 
of the people of the UT is represented in the Parliament (Lok Sabha) through its two Members of 
Parliament. 
 
2.7.4 Further, as per the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments in the year 1992, this UT has two 
tier panchayats- Village and District Level in Rural Areas and in the Urban Areas of all three 
Districts, there are Municipal Councils namely Silvassa Municipal Council, Daman Municipal 
Council and Diu Municipal Council. All the Municipal Councils and District Panchayats have public 
representatives as its President, Vice-President and Councillors/ Members, which are elected by the 
people directly through elections. The President and Vice-President of the Council/ Panchayat are 
elected from the Councillors/ Members. 
 
2.7.5 The Public Representatives of the Municipal Councils/ District Panchayats ensures to improve 
quality of life, provide social and community welfare amenities with public, private participation, 
environmental improvement, cleaning & greening campaigns, etc. in the functioning of the Union 
Territory. 
 

 
 
22 
 
2.7.6 Hence, considering the above, the establishment of Mini Assembly/ Vidhan Sabha in the UT of 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu is not feasible at this stage. 
  
2.8 Demand No. 52 –Ladakh 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.8.1 The Committee takes note that Ladakh faces shortage of 22 MW of power during the winter 
seasons and the old infrastructure in the power sector needs augmentation. Further, sufficient funds are 
required for operation and maintenance of the Diesel Generating Stations. The Committee also 
understands that Ladakh has a huge potential for Hydel, Solar and Geo-thermal power. But, there has 
been an allocation of only Rs. 54.07 crore for the power sector which is quite low for installation of 
power plants in the UT. Therefore, the Committee recommends that additional funds may be provided 
to the UT at RE stage to increase its power generation capacity. Further, existing infrastructure in the 
power sector should be upgraded to maintain continuity of power supply. 
(Para 5.5.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 After completion of 220KV Zenakote- Alesteng line, the bottleneck of import of power has 
been removed and sufficient power can be imported to meet the power requirement for UT of Ladakh 
throughout the year. 
 
2.8.3  Sufficient fund is available for smooth operation of Diesel Generators for supplying power to 
the rural areas not connected to the grid. 
 
2.8.4  The UT of Ladakh has intimated that the amount of Rs. 54.07 Cr earmarked during FY 2020-
21 for Generation, Transmission and Distribution will be sufficient for normal operation & 
maintenance of existing network and hydel generation. However, requirement of additional funds, if 
any, will be considered at RE stage. 
 
 
2.9 Tourism 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.9.1 The Committee understands that the Ladakh region offers multiple tourism options that cater to 
the taste of a vast array of tourists from varied groups and the development of tourism is integral to the 
holistic development of Ladakh. Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
coordinate with the administration of UT of Ladakh to ensure that sufficient funds and due publicity 
are given for the promotion of tourism in the Ladakh region. The Committee recommends that an 
elaborate tourism development planShould be conceived for Ladakh which should focus on promotion 
of rural, theme-based and adventure tourism. Besides, new destinations for the tourists and film 
industry needs to be opened. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to coordinate with 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Finance to provide adequate budgetary support for the 
development and expansion of Kargil and Thoise (Nubra Valley) airports to begin the operation of 
civil aircraft from there. 
(Para 5.5.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 The department of Tourism, UT of Ladakh is making all efforts to promote tourism and to 
explore new tourist destinations in the region. Necessary coordination by this Ministry with 

 
 
23 
 
Administration of UT of Ladakh is being made to ensure availability of sufficient funds for promotion 
of tourism sector in the region. 
 
2.9.3 Ladakh participated for the first time as Union Territory in SATTE 2020 in New Delhi during 
the month of January 2020. A winter conclave was organized in February 2020 at Leh wherein 
prominent personalities from Film Industry and tour and trade industry participated. Ladakh had also 
planned to participate in ITB Berlin 2020 but unfortunately due to COVID-19, the event was 
cancelled. Similarly, a national level Sking event proposed at Drass in Kargil had to be cancelled due 
to COVID-19. 
 
2.9.4 The administration of UT of Ladakh is also taking various initiatives to develop overall 
aviation infrastructure in Ladakh in coordination with the concerned authorities. 
 
 
2.10 Education 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.1 The Committee feels that there is need to promote education as its serene beauty is ideal for 
educational institutions and students from all across the country can come to Ladakh to pursue various 
courses. The Committee is of the view that this will not only help Ladakh to impart quality education 
at an affordable rate but will also connect Ladakh with the rest of the country-psychologically, 
culturally and educationally. 
(Para 5.5.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 The University of Ladakh is the only trans-Himalayan institute of higher learning and research 
and, therefore, an institute of higher learning of its own kind. It intends to introduce courses and 
research programmes specific to Himalayan, trans-Himalayan and South and Central Asian regions 
not ordinarily available in other universities in the country. Further, it intends to develop state- of-the-
art infrastructure and set up advanced research facilities to attract students, scholars and faculty not 
only from other parts of the country but from across the world, thus necessitating integration of 
various cultures, creeds and regions. The University of Ladakh aspires to be one of the leading 
universities of the country offering high quality, innovative and responsive education at the under 
graduate, post graduate and Ph.D. levels through post graduate and integrated courses. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.10.3 The Committee recommends the MHA to establish a tribal research institute in Ladakh. The 
Committee further recommends that the MHA should engage with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and 
endeavour to create an organic relationship among various tribal research institutes of the country in 
the form of institutional exchange or linkage to enrich the research on tribal culture and their 
development. 
(Para 5.5.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.4 Provision of funds has been made during the current FY for construction of a Tribal Research 
Institute in Ladakh University Campus at Kargil.  
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
 
2.11 Landfill sites at Bhalswa and Ghazipur 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee is surprised to note that the GNCTD has not able to address the issues of two 
landfill sites in the national capital. The Committee firmly believes that there is an urgent need to find 
a permanent solution to the issue of landfills at Bhalswa and Ghazipur. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that a concrete plan should be chalked out in the matter. Further, periodic 
consultation/review should be carried out between the MHA, GNCTD, Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change and foreign experts groups and effective/regular monitoring to ensure the 
waste handling and management at these sites. 
(Para 5.7.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11.2 The matter is in the Court and NGT vide Order dated 23.03.2020 directed “to set up a Special 
Purpose Vehicle for scientific management of scientific management, processing and disposal of 
legacy waste dump sites at Ghaziput (East Delhi), Bhalswa (North Delhi) and Okhla (South Delhi) 
headed by Chief Secretary, NCT of Delhi with a nominee of Lt. Governor and Commissioners of 
concerned Corporations, Secretary Urban Development, Delhi Govt. , Shri Manish Singh, IAS (now 
Director Swachh Bharat, M.P., Bhopal) and Shri Vijay Nehra, IAS, Commissioner, Municipal 
Corporation, Ahmedabad as members with in specific time lines”. The integrated SPV may co-opt 
other technical and administrative members as deemed necessary. This SPV may provide a fruitful 
solution to the problem. The matter in this regard is under process. 
 
 
2.12 Demand No. 55 - Transfers to Jammu & Kashmir 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.12.1 The Committee notes that there exists a huge potential that can be explored in terms of exotic 
agrarian products, tourism and hospitality, industrial estates, handloom and handicrafts. But to realise 
this potential, there is a need to improve the connectivity of J&K with the rest of India. 
(Para 5.8.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 The Government has undertaken following projects for enhancing the connectivity of J&K 
with rest of India such as widening of Airstrip at Jammu Airport, four-laning of National Highways 
connecting Jammu with Srinagar and Jammu with Poonch, construction of the 575 KM Delhi-
Amritsar-Katra Expressway etc. 
 
2.12.3 Work on rail connectivity between Katra and from Banihal to Baramullah has been completed 
and following projects are under various stages of implementation: Katra-Banihal, Jammu-Poonch. 
 
2.12.4 Road projects to de congest Jammu and Srinagar are some of the other projects envisaged for 
improving connectivity in J&K. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.12.5 To improve air connectivity, the Committee recommends that necessary measures must be 
taken to keep the airfares for J&K under a reasonable limit. The Committee also recommends that the 

 
 
25 
 
number of flights from Srinagar to Leh and from Srinagar to Kargil may be increased. Given the 
mountainous terrain and the frequency of landslides in the  region, the Committee recommends that 
helicopter services may be further augmented by putting additional helicopters into service for tourist 
facilitation. Lesser-known and far flung destinations like Gurez, Bangus, Kishtwar, etc. should remain 
connected throught these additional helicopter services. Tourist schemes should also be devised 
efficiently so as to connect Srinagar with other major cities, especially in the peak tourist season. 
(Para 5.8.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.6 To improve the air connectivity between cities, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir is 
pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Regarding flights between Srinagar-Kargil and 
Jammu-Kargil, an AN-32 courier service is run by India Air Force during winters, when the passes get 
closed due to snowfall, to meet the travel requirements of people in Kargil. In order to develop the 
Kargil airport, the officials of Airports Authority of India and their team had visited Kargil to work out 
the feasibility of creating full-fledged airport for the large aircrafts like Airbus and Boeing. The issue 
of creation of civil commercial airport at Kargil is being handled by the Union Territory of Ladakh 
along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India. 
 
2.12.7 Ministry of Home Affairs, has approved a subsidized helicopter service in 2017, for the 
following 10 routes that include far flung and inaccessible destinations as follows: 
 
(i) Srinagar-Kargil-Srinagar 
(ii) Srinagar-Drass-Srinagar 
(iv) Kargil-Padum-Leh-Padum-Kargil Leh-Lingshed-Neerak-Leh 
(v) Srinagar-Leh-Nubra-Srinagar 
(vi) Bandipora-Kanzalwan-Dawar-Niru-Bandipora 
(vii) Kupwara-Machil-Tagdhar-Keran-Kupwara 
(viii) Kishtwar-Sounder-Navapachi-Ishan-Kishtwar 
(ix) Jammu-Rajouri-Poonch-Jammu 
(x) Jammu-Doda-Kishtwar-Jammu 
 
2.12.8 Under the PM Development package, Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir is developing 
tourist destinations such as Matali, Sudh Mahadevi, Budha Amarnath (Poonch), Peer Chote Shah 
(Poonch), Ram Kund Manader (Poonch), Shahdra Sharief (Rajouri), Mata Mangla Devi (Rajouri), 
Mansar, Surisar, Sanasar, Mata Sukrala Devi, Bani etc. in Jammu, Pahalgam, Gulmarg, Yusmarg etc 
in Kashmir region, where air connectivity by helicopter services can be operationalized in due course. 
 
2.12.9 Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India has identified certain routes under Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (RCS) for providing a major boost to promotion of tourism in Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 

 
 
26 
 
Chapter III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
3.1 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.1 The Committee observes that there is always a disparity between the assessment of damage due 
to disaster made by the States and the assessment made by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The reason 
for the same could be that the Central study teams are sent for an assessment of damages and 
casualties months after the occurrence of disaster and by the time that teams reaches the disaster-
affected area, the signs of disaster are on the verge of diminishing. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Study Teams should make a preliminary visit to the disaster affected areas, within 
a week of the disaster for quick and initial assessment of the damage. Further, if preliminary damage 
assessment is done jointly with the concerned State Governments then chances of differences in 
assessment of damage is likely to be minimized. 
(Para 3.4.8 of 224th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 The concerns of the Committee have been noted. The Central Government had taken a 
significant decision on 19/08/2019 for constitution of Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) 
immediately in the aftermath of any natural calamity of severe nature and even before the receipt of 
Memorandum from the State Government. Accordingly, in consultation with the State Government, the 
IMCT along with the concerned officers of State Government, visits the affected areas to have the first 
hand assessment of the damages caused and the relief work carried out by the State Administration. 
 
3.1.3 It may also be noted that State Government in their Memorandum generally projects their 
requirements over and above or on other than approved items / norms, which are outside the purview of 
SDRF / NDRF norms, such as restoration works of long term / permanent nature and ineligible items, 
etc. These factors attribute the huge difference / gap in demand of the State and actual approval from 
the GOI. Therefore, the State Government should prepare Memorandum in conformity with approved 
items and norms of assistance. Therefore, all the States have been advised from time to time that while 
submitting Memorandum for assistance from NDRF, they should prepare it strictly as per the norms 
only. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that no firm commitment has 
been given with regard to visit of the Central Study team within a week's time for assessment of 
damage caused by disaster. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the 
Study Teams should make a preliminary visit to the disaster affected areas within a week of the 
disaster for quick and initial assessment of the damage so that the funds can be released in time 
on the basis of realistic assessment. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1.5 The Committee takes note of the above measures and feels the need to prepare and engage 
communities to deal with all phases of a Disaster: preparedness, prevention, mitigation, response, and 
recovery. To build disaster resilient communities, the communities need to be empowered first so that 
it can cope with the adverse effects of natural hazards. This is the most sustainable approach in dealing 
with disaster risks. The Committee strongly recommends that in the pattern of National Cadet Corps 
(NCC), a Disaster Management Training Corps (DMTC) can be initiated in schools and colleges not 
only to play the role of a strong civilian corps to support the Disaster Management Teams but also to 
disseminate the practices in disaster management at the community level. 
(Para 3.4.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.6 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) initiated a pilot scheme – Aapda Mitra 
with a view to create a pool of volunteers by training of 200 volunteers in each 30 project districts of 
25 States of India in disaster response so that they can respond to their community's immediate needs 
in the aftermath of a disaster thereby enabling them to undertake basic relief and rescue tasks during 
emergency situations such as floods, flash-floods, urban flooding. These volunteers are selected from 
the community including Students residing in flood prone districts. Preference is given to Ex-
Servicemen, Civil Defence, Home Guards and Community Services. 5116 volunteers have been trained 
so far. Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tripura, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh are also 
using their services in COVID-19 response. 
 
3.1.7 It is also informed that based on the recommendations of States/UTs to upscale it in multi-
hazard districts and to train more volunteers, NDMA is planning to upscale it in 350 districts prone to 
landslide, earthquake, cyclone and floods with a view to train 100000 volunteers in India in the 
current financial year. 
 
3.1.8 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) is conducting Community Awareness Programmes 
(CAP), School Safety Programmes (SSP), Mock Exercises as a part of Capacity Building programmes 
and Community is being sensitized about disaster management during non-operation season. Besides, 
training in Disaster Management to NCC & NYKS Volunteers are also being conducted. The details of 
above all programme are appended below:- 
 
No. of No. of persons Programme Sensitized 
CAP 6807 5553826 
SSP 2512 1009528 
Mock Exercise 2910 1235660 
NYKS 196 8266 
 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs and further recommends 
that the Apada Mitra pilot scheme may be implemented as a pan India scheme and cover all the 
districts of the country, if the result of the pilot scheme is found successful. 
 
3.1.10 Regarding the Community Awareness Programmes (CAP), School Safety Programmes 
(SSP) and Mock Exercises as a part of Capacity Building programmes the Committee reiterate 
its recommendation that in the pattern of National Cadet Corps (NCC), a Disaster Management 
Training Corps (DMTC) can be initiated in schools and colleges not only to play the role of a 
strong civilian corps to support the Disaster Management Teams but also to disseminate the 

 
 
28 
 
practices in disaster management at the community level. 
  3.2 Helicopter Services in (a) North Eastern Region and (b) Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee takes note of the helicopter service in North East Region and Jammu & 
Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh. The Committee further notes that around 40% of the area of the UT 
of Ladakh remains snow clad throughout the year. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
MHA should pursue this matter with the Administration of UT of Ladakh and facilitate Helicopter 
Services in the UT of Ladakh so that the region is not cut off from the rest of country because of heavy 
snow. 
(Para 3.5.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 The administration of UT of Ladakh has placed the services of Pawan Hans Helicopter to meet 
the various exigencies in the far-flung areas of UT of Ladakh and for timely response to any disaster. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.3 The Committee notes the reply of the ministry and further recommends to ensure air 
connectivity of the region throughout the year specially during winter season. 
 
 
3.3. Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.3.1 The Committee observes that living conditions in the 849 transit accommodations are not good 
and therefore, the Committee recommends that MHA should send a team to visit the transit 
accommodation and take necessary steps to provide adequate living conditions including floor space, 
hygienic food, water supply , sanitation and other basic amenities. The Committee also recommends 
that the MHA should fastrack the construction of the transit accommodations so that the burden on the 
existing accommodation may be eased. 
(Para 3.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 Under the Prime Minister Package for Relief & Rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants (PMRP-
2008), certain transit accommodations were constructed as prefab structures and were allotted to the 
Kashmiri Migrants. Since these units got worn out over a period of time, based on the demand from 
inhabitants, Government of J&K, sanctioned Rs.2.80 crore in 2019-20. As such, repair & renovation 
of these units has been undertaken at various sites and the work is under progress. Besides, the 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir has also posted nodal officers to look after the day to day issues 
of inhabitants of these camps. 
 
3.3.3 Further, under PMDP-2015, the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed 
its approval for construction of 6,000 new accommodation units in Kashmir Valley for Kashmiri 
Migrants at a cost of Rs.920 Crores. While the construction of these units has started in various 
districts of the Valley, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir has been asked to accelerate 

 
 
29 
 
construction of these units. Considering the COVID situation, the team of MHA will be visiting at the 
earliest at an appropriate time. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.4 The Committee observes that the progress of implementation of package for returnees 
and Rehabilitation of Kashmir Migrants is quite unsatisfactory. The people living in transit 
accomodations are having issues regarding floor space, hygienic food, water supply , sanitation 
and other basic amenities and therefore the Ministry may furnish status report from the nodal 
officers that are looking after the day to day issues of the inhabitants of the camps The 
Committee lso recommends that the team of MHA may  undertake a fresh visit at an earliest 
appropriate time and submit a detailed status report on implementation of various components 
and projects of the rehabilitation package. 
 
 
3.4 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee appreciates the commissioning of Early Warning Dissemination System 
(EWDS) in both Odisha and Andhra Pradesh and expects that now the EWDS will bolster pre-cyclone 
preparedness in these States which are severely and frequently hit by cyclones every year. Regarding 
Phase-II of National Seismic Risk Mitigation Program NCRMP), the Committee observes that it was 
commenced in 2015, but even after 5 years the implementation of most of the works are either under 
tendering stage or the construction is yet to begin. Therefore, the Committee recommends that all the 
stages of processing needs to be expedited and construction work should commence at the earliest. The 
Committee feels that any further delay in the commencement of these projects may have adverse 
effects in these States during the cyclonic season. 
(Para 3.8.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.2 Progress on Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) in 6 States is as under : 
 
1. Goa: Work awarded and work in progress. 
2. Gujarat: Retendered. 
2. Karnataka: Retendered. 
3. Kerala: To be retendered. 
4. Maharashtra: To be retendered. 
5. West Bengal: Tendered. 
Similarly, the progress of Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (CRMI) works in 6 States is as 
under : 
 State Sub 
component 
Planne 
d 
Complete d Under 
execution 
Tendering 
stage 
Goa MPCS 
(No) 
UGC (KM) 
12 
 
98 
- 
 
- 
10 
 
98 
02 
 
- 
Gujarat MPCS 
(No) 
Road (Km) 
UGC (KM) 
95 
 
157 
 
430 
28 
 
157 
 
- 
51 
 
- 
 
- 
16 
 
- 
 
430 (re- 
tendering) 

 
 
30 
 
Karnataka MPCS 
(No) 
Road (KM) 
Bridge (No) 
SE (KM) 
11 
 
48 
 
02 
 
7.8 
4 
 
48 
 
- 
 
- 
07 
 
- 
02 
7.8 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
Kerala MPCS 
(No) 
17 01 13 03 
Maharashtr a MPCS 
(No) 
UGC (KM) (3 
packages) 
SE (KM) 
11 
 
471 
 
29.55 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
471 
22.26 
11 
 
- 
 
7.29 
MPCS (No) 
UGC (KM) 
146 
515 
144 
413 
02 
87 
- 
One 
Package 
(15 KM) 
 
 
The progress has geared up now. Non-availability of land, delay in Environment & Forest 
clearance, non-availability of qualified contractors/ bidders, repeated re-tendering in few 
packages, etc have caused some delay in execution. The State Project Implementation Units 
(SPIUs) have been urged repeatedly to expedite bidding out the remaining works/ activities on 
priority. However, progress of works is suffering now due to COVID-19. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.3 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the 
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) is under progress in six States but observes that 
most of the projects are yet to be tendered or are under retendering process. The delay in 
Commission in of the EWDS in these coastal States is negatively impacting the preparedness do 
deal with cyclonic storms. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
impress on the State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) to finalise the tendering and  
clearances issues in a time bound manner and commence construction work at the earliest. The 
Committee desires to be apprised about the progress made in these projects. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.4 The Committee notes the submission of MHA on the upcoming Census and NPR. The 
Committee is not quite convinced with the reply of the Ministry that the Aadhaar is an individual data 
and in order to create a family database, NPR exercise has been undertaken.The Committee is of the 
opinion that the Aadhaar is not just an individual’s data but it is also tied up with ration card, pan card, 
etc. Aadhaar metadata also includes entire family’s surname, address, etc. Therefore, the Committee 
fails to understand as to why this should be treated as individual data only. In view of the same, the 
Committee would like the MHA to explore the feasibility of using the Aadhaar metadata for the 
Census and updation of NPR in 2020-21. Further, the Committee recommends that all the States/UTs 
should be fully convinced on various issues pertaining to the NPR which commences in April to have 

 
 
31 
 
a national consensus so that there is absolute clarity and no apprehension among remaining people 
across the country which will help in conducting these exercises in a smooth manner. 
(Para 3.9.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.5 Aadhaar is individual data. In Aadhaar database consolidated details of a family is not 
available nor from this database can a family structure be created without visiting each household and 
collecting information such as relationship among family members. However, NPR database is 
created by collecting family-wise data and it can be strengthened by linking Aadhaar to each member. 
Various welfare schemes of State and Central Governments are generally family based for which NPR 
data may be used. 
 
3.4.6 Aadhaar provides a unique identity number to individuals. Aadhaar database contains bare 
minimum demographic parameters of an individual while NPR database is a comprehensive family 
database which can be further enriched by linking with Aadhaar number to provide a base frame of 
population for preparing various public welfare schemes. During updation of NPR 2020, the Aadhaar 
number is being collected on voluntary basis. Presence of Aadhaar number in the NPR database will 
facilitate its integration with other databases and will also help in cleaning of various databases. NPR 
database may be shared with Central and State Governments to prepare Public Welfare oriented 
schemes. 
 
3.4.7 This office is in constant touch with State / UT Governments on various issues related to 
conduct of Census 2021 and updation of NPR. However, in view of outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, 
the Phase I of Census 2021 and updation of NPR, which as to begin on various dates decided by the 
State/ UT Governments beginning from 1st April, 2020 and other related field activities have been 
postponed until further orders. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.8 The Committee notes the reply that NPR will consist of comprehensive  demographic 
information as well as biometric information and  aadhaar is a separate database but it 
already has biometric information of the individuals. Therefore, the Committee opines that 
already stored Aadhaar metadata of the individuals may be used in creating a family database 
for upcoming Census and updation of NPR to avoid duplicacy of biometric identification and 
wastage of expenditure. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that all the 
States/UTs should be fully convinced on various issues pertaining to the upcoming updation of 
NPR to have a national consensus so that there is absolute clarity and no apprehension among 
remaining people across the country which will help in conducting these exercises in a smooth 
manner. 
 
 
3.5 Allocation, Projections, Variations and Expenditure Trend 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.5.1 The Committee also takes note of the increase of Rs. 2042.11 crore in BE 2020-21 (Rs. 
105244.34) crore as compared to the RE 2019-20 (Rs. 103202.23 crore) i.e. a meager increase of 2% 
under Demand No. 48 (Police) which becomes negligible considering inflationary effect and does not 
seem to be in sync with the tasks of the Police. It will eventually lead to delays in the acquisition of 
critical capabilities. The Committee believes that the modernization and technology up-gradation is a 
continuous process necessitating keeping of adequate budgetary allocation. Further, the expenditure 

 
 
32 
 
made on capital outlay during peacetime is like building a block for the Forces which builds a strong 
Force/organization in the long run. 
(Para 4.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 As far as modernization and technological up-gradation of CAPFs is concerned, the details of 
BE 2019-20, RE 2019-20, actual expenditure 2019-20 and BE 2020-21 are as follows:  
 
S. No. CAPFs BE 2019-20 RE 2019-20 Expenditure 
2019-20 
BE 2020-21 
1. AR 441.21 452.49 401.77 413.94 
2. BSF 821.33 635.33 618.25 702.14 
3. CRPF 1341.11 1359.53 1256.17 1302.50 
4. CISF 187.69 187.65 172.38 187.69 
5. ITBP 415.71 347.84 352.40 303.27 
6. NSG 180.90 144.89 99.33 149.28 
7. SSB 252.21 255.76 246.73 229.89 
 Total 3640.16 3383.49 3147.03 3288.71 
 
3.5.3 Regarding allocation in provisioning heads of Budget (including both General and Mod Plan) 
to CAPFs, it may be seen that although there is a marginal decline (2.80%) in BE-2020-21 as 
compared to previous year, the CAPFs have been given an increase of ₹141.68 crore (4.50%), as 
compared to their actual spending in 2019-20. Thus, adequate funds have been allocated to CAPFs for 
their modernization and technological up-gradation as per their operational requirement and funds 
absorption capacity/expenditure trend. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.4 The Committee notes the fund utilization of the CAPFs in 2019-20 and observes the sub-
optimal utilization of the allocated funds in BE 2020-21 by Assam Rifles (AR), Central Reserve 
Police Force (CRPF) and National Security Guard (NSG). The Committee sincerely feels that the 
there should be full utilization of the allocated funds to the CAPFs, failure of which is leading to 
delay in acquisition of critical capabilities. The Committee therefore, recommends that all the 
CAPFs may share their best practices to improve their operational efficiency and steps needed to 
enhance their absorption capacity and reduce procurement bottlenecks.  
 
 
3.6 Central Armed Police Forces 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.6.1 The Committee takes note of the measure taken by the Ministry to fill up vacancies and 
recommends that the recruitment process be devised in such a way that the recruitment agencies are 
informed well in time of all the existing and anticipated vacancies. The Committee also recommends 
that due representation be given to the youths from tribal and remote areas. 
(Para 4.3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.2 Vacancies for recruitment for various posts are being reported to recruiting agency i.e. 
SSC/UPSC timely. Special Recruitment Rally was conducted in the 2016-17 in Chhattisgarh State for 
filling up 743 vacancies of CT/GD. Similarly, at present a special  recruitment Rally is under way for 
filling up of 1356 vacancy in UTs of J&K and Ladakh. 
 

 
 
33 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.3 The Committee notes the reply of Ministry regarding recruitment rally in Chhattisgarh 
in 2016-17 that is four years ago. The Ministry may furnish the data on recruitments done for 
various posts in CAPFs during the last five years and representation of tribal youths thereon. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.6.4 The Committee is aware of the several cases relating to service condition including stagnation 
and other issues of CAPFs are pending in the Courts. The total strength of the CAPFs is approximately 
nine lakhs, and if each family consists of four-five members, then, there are 30 or 40 lakh people 
approximately, who are going to be affected adversely. The Committee therefore is of the view that 
some dispute resolution mechanism outside administration of CAPFs needs to be developed to reduce 
Court cases in such matters. Further, there are cases when CAPFs personnel posted in the borders don't 
get leave on time. In the Army, two months leave is compulsory but CAPFs personnel are not getting 
leave when they need it. So, there is dissatisfaction, suicides, fratricides, etc. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that there is an urgent need to address the issue of leave management of the CAPFs. 
 
(Para 4.3.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.5 With regard to leave and other welfare issues, a committee was constituted under the 
Chairmanship of ADG CRPF. The Committee has submitted its report which is under examination in 
the Ministry. 
 
3.6.6 Each force has developed its own grievance redressal mechanism which, inter- alia, includes 
ICT (Information & Communication Technology)/ Web based systems like e-mail, IVRS (Interactive 
Voice Response System), e-grievance portal, toll free helpline, SMS services, mobile Apps etc. Besides, 
there are periodic interactions during Sainik Sammelans, DGs open forum, personal hearing, etc. also 
available for CAPFs personnel. These channels have proved to be useful for force personnel for 
speedy redressal of their grievances including stagnation. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.7 The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided its 
comment on the Committee‘s recommendation for setting up of an institutional mechanism 
outside administration of CAPFs to reduce the Court cases related to service condition including 
stagnation and other issues. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 4.3.19 
of the 224th  Report of the DFG (2020-21) of MHA  and urges the Ministry to furnish their views 
on said recommendation. 
 
 
3.7 National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.7.1 The Committee notes that the allocation of Rs. 50.82 crore granted in BE 2019-20 was cut 
down to Rs. 43.77 crore in RE 2019-20. Out of the reduced allocation of Rs. 43.77 crore in the RE 
2019-20, only 54.67% has been utilized up to 31st January, 2020. The Committee finds it difficult to 
comprehend the projection of Rs. 283.29 crore made in BE 2020-21 when the allocated budget of Rs. 
43.77 crore in the RE 2019-20 could not be utilized fully. An effective coordination mechanism was 

 
 
34 
 
needed to utilize the funds fully and for operationalization of NATGRID. The Ministry should now 
therefore, closely monitor the fund utilization under NATGRID and ensure that the funds are not 
surrendered during the fiscal year 2020-21. The Committee also desires to be apprised about the 
reasons for huge gap between the projected demand under this Head to the tune of Rs. 283.29 crore 
and Rs. 52.17 crore that has been allocated in BE 2020-21. 
(Para 4.7.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.2 Rs. 54.20 Crore was allocated to NATGRID under Capital 1- lead as BE 2019-20 whereas at 
RE stage Rs. 111.70 Crore were allocated under Capital Head out of which Rs, 94.72 Crore utilized 
as on 31.03.2020. 
 
3.7.3 Justification for Projection of higher BE 2020-21: As regards, higher projection of BE 2020-
21 against the BE 2019-20, it is stated that the NATGRID Solutions are to go live by December, 2020 
and accordingly, all IT equipment of NATSTAR and OSINT and Solution development is planned to be 
undertaken in 2020-21. Accordingly, budgetary projections of Rs. 294.04 Crore were made for the 
financial year 2020-21. 
 
3.7.4 Monitoring of Budget Utilization: Budget utilization is being monitored at senior levels in 
MHA. The Project execution is being monitored at the level of Hon'ble Home Minister. 
 
 
Further Recommendation   
 
3.7.5 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that budgetary projections 
of Rs. 294.04 was made for BE 2020-21 as NATGRID Solutions are to go live by December, 2020 
and accordingly, all IT equipment of NATSTAR and OSINT and Solution development are 
planned to be undertaken in 2020-21. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to 
expedite the process of procurement of all IT equipments of NATSTAR and OSINT and solution 
development so as to achieve early operationalisation of NATGRID that is a integrated 
intelligence master database for counter-terrorism operations. 
 
 
3.8 Modernization of Police Forces 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8.1 The Committee observes that a total of Rs. 3,161.91 crore has been allocated for the 
modernization of police forces in BE 2020-21, which is 24 percent less than the Rs. 4155.01 crore in 
RE 2019-20. Besides, the C&AG in its Report has observed lapses in the implementation of 
modernization schemes in various States. 
(Para 4.9.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 The Committee has referred to the allocations of umbrella scheme of Modernisation Police 
Forces under which ‘Assistance to States for Modernistion of Police’ and “Assistance to States for 
Special Projects/Programmes for upgrading Police infrastructure”, were the sub-schemes 
administered during the year 2019-20. These two sub-schemes have been merged from the current 
year as their objectives were similar. Allocation of these two sub-schemes as per RE 2019-20 was Rs. 
891.30 crore which has been reduced to Rs. 770.76 crore in BE 2020-21, whereas this proposal was 
for allocation of Rs.1000 crore. Additional requirement will be projected at RE stage. Observations of 

 
 
35 
 
the C&AG in its Reports regarding lapses in the implementation of modernization schemes in various 
States are regularly followed up with the State Governments concerned. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.3 The Committee notes the shortfall of funds for Modernisation of Police Forces Scheme 
and feels that the modernization of Police Forces through the induction of new equipments, 
training and technological up-gradation of capabilities is also equally important. Police Forces 
should be sufficiently equipped to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. Therefore, the 
Committee, recommends that more budget may be requested at RE stage.  Further, a major 
share of the modernization budget is spent on improving the infrastructure of the police forces 
but training State Police Forces in relation to its behavior with public is essential to improve its 
image as modern day police forces. The Committee further recommends that it should be 
mandatory for the State police forces to spend the allocated budget for giving better training to 
all police personnel.  
 
 
3.9 Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.9.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts in linking around fifteen thousand police stations under 
CCTNS which will help in creating a comprehensive and integrated system for effective policing 
through e-governance. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider and 
check the feasibility of an effective and robust online complaint management system for different 
categories of cases. The Committee further recommends that the MHA should coordinate with State 
Police and encourage them to move towards the online registration of complaints so that the cases can 
be registered from anywhere and investigation can begin without any delay and procedural 
requirements. 
(Para 4.10.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 All the States and UTs have launched their Citizen Portals under the Crime and Criminal 
Tracking Networks System (CCTNS). A total of 4.85 crore citizen service requests have been received 
on the State/UT portals till 29.02.2020. These Citizen portals, inter-alia, provide the following citizen 
services: 
 
(i) Filing of online complaints 
(ii) Obtaining status of complaints 
(iii) Obtaining copies of FIR 
(iv) Details of arrested persons/wanted criminals 
(v) Details of missing/kidnapped persons and their matching with arrested, unidentified 
persons and dead bodies 
(vi) Details of stolen/recovered vehicles, arms and other properties 
(vii) Submission of requests for issue/renewal of various NoCs 
(viii) Verification requests for servants, employment, passport, senior citizen registrations etc. 
(ix) Sharing information and enabling citizens to download required forms 
 
3.9.3 It is also stated that a total of 14992 Police Stations in the country are registering 100% FIRs 
on CCTNS. A total of 4.63 crore FIRs have been digitized on CCTNS. 
 

 
 
36 
 
3.9.4 In addition to the above, the facility for online filing of e-FIR has been launched by three 
States/ UTs, namely Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan for property and vehicle thefts in cases where 
accused are unknown. A total 6.93 lakh e-FIRs have been filed till 29.02.2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that all the States have launched their 
Citizens Portal under the CCTNS and 4.85 crore citizens request have been received so far till 
29th February, 2020. The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken/ disposal 
of the requests made under CCTNS. The Committee also notes the reply that online filing of e-
FIR has been launched by three States/ UTs, namely Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan for 
property and vehicle thefts in cases where accused are unknown. The Committee recommends 
that online filing of e-FIR should be expanded to all States/UTS and devise a mechanism to 
register e-FIRs for different category of complaints. 
 
 
3.10 Security Related Expenditure (SRE) and Special Infrastructure Scheme for LWE areas 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.1 The Committee takes note of the allocation made towards Security Related Expenditure (SRE) 
and Special Infrastructure Scheme for LWE but also feels that more efforts needs to be taken to end 
the menace of LWE from the country. The Committee is of the view that the Central Armed Police 
Forces (CAPFs) can't substitute the State Police Force as their deployment is to meet the emergency 
situation/crisis in states for maintaining law and order. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
concerned States develop their own capabilities to face/handle such situation on permanent basis. 
Further, the requests for extension of deployment and increase in the quantum must also be examined 
and linked to the development of state police capabilities. 
(Para 4.11.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 The subjects Police & Public Order lies with the State(s). The GoI has, however, been 
supporting the States in the capacity development and strengthening their security apparatus to 
address the LWE menace effectively under the two major schemes, namely, Security Related 
Expenditure (SRE) Scheme and Special Infrastructure Scheme (SIS). 
 
3.10.3 Under the SRE, assistance is provided to 90 LWE affected districts in 11 States for recurring 
expenditure relating to operational and training needs of security forces which also include the 
expenditure incurred by the states for the rehabilitation of the surrendered LWE cadre,s etc. Rs. 1687 
crore has been released since 2014-15 under the scheme 
 
3.10.4 SIS provides support to the LWE affected States for strengthening of their Special Forces (SFs) 
and Special Intelligence Branches (SIBs) along with construction of 250 fortified Police Stations in 
LWE affected States. The scheme has an outlay of Rs.1006 crore with 60% central share. 
 
3.10.5 Meanwhile, deployment of CAPF is expected to continue for providing support to the state 
police forces till LWE menace is reduced to an insignificant level. 
 

 
 
37 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Rs. 1687 crore has been released since 
2014-15 under the Security Related Expenditure (SRE) scheme and urge the Ministry to furnish 
data on the utilization of the funds since 2014-15. The Committee also notes the reply regarding 
deployment of CAPFs in LWE areas to provide support to the State police forces till the 
situation comes under control. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the  the 
CAPFs should be deployed to meet the emergency situation/crisis in states and the requests for 
extension of deployment and increase in the quantum must also be examined and linked to the 
development of State police capabilities. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.10.7 Some Members of the Committee raised the issue of delay in construction of roads and 
rehabilitation of surrendered extremists in most of the LWE affected districts along Telangana and 
Chhattisgarh border. The Committee notes that the funds have been allocated for extremist-infested 
district roads in the border areas of Telangana and Chhattisgarh but, the construction of roads is still 
pending in most of these districts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction of the 
pending road-works should be completed without any further delay. The Committee also observes that 
some extremists have also surrendered over the years. But most of them are living below the poverty 
line on account of which they are deprived of basic education, housing and health facilities. The 
Committee feels that the extremism has arisen on account of real and perceived neglect, deprivation 
and disaffection, mainly towards the downtrodden. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should devise a robust surrender-cum-rehabilitation policy for LWE affected states so that 
education, gainful employment and entrepreneurial opportunities could be provided to the surrendered 
extremists and they are encouraged to remain in the mainstream. 
(Para 4.11.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.8 Government is committed for eradication of the LWE insurgency from the Country and 
holistic development of the affected areas at par with other developed areas. For development of the 
LWE affected areas, apart  from various developmental/flagship schemes of line Ministries, 
Government has been implementing several schemes including 02 major schemes for improvement of 
road network. 
 
3.10.9 Road  Requirement Plan-I  (RRP-I):  The  Scheme  is  under implementation since 
26.02.2009 for improving road connectivity in 34 LWE affected districts of 8 States i.e. Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Uttar 
Pradesh. The scheme envisages construction of 5422 km road length with an estimated cost  of Rs. 
8585 crores. Of these 4902 km roads have been completed. Current status of Roads (as on 
30.03.2020) of Telangana (TG) and  Chhattisgarh (CG) are under: 
 
                                                                                                  (Road lengths in KM) 
S. No State Sanctioned 
length 
Completed 
length 
Balance lengths 
1.       TG 617 617 Nil 
2.       CH 1988 1593 395 
 
 
                          

 
 
38 
 
       
    
 
3.10.10 Road Connectivity Project for LWE Affected Areas (RCPLWE): The project, approved 
in December-2016, envisaged construction of 5412 km  roads and  126 bridges with an estimated cost 
of Rs. 11725 crore.  However,  9338 km  road length have been  sanctioned  under the scheme till 
now.  Of these 1796  km length of roads are complete. Current status of Roads of Telangana and 
Chhattisgarh are under: 
 
S. No. State Sanctioned 
Lengths 
Completed 
Length 
Balance Lengths 
1. TG 705 147 558 
2. CH 2479 319 2160 
 
3.10.11 Surrender and Rehabilitation policy: As regards to rehabilitation of LWE  cadres, GoI 
has a Surrender and Rehabilitation policy as part of SRE Scheme. Under the policy MHA reimburses 
the expenditure incurred by the State Government on rehabilitation of LWE cadres. The rate of 
reimbursement is as under: 
 
(i) ₹ 5 lakh for higher ranked LWE cadre. 
(ii) ₹2.50 lakh for middle/lower ranked LWE cadre. 
(iii) Monthly stipend of ₹6,000 each for a maximum period of 36 months for vocational 
training. 
 
3.10.12 Additional incentives are given for surrendered weapon/ammunition. However, some 
states under their own surrender policies provide additional incentives. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.13 The Committee notes that the out of 9338 km sanctioned roads under Road 
Connectivity Project for LWE Affected Areas (RCPLWE) only 1796 km length of roads have 
been completed. The Committee would like to know the reasons regarding abysymally slow 
progress in completion of these roads specially with respect to Telangana where 147 km has 
been completed out of 705 km and Chhattisgarh where 319 km has been completed out of 2479 
km. The Committee is of the view that delay in construction of roads in most sensitive LWE 
areas like Telangana and Chhattisgarh is also a reason for slowing down the inclusion and 
development processes of these regions and negatively affecting the capability of CAPFs/ State 
police in tackling the LWE menace. 
 
 
3.11 Border Infrastructure & Management 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.11.1 The Committee notes that the allocations made for Border Infrastructure and Management is 
low. The Committee observes that the only Rs. 1996.51 crore has been allocated under this Head at BE 
2020-21 which is only 54.24% of the projected demand of  Rs. 4363.62 crore. The Committee further 
notes that due to shortage of funds, construction and maintenance of bridges & roads, resurfacing 
works and other developmental activities get affected. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
considering the geo-political scenario of India with the neighboring countries and importance of border 
infrastructure in border security, we must prioritize our spending and develop infrastructure and roads 
so that our forces can ensure effective mobility of men and machine upto the last post of the 

 
 
39 
 
border.Therefore, the Committee also recommends that the allocations made in BE 2020-21 to the tune 
of Rs. 1996.51 crore should be optimally utilized. 
(Para 4.12.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 The Budget projections are made on the basis of demands received from agencies. Allocation 
of budget for 2020-21 has been provided based on pace of expenditure and absorption capacity of 
implementing agencies. The recommendation regarding optimal utilization of allocated funds has been 
noted. Regular monitoring of projects will be done throughout the year. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.11.3 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should establish an inter-State forum 
of all the international border sharing Sates for interaction between the heads of State Level 
Empowered Committees of different States under the guidance of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
so as to allow them to share the best practices for enhancing their absorption capacity and 
optimize utilization of allocated funds. 
 
 
 
3.12 Schemes for Safety of Women 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry is implementing the twelve schemes for which Rs. 
855.23 crore has been allocated in BE 2020-21 under the Nirbhaya Fund. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should hold periodic consultations with the States and Union Territory Governments 
and Delhi Police regarding the implementation status of various schemes under this Head and the 
Ministry should take all necessary steps to overcome the bottlenecks which hamper faster 
implementation and consequently leads to under-utilization of allocations for Schemes meant for the 
safety of women. The Committee further recommends to extend the Safe City Project to all the major 
cities including Capitals of all States/UTs in Phase II and some new schemes needs to be started. 
 
(Para 4.13.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs is in the process of implementation of projects under Nirbhaya 
Fund such as Emergency Response Support System(ERSS), Central Victim Compensation 
Fund(CVCF), Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children(CCPWC), Delhi Police projects 
on safety of women, Safe City projects in selected eight cities, Establishment of a State- of- the- art 
DNA Lab at CFSL, Chandigarh, Strengthening of State/UT forensic Laboratories, Training and 
Capacity Building for the investigating/prosecution /medical officers in the areas of forensic 
investigation, Anti Human Trafficking and setting up of women desks in Police Stations across the 
country. 
 
3.12.3 The ERSS project which provides a pan India,  single, internationally  recognized number 112 
based emergency response mechanism for various emergencies with computer aided dispatch of field 
resources to a person in distress has been made operational in 28 States/Union Territories in FY 
2019-20. The Safe City projects for selected cities such as Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Lucknow and Ahmadabad have since been approved. Budgetary provisions for 
these projects have been released to the States/UTs and implementing Agencies. 

 
 
40 
 
3.12.4 The Ministry monitors implementation of these projects regularly in consultation with the 
States/ Union Territories and Implementing Agencies. A Safe City Implementation and Monitoring 
(SCIM) portal has been created for enabling proper monitoring and enabling the State Implementing 
Agencies to upload the details about the assets installed and made operational under the project. 
 
3.12.5 It has been decided to take up new cities in the ‘Safe City Projects’ in Phase II after 
implementations of the ongoing safe city projects and on the basis of the outcomes achieved. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.6 The Committee notes that the funds have been allocated for Central Victim 
Compensation Fund (CVCF) Scheme for compensating women victims of acid attacks, rape, 
trafficking, etc. The Committee appreciates the necessity and significance of the CVCF Scheme. 
However, the Committee feels that this Scheme could have been funded from sources other than 
Nirbhaya Fund, which was meant for funding dedicated initiatives aimed at enhancing the safety 
and security for women in the country. The Committee feels that sanctioning funds from 
Nirbhaya Fund for schemes pertaining to compensation would render the entire fund as a fund 
for merely disbursal and would not have a desired impact at the ground level in enhancing the 
security scenario for the women. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Ministry should desist from sanctioning funds for such Schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and 
adhere to the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund.  The Committee further recommends 
establishment of a State- of- the- art DNA Labs at various places  to strengthen forensic 
investigation across the country.  
 
 
3.13 Demand No. 49 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.1 The Committee observes that the UT of A&N Islands has not been able to achieve optimal 
utilization of funds under some heads such as Disaster Management,  Agriculture  and Allied 
Activities, Rural Development, Medical and Public Health, Social Welfare, Roads and Bridges, 
Shipping, Housing and Urban Development. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
UT Administration should ascertain the reasons for the under- utilization of funds and re-orient its 
focus towards resolving the bottlenecks for expeditious and prudent expenditure management and 
enhance the absorption capacity of the implementing agencies of the on-going projects. 
(Para 5.2.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2 The UT Administration is regularly monitoring utilisation of funds and corrective measures are 
taken to resolve bottlenecks in implementation of projects/schemes. However, the Administration could 
not achieve optimal utilisation of fund during 2019-20 under some heads due to the following reasons: 
 
Disaster Management 
  
3.13.3 Tsunami Early Warning Siren System in 35 places in A & N Islands has been assigned to BSNL 
for execution. Saving is due to non-finalization of Techno-Commercial Bid for installation and 
commissioning of Tsunami Early Warning Siren System in 35 places in A & N Islands by BSNL. 
Techno-Commercial bid 2nd stage of the e-tender for Tsunami Early Warning Siren System was opened 
on 18th January, 2020, which had participation by two bidders and the RFP documents and other 
exhibits along with scrutiny note have been forwarded to BSNL, New Delhi for further processing. 

 
 
41 
 
Further, the evaluation of the financial bid is to be done in consultation with National Centre for 
Seismology, New Delhi. The schedule date of opening of financial bid was on 21st March 2020 but the 
evaluation of financial bid has been affected due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
Agriculture and Allied Activities 
  
3.13.4 Expenditure on civil works under the head could not progress due to shortage of quarry 
products. Therefore, budgetary allocation of Rs.23.39 Crore in the BE 2019-20 was reduced to 
Rs.20.54 Crore in the RE 2019-20 due to under utilisation of funds.  Further, expenditure during the 
year stood at Rs.18.17 Cr. due to non- finalisation of tenders for procurement of organic manure, 
neem cake and its local transportation on account of unavoidable administrative reasons. 
 
Roads & Bridges 
  
3.13.5 A large chunk of funds is towards Grant-in-Aid for creation of capital assets by the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs). Funds are released to PRIs based on the utilization certificates. Funds could 
not be utilized due to shortage of quarry products. Quarry operations were non- operational on 
account of the matter being sub-judice before the National Green Tribunal and the conditions laid 
down by NGT for resumption of the same which involved elaborate environmental studies which took 
time. Allocation was reduced at the RE stage due to non-utilization of previous grants released to 
PRIs. Quarry operations have been resumed w. e. f. February 2020 and fund utilization is expected to 
be optimal during the next fiscal. 
 
Urban Development 
 
3.13.6 Development projects were affected due to shortage of quarry products. Quarry operations 
were non-operational on account of the matter being sub-judice before the National Green Tribunal 
and the conditions laid down by NGT for resumption of the same which involved elaborate 
environmental studies which took time. Under the Smart City Mission, tender for four projects were 
floated thrice, but failed on account of unavoidable administrative reasons. Re-tender was scheduled 
during end of March 2020, but could not be finalised due to the lockdown on account of the COVID-19 
situation. Pre-bid meeting for establishment of Integrated Command Control Centre (ICCC) was also 
scheduled to be held on 20th March 2020 but could not be held due to lockdown. Therefore, Port Blair 
Municipal Council could not utilise previous grants released and fund was not released. Quarry 
operations have been resumed from February 2020 and the expenditure will be optimal in the next 
fiscal. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.7 The Committee notes the reply and recommends to expedite the finalization of Techno-
Commercial Bid for commissioning of Tsunami Early Warning Siren System in 35 places in A & 
N Islands by BSNL so that its installation can be done to strengthen the resilience and 
prepardeness of the A&N Islands against disasters. 
 
3.13.8 The Committee also notes the reply of the UT that due to lack of availibility of quarry 
products and unavoidable administrative reasons,  the UT was not able to fully utilize the funds 
allotted under several heads such as Agriculture  and Allied Activities, Rural Development, 
Medical and Public Health, Social Welfare, Roads and Bridges, Shipping, Housing and Urban 
Development The Committee feels that such underutilization of the developmental projects in 
the UT is inexplicable. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that necessary measures 
may be taken to achieve full utilization of funds under various heads. The Committee also 

 
 
42 
 
recommends the MHA to ensure that the fund utilization status of A&N Islands be reviewed on a 
monthly basis and corrective measures are taken in proactive manner.  
 
 
Connectivity of the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands with the mainland 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.9 The Committee appreciates the initiative taken to improve intra-island and inter- island 
connectivity. The Committee recommends that timelines fixed for various projects may be adhered to. 
 
(Para 5.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.10 Timelines for projects to improve inter and intra island connectivity have been fixed 
and progress is being monitored regularly. Important projects for improving connectivity of the UT 
are as under: 
 
(i) Construction of two 1200 pax-cum-1000 Ton cargo vessels (Mainland- Island), which are 
likely to be delivered by June, 2021 and December, 2021 respectively. 
(ii) Construction of two 500 pax-cum-150 Ton cargo vessels (Inter-Island), which were to be 
delivered by April, 2020 and June, 2020 respectively. However, the delivery has been 
delayed due to COVID-19 Pandemic. 
(iii)A & N Administration had operated one chartered flight between Port Blair- Chennai and Port 
Blair-Kolkata to improve mainland-Island air-connectivity and to provide affordable air 
travel to the Islanders, especially to the weaker sections during the year 2019-20. The 
Administration now intends to underwrite few seats on daily basis in commercial airline 
flights operating between Port Blair-Chennai, Kolkata and Vishakhapatnam sectors to 
replace the arrangement of chartered flights, for which tendering process is underway and 
expected to be finalized by July, 2020. 
(iv) A & N Administration is utilizing the services of 04 Dauphin N helicopters on lease from M/s 
Pawan Hans Ltd. to provide air-connectivity in the Inter- Island sector. Since these 
Dauphin N helicopters are very old and have limited carrying capacity, a proposal has 
been taken up for modernization of these vintage fleet of 04 helicopters with advanced 
technology 02 medium lift (10 seater) and 02 heavy lift (18 seater) helicopters. 
 
3.13.11 Administration is also in the process of reintroducing the seaplane services in A & N 
Islands for which tender will be floated by July, 2020. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.12 The Committee understands the requirement of air conectivity of the UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands with the mainland and recommends the Ministry to cap the flight 
fares from the Island to the mainland to provide affordable air travel to the Islanders especially 
to the weaker sections. The Committee further recommends to increase number of flights based 
on demand to ensure 24X7 connectivity of the island with the mainland. 
 
 

 
 
43 
 
 
Power 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.13.13 The Committee notes that the A&N Islands still have to depend on the conventional 
sources of energy for power generation. The Committee is of the considered view that the Diesel 
generated power must be minimized as it pollutes the serene environment and the use of solar energy 
for power generation be intensively promoted taking into account the weather conditions of the 
Islands. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the UT Administration must undertake 
requisite measures to ensure the installation of roof-top solar power plants in all the buildings in the 
Islands beginning with all government buildings. The UT administration may also consider giving 
subsidies to its locals. The Committee also recommends that the ongoing work pertaining to the 
floating solar plants  must  be  completed expeditiously. The Committee also urges the UT 
administration to carry out a feasibility study of wind farms for power generation. 
(Para 5.2.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.14 De-dieselization efforts are already on. The islands plan to achieve De- dieselization 
from 9% to 93% in next 3 years. Renewable Energy Projects Completed and in operation in A & N 
Islands are as follows: 
 
(i) 5MWp Ground Mounted Solar Power Plant at Garacharama, Port Blair is installed and in 
operation since April 2013. 
(ii) 50 KW Ground mounted Grid connected SPV at Raj Niwas under SADP Programme is in 
operation since August 2016. 
(iii) NLCIL has established 2.5 MW Ground mounted Solar Power Plantout of total capacity 20 
MWp and this was commissioned by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on 30.12.2018. 
Remaining 17.5 MW capacity has been established and is ready for commissioning. 
(iv) 4.15 MWp Rooftop Solar Plants installed in 54 Government Buildings in Port Blair (48 
Bldgs.) and Nicobar (6Bldgs,) in A & N Islands. 
(v) 28.81 KWp Rooftop SPV system has been installed on residential buildings in A & N 
Islands under 1-10 KWp aggregating to 2MWp Residential RTS. 
 
3.13.15 Upcoming Renewable Projects in A & N Islands to achieve the target are as follows: 
 
Solar 
(i) MoU executed between A & N Administration with EESL for implementation of Roof top Solar 
Power Plants in North & Middle Andaman. 
(ii) A&N Administration is in the process of signing of MoU with SECI/EESL for setting up 11.7 
MW with 11.5 MWhr battery storage at various locations of A&N Islands. 
(iii)The MNRE has been requested to depute a team of experts to explore the potential RE sites 
especially in Swaraj Dweep, Shaheed Dweep and Campbell Bay in the 1st phase which can 
be replicated in other Islands. 
(iv) Empanelment of bidders is under process for design, supply, installation and commissioning 
with 5 years of Grid connected 1-50 KWp capacity Rooftop Solar PV power plants with 
hybrid/ordinary inverter and battery energy storage system in 
residential/commercial/Industrial sector at various locations in A & N Islands under Net 
Metering Policy.  
(v) Tender for 4MWp floating Solar at Kalpong Dam, Diglipur with 1 MWhr BESS floated on 
13.01.2020 by SECI and pre-bid meeting held on 30.01.2020 at the site. 

 
 
44 
 
 
Wind Energy 
 
(i) National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) recommended only one site i.e. Hog Point, Car 
Nicobar with the potential of 3x250KW. NIWE is in the process of submitting technical 
specifications for floating the tender. Possibility of setting up of similar capacity wind 
power plant at Little Andaman is being explored. 
 
LNG Power Plant 
 
(i) The A & N Administration has entrusted NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN) to establish 50 
MW LNG based Power Plant on single fuel (natural gas) at Hopetown, South Andaman. 
The site for establishment of 50 MW LNG Power Plant at Hope Town has been notified as 
“Port Area under the power conferred under Indian Ports Act 1908” by Ministry of 
Shipping and has been notified in the Gazette of India on 02.03.2020. The plant is expected 
to be commissioned by 2022. 
 
 
3.13.16 Energy Conservation Building Code and Energy Conservation Building Code Rules for 
A&N Islands have been notified on 22nd August, 2019, which stipulate that every new building which is 
used or intended to be used for commercial purposes, having a connected load of 50 KW or above has 
to install solar power plant equivalent to 15% of the connected load or 25% of Roof area whichever is 
less. This shall also apply to the existing buildings after addition /alterations and change in the 
connected load to 50 KW. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.17 The Committee appreciates the islands plan to achieve De- dieselization from 9% 
to 93% in next 3 years that will also promote the use of Renewable energy Sources (RES) in the 
islands. The Committee also notes ongoing/completed solar, wind and LNG projects to cater the 
energy demand of the island and further recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Administration of the A&N islands may undertake a feasibility study of the other RES like 
thermal energy, tidal energy, floating find farm, etc. to meet the energy needs of the Islands. 
 
 
3.14 Demand No. 51 - Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.1 The Committee observes that the reasons for amalgamation of the Union Territories of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu was to strengthen administrative efficiency and fast track 
development. However, the budgetary allocation for the UT is Rs. 3520.52 crore in BE 2020-21 which 
is only about thirteen percent more than the allocation of Rs. 3103.37 crore in BE 2019-20 of both the 
UTs put together. The Committee feels that more funds are needed to cater to the overall 
development of the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that additional funds should be sought at an appropriate stage to give pace to the 
development of the UT. 
(Para 5.4.2 ibid) 
 
 
 

 
 
45 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.2 The budgetary allocation for UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu for 2020-21 is 
less than the fund demanded i.e. Rs. 4089.49 crores. If any additional requirement, the same shall be 
requested in RE or at supplementary demand stage. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.14.3 The Committee notes that the allocation made in BE 2020-21 for UT of Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu is less than the projection. The Committee believes that shortage of 
funds will arrest the development of the UT. Therefore, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the sector-wise projects proposed/ undertaken for the holistic development of the newly 
merged UT so that correct assessement of requirement of funds can be done and accordingly can 
also be enhanced at RE stage and also in the next fiscal year. 
 
 
3.15 Demand No. 54 - Transfers to Delhi 
 
Water Treatment Plant 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.15.1 The Committee notes that the Water Treatment Plant (WTP) projects in Delhi are being funded 
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The Committee hopes that once bilateral formalities between 
NCT of Delhi and ADB about this project are completed, the MHA should make a request to the 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds for this project at RE stage. 
(Para 5.7.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
 
3.15.2 The Project is to be executed in 6 packages for which bids for package 1 & 2 have already 
been processed. Now, DJB has submitted a fresh application to the Deptt of Economic Affairs (DEA’s) 
Screening Committee to revalidate the project for Tranche-I. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.15.3 The Committee would like to know the reasons as to why the project was required to be 
revalidated. The Committee emphasize that all operational glitches be removed and expects that 
Water Treatment Plant would be operations at the earliest. 
 
 
3.16 Demand No. 55- Transfers to UT of J&K 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.16.1 To boost handicraft industry in J&K, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should take up with the Ministry of Finance seeking some exemption to handloom and 
handicrafts under the implementation of GST to ensure a market for the handloom and handcrafted 
products which are presently underperforming due to competition with cheap imports. The Committee 
recommends that the State Government may introduce skilled craft in the curriculum in order to educate 

 
 
46 
 
children about the rich traditional handloom and handicrafts heritage of the UT. This will also go a long 
way in ensuring livelihood in the UT, whilst ensuring the longevity of these prized handloom and 
handicraft skills. 
(Para 5.8.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.2 The UT of Jammu and Kashmir has taken up the matter regarding exemption to handloom and 
handicraft sectors from GST with the GST Council. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.3 The Committee notes the reply of the UT of J&K that they have taken up the matter 
regarding exemption to handloom and handicraft sectors from GST with the GST Council. The 
Committee would like to know about the final decision taken by the GST Council in this matter 
as this is a crucial aspect for promoting the rich handloom and handicraft tradition in the UT of 
Jammu & Kashmir. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.16.4 The Committee emphasizes the need for proper physical and social infrastructures like land, 
capital, storage, roads, railways, air connectivity communication, power, skilled, Workforce to attract 
new industries and entrepreneurs into J&K. The Committee also recommends setting up a Planning 
Board and investment promotion agency in J&K in a stipulated time to formulate investment plans and 
coordinate with the industries from various sectors and countries to increase investment in J&K. The 
MHA should also hold periodic meetings with the Planning Board for guidance and addressing the 
issues with the concerned Ministries of the Government of India. 
                                                                                                                        (Para 5.8.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.5 The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade is preparing a New Industrial 
Policy for the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir in consultation with the UT of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 
3.16.6 The UT of Jammu and Kashmir is also giving focused attention to provide the supporting 
infrastructure and enabling environment for attracting new industries and entrepreneurs in Jammu 
and Kashmir that includes creation of a land bank, road shows in leading cities of the country, signing 
of expression of interest with prospective entrepreneurs, creation of an Investment of facilitation cell 
amongst various other proactive steps that have been initiated. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.7 The Committee would like to be apprised about details of the projects undertaken/ 
proposed for creating necessary social and physical infrastructure for attracting new industries 
and entrepreneurs in Jammu and Kashmir. The Commiitte further reiterates its 
recommendation o f  setting up a Planning Board and investment promotion agency in J&K in a 
stipulated time to formulate investment plans and coordinate with the industries from various 
sectors and countries to increase investment in J&K. The Committee also desires to know about 
the details of investment proposals received for the UT of J&K since its creation.  
 
 

 
 
47 
 
 
Employment 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.16.8 The Committee notes that there are vacancies of 22078, 54375 and 7552 at Class IV, Non-
Gazetted and Gazetted level, respectively and their recruitment will be done by the Staff Selection 
Board. The Committee recommends to expedite the recruitment process and fill the vacancies in a time 
bound manner.The Committee further recommends to reserve seats for the local youth so that they can 
get due share in the Government jobs of the UT. The Committee also recommends the administration of 
the UT of J&K to assess the requirement of manpower after being established as a UT and notify it on a 
priority basis. 
                              (Para 5.8.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.9 In terms of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of State Laws) Order, 2020, read 
with the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of State Laws) Second Order, 2020, 
amendments have been effected, among others, in the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services 
(Decentralisation and Recruitment) Act, 2010. Through these amendments, Domicile has been made a 
basic eligibility for an appointment to any post under the Union Territory of J&K or under a local or 
other authority (other than Cantonment Board) within the UT of J&K. The Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir has been asked to assess the requirement of manpower and undertake the process of 
recruitment in an accelerated manner.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.10 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and reiterates its recommendation 
for expediting the assessement and recruitment so as to fill the vacancies in a time bound manner. 

 
 
48 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government  
have not been received 
 
 
4.1 Home Guards 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that the State Governments/UTs are blatantly 
and willfully not implementing the Supreme Court judgment and despite repeated reminders by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, only nineteen States/UTs have implemented the judgment. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue a strong message to those 
States/UTs, which are yet to implement the judgment of the Supreme Court and direct them to 
implement the judgment without any further delay. The Committee reiterates its recommendation 
made in the Para 3.8.5 of the 209th Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA). 
          (Para 3.10.4 of 224th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 Directorate General, Fire Service, Civil Defence and Home Guards, MHA has been pursuing 
the matter with States/UTs since 2015 and issued several letters, last one on 20.03.2020, for 
implementation of the Supreme Court Judgement. As per available records, following 23 States/UTs 
have implemented the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court: 
 
[1] Andaman & Nicobar Islands (UT) 
[2] Andhra Pradesh 
[3] Bihar 
[4] Chandigarh (UT) 
[5] Daman & Diu 
[6] Delhi 
[7] Goa 
[8] Himachal Pradesh 
[9] Karnataka 
[10] Lakshadweep 
[11] Madhya Pradesh 
[12] Maharashtra 
[13] Manipur 
[14] Meghalaya 
[15] Nagaland 
[16] Odisha 
[17] Puducherry 
[18] Punjab 
[19] Rajasthan 
[20] Tamil Nadu 
[21] Telangana 
[22] Tripura 
[23] Uttarakhand. 
 

 
 
49 
 
4.1.3 13 States/UTs (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Dadra Nagar & Haveli (UT), 
Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir (UT), Jharkhand, Ladakh (UT), Mizoram, Sikkim, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal) have informed that case is under active consideration in the States/UTs. 
There is no Home Guard set up in Kerala. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.1.4 The Committee feels that MHA should continue pursuing remaining thirteen States for 
implementing the Supreme Court's order and implement it in the UTs of Ladakh, J&K and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the division 
concerned of MHA may send a monthly reminder on this issue to the remaining States and 
obtain regular status of action taken in this matter. 
 
 
4.2 Delhi Police 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee reiterates its following recommendations made in its 222nd Report on The 
management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi: 
 
(i) with the increasing population and increasing number of vehicles in Delhi, it has 
become very difficult to regulate the flow of traffic manually and therefore, the Committee 
strongly supports incorporation of Intelligent Traffic Management systems (ITMS) for better 
management of traffic (Para 4.6.6). 
(ii) The Committee observes that the computer-based Area Traffic Control System is 
operational in many Southeast Asian countries for the last three decades but is anguished to 
learn that Delhi, the capital of India, does not have any computer-based system for managing 
the traffic on the Roads. For example in the Philippines, for traffic management, a computer-
based induction and sensor-based intersection system were installed around 30 years ago. 
(Para 4.6.7). 
(iii) The Committee feels that although ITMS projects have finally been envisaged for 
Delhi, the Committee is deeply concerned at the very slow pace of progress being made in 
devising the project and taking up just the pilot project. (Para 4.6.8). 
 
(Para 4.4.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 Delhi Traffic Police has informed that the pilot ITMS has been initiated and under this project 
Red Light Violation Detection (RLVD) cameras at 34 important intersections have been installed in 
Delhi based on State-of-the-art 3D Radar technology. Similarly, Over Speed Violation Detection 
(OSVD) camera system has also been installed at 100 locations all over the city. These systems are 
computer based and controlled from the Traffic Command  Centre established at Traffic Police 
Headquarters, Todapur. Traffic violations such as violation of traffic signal, stop line, over-speeding, 
driving against the flow of traffic, etc. are detected by intelligent sensors and notices are sent to the 
violators through SMS. The violators have been provided facility of online payment through SBI e-
pay gateway. The entire system is automated based on latest technology. The system is working 
satisfactorily and Delhi Traffic Police is considering expanding it at other strategic locations. The 
project of Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) planned to be implemented in a phased 
manner: - Preparation and approval of detailed project report (DPR) by September  2020  (16  weeks  
for finalization  of  DPR).-  Finalization/signing of contract with System Integrator (after 

 
 
50 
 
approval/acceptance of the DPR from Competent   Authority-MHA)   –   April’   2021   (30   weeks   
from   date   of approval/acceptance of DPR).Phase-wise implementation of the Project: Phase- I: 
Upto July 2021.- Phase-2: August 2021 to October 2022- Phase-3: November 2022 to July 2023. The 
process of hiring of Consultant has been started as per approved ‘Terms of Reference’ by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India. All out efforts are being made to meet the target set for 
implementation of the ITMS Project. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.2.3 The Committee desires to be apprised about the progress made in the ITMS project in 
Delhi. 
 
 
4.3 Central Police Organizations 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.3.1 The Committee notes that the NCRB was allocated Rs. 87.88 crore in BE 2019-20. But, the 
expenditure incurred by NCRB till 31st January, 2020 is only 46.10 % (Rs. 40.52 crore) which is 
abysmally low. Therefore, the Committee, recommends that the NCRB  should focus on timely and 
optimal utilization of allocated funds and take remedial measures against factors responsible for poor 
utilization. 
(Para 4.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 As informed by the NCRB, out of a total BE allocation for FY 2019-20 of Rs.87.88 crore to 
NCRB, Rs.48.00 crore was earmarked for the implementation of National Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (NAFIS) project. After following a tender process, work order was issued by the 
Bureau to the successful bidder on 25.06.2019, and Master Service Agreement (MSA) signed between 
the vendor and the NCRB on 24.07.2019. In terms of the agreement, payments were to be released to 
the vendor after successful completion of Milestones in the Agreement. Accordingly, a total of Rs.32.18 
crores was released as First instalment and Second instalment after due completion of milestones by 
the vendor. The project is underway and the remaining balance has been accounted in the Final 
Expenditure for the FY. 
 
4.3.3 It is also stated that total funds available to NCRB as per RE for FY 2019-20 was Rs.74.05 
crore, against which NCRB has spent Rs.71.21 crore. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.3.4 The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of utilization of funds by 
NCRB for year 2019-20 to assess the pattern of spending by NCRB. 
 
 
4.4 Marine Immigration Posts  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.4.1 The Committee is astonished to note that the majority of the Marine Immigration Posts lack 
adequate infrastructure facilities like building space, electricity/ water connections, monitoring screens, 
canopy, etc. Further, in four river port based immigration Check posts (ICPs) on Indo-Bangladesh 

 
 
51 
 
border in Assam viz. Dhubri, Pandu, Karimganj and Nagaon, there is no infrastructure available. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA should take up the matter on a priority basis at highest level 
with the Ministry of Shipping and various Port Trusts and other concerned agencies to prepare a time-
bound plan with projected outlays for the infrastructure development of the Marine ICPs. 
Modernization and development of infrastructure available at marine ICPs is necessary and that should 
be done to bring them at par with the best Marine ICPs of the world. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the MHA should make adequate budgetary provision in order to support them. 
Therefore, increased allocation be made at the Revised Estimates stage and the Committee also desires 
to be apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.8.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.4.2 National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI) is in process of procurement and 
delivery of items (pertaining to IT infrastructure) at Dhubri and Karimganj river port. 
 
Bureau of Immigration  
 
4.4.3 The development of infrastructure for Immigration Check Posts is the responsibility of the 
concerned port authorities. Further, the Foreigners Regional Registration Officers and Chief 
Immigration Officers have been sensitized to consult the concerned port authorities for infrastructure 
requirement from Immigration point of view. 
 
Ministry of Shipping  
 
4.4.4 The matter of immigration facilities at major sea ports has already been assigned to a 
consultancy agency named KPMG to carryout study in connection with Immigration facilities at Sea 
Ports for improving Immigration processes by way of developing and operationalising modern 
Immigration facilities across the country’s seaports to ensure smooth movement of passengers, crew 
and personal luggage without compromising the safety and national security. This is to be done in three 
phases as follows: 
(i) Phase I: process improvement study  
(ii) Phase II: detailed process mapping development of bid document selection of solution 
providers through competitive bidding process 
(iii) Phase III: implementation progress monitoring and commissioning. 
 
4.4.5 Consultation agency has submitted their study report for Phase I in April, 2020 which is under 
examination of Ministry of Shipping. 
 
4.4.6    It may be mentioned that Inland Waterways Authority of India is responsible for 
modernization/development of infrastructure at the proposed ICPs in river ports. This Ministry, vide 
OM dated 30.05.2020, has taken up the matter with Inland Waterways Authority of India.The following 
infrastructure exists at Dhubri, Pandu and Karimganj, the Ports of Call on protocol routes: 
(i) Dhubri ICP is functional with the dedicated 10 MBPS leased line NICNET, frisking facility, 
office space for immigration & customs, space for screening machines and waiting rooms. 
(ii) At Pandu, adequate office space for Customs, waiting rooms, and space for screening machines 
available. 
(iii)Naogaon is not on protocol route. However, nearest Port of call to Naogaon is Silighat on IBP 
route (NW-2). IWAI do not have any land and infrastructure at Silighat. 
(iv) At Karimganj Port of Call, land of 0.76 acres with an office building, warehouse, open storage 
facility exists which is not being upgraded/ renovated. No ICP facility currently exists in 

 
 
52 
 
Port area. However, as per requirement, same will be created for which required land is 
available. In addition to above, further infrastructure as per MHA requirement may also be 
made available for smooth functioning of ICPs in the IWAI Ports of calls. 
 
4.4.7 The Committee notes the existing infrastructure at Dhubri, Pandu, Silighat and 
Karimganj Ports of Call. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to co-ordinate with 
the Ministry of Shipping and Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) to ensure timely 
procurement and modernization/ development of necessary infrastructure at Silighat Port of 
Call and initiate the modernization/ upgradation at Pandu and Karimganj Ports of Call on 
priority basis. The Committee would like to be apprised about the completion status of these 
projects. 
 
 
4.5 Border Infrastructure & Management 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.1 The Committee notes that upcoming ICPs have received approval in 2018, but land acquisition 
is still going on for the two ICPs. The Committee also notes that even after a year of grant of approval, 
the project has not started yet which is very important to facilitate the legitimate cross-border 
movement of people and goods while preventing unauthorized passage. The Committee recommends 
that the land should be acquired within stipulated time and construction should commence 
immediately after land acquisition so that the project is completed on time without cost overruns. The 
Committee desires to be updated on the progress made in this regard in Action Taken Replies. 
(Para 4.12.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.2 The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) had on 17.12.2018 inter-alia approved the 
following: 
 
(i) Development of 03 ICPs, including acquisition of land for them, at Rupaidiha, Sutarkandi & 
Sunauli at an estimated cost of Rs. 847.72 crore and; 
(ii) Accorded “in principle” approval for acquisition of land and preparation of DER by LPAI for 
developing ICPs at the remaining 10 locations i.e. at Hilli, Changrabandha, 
Kawrpuichhuah, Jaigoan, Panitanki, Ghojadanga, Banbasa, Mahadipur, Fulbari & 
Bhittamore. 
4.5.3 With respect to the development of 3 ICPS at Rupaidiha, Sunauli and Sutarkandi the status is 
as below: 
 
(i) ICP at Rupaidiha, (India-Nepal Border): The work of construction of ICP   has been 
awarded to the contractor on 07.02.2020 and the contractor has mobilised  the  
resources  and  equipment  at  site.  The  expected  date  of completion: 2 years from 
date of award of work. 
(ii) ICP at Sutarkandi (India-Bangladesh Border): Land Acquisition in progress and delayed 
due to a pending litigation. The partial operations of ICP in the existing facilities (BTC-I) 
has commenced from 7th September, 2019 by carrying out certain modifications to the 
existing facilities. 
(iii)ICP at Sunauli (India-Nepal Border): 117 acres of land for the development of ICP has been 
identified and the land acquisition is in progress. The likely completion of acquisition of 
land is by September, 2020. The preparation of tender documents for Project Management 
Consultancy for the ICP is also in progress. 

 
 
53 
 
 
4.5.4 As far as the ICPS at Hilli, Changrabandha, Kawrpuichhuah, Jaigoan, Panitanki, 
Ghojadanga, Banbasa, Mahadipur, Fulbari & Bhittamore for which “in principle” approval for 
acquisition of land and preparation of DER by LPAI” was accorded by the CCS, the following 
actions have been taken: 
 
(i) The identification of land for acquisition has been taken up with respective State 
Governments. 
(ii) M/s RITES has been appointed as PMC for the preparation of DPR for the new 10 ICPs. 
(iii) The DPRs for ICP Banbasa, Panitanki, Jaigoan & Fulbari have been prepared and are 
under examination. 
(iv) Preparation of DPRs for remaining 6 locations is under progress. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.5.5 The Committee notes the reply regarding progress made at Rupaidiha, Sutarkandi & 
Sunauli ICPs and further recommends to expedite the land acquisition and preparation of DPRs 
for the remainig ICPs and commence the construction at these sites at the earliest without time 
and cost overrun. 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.5.6 The Committee notes that the delay in the installation of Tsunami sirens due to nonfinalisation 
of tender by BSNL. The Committee recommends that the process of finalization of tender by BSNL 
for the installation of Tsunami Sirens be expedited. This will help to improve the response time in case 
of a Disaster and strengthen early warning and emergency communication system be installed on 
priority basis. The Committee also desires to be updated about the completion status of the same. 
 
(Para 5.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.7 Tsunami Early Warning Siren System in 35 places in A & N Islands has been assigned to BSNL 
for execution. Techno-Commercial bid 2nd stage of the e- tender for Tsunami Early Warning Siren 
System was opened on 18th January, 2020, which had participation by two bidders and the RFP 
documents and other exhibits along with scrutiny note have been forwarded to BSNL, New Delhi for 
further processing. Further, the evaluation of the financial bid is to be done in consultation with 
National Centre for Seismology, New Delhi. The scheduled date of opening of financial bid was on 21st 
March 2020 but the evaluation of financial bid has been affected due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.5.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding installation of Tsunami Early 
Warning Siren System and recommends to finalise the tenders at the earliest and update the 
Committee about the progress in the matter. 
 
 
4.6 Medical and Public Health 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.6.1 The Committee appreciates the plans to upgrade the Community Health Centre (CHC), 

 
 
54 
 
Diglipur to Sub District Hospital for extending better health care to the population of North Andaman 
and procurement of medical equipments for GB Pant Hospital and other Hospitals. The Committee, 
however, is displeased to note the under-utilization of fund by the Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Institute of Medical Sciences (ANIMERS) and reduction of allocation under capital head for FY 2020-
21 as compared to FY 2019-20. The Committee, therefore, recommends to increase and improve the 
utilization of funds for the health care. The UT administration should also ascertain the reasons for 
under-utilization and take appropriate remedial measures to obviate the same in the future. 
(Para 5.2.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.2 The funds were projected under GIA- creation of Capital Assets for release to the society, A & 
N Islands Medical Education & Research Society (ANIMERS) for the project C/o New Medical 
College at Port Blair. The total cost of project was Rs.284.24 Crore to be shared between the Centre 
and UT in 75:25 ratio. The project commenced during 2014-15 and financial year wise release of 
shares was also planned. Accordingly, Rs.52 Crore were released till 2017-18 by the UT 
Administration. Most of the works under Phase-I that includes construction of Hostels, Mess etc as 
well as the site development work have already been sanctioned. During 2018-19, it was noticed that 
the value of sanctioned projects exceeded Rs.100 Crore requiring clarification whether approval of 
GoI is to be obtained or not. Administration sought clarification from Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare vide letter dated 31.10.2018 and clarification has been received during March 2019. 
Sanctioning of new works resumed during November, 2019 on receipt of clarification from Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare. Therefore, fund provisioned under GIA could not be drawn and had to be 
surrendered during last two financial years.As such, currently only a token provision of Rs.1 Crore is 
kept considering the estimated time for completion of works and tendering of new works. Additional 
funds, if required, will be projected. To avoid recurrence of such instances, it has been decided that 
henceforth provision of funds shall be made only after ascertaining and confirming that the project has 
the requisite sanction and will be completed as per planned schedule. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.6.3 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and desires to be 
apprised about the physical and financial progress achieved with respect the construction of 
Medical College in the UT of A&N Islands along with the timeline for completion. 
 
 
4.7 Demand No. 49- UT of A & N Islands  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7.1 The Committee notes that the cargo and vessel-related charges are outstanding and reduced 
allocation will affect the operational expenses, crew wages, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry of  Home Affairs must take up the matter of higher allocation to the UT 
of A & N Islands with the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage to meet the fund requirement and settle the 
outstanding dues. 
(Para 5.2.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.7.2 The Vessel Related Charges and Cargo Related Services payable to PMB, Port Blair are 
outstanding from 1993-1994 due to scarcity of funds and the total dues as per records available are 
more than Rs.150.00 Crore. The Administration has been projecting the requirement of funds for the 
settlement of outstanding dues related to Cargo and Vessel-related charges and the same shall be 

 
 
55 
 
projected at the RE 2020-21 stage and the recommendation of the Committee will also be brought to 
the knowledge of Ministry of Finance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.7.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the amount to the tune of Rs 150 crore 
for Vessel Related Charges and Cargo Related Services payable to PMB, Port Blair are 
outstanding from 1993-1994 due to scarcity of fund and recommends the Ministry to take up this 
matter with Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the progress made in this regard. Therefore, the Committee considers the above as an interim 
reply. 
 
 
4.8 Demand No. 50-Chandigarh 
 
Recommendation  
 
4.8.1 The Committee notes that the UT of Chandigarh has been allocated Rs. 5138.10 crore in the BE 
2020-21 which is 520.13 crore less than the projected amount of Rs. 5658.23 crore. The Committee is 
of the firm view that this significant shortfall would adversely affect the development of the thirteen 
transferred villages to the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the shortfalls in budgetary allocation at Budget Estimates stage must be favorably 
looked into at the Revised Estimates stage. 
(Para 5.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.2 As per the recommendation of the committee UT Administration of Chandigarh will raise the 
demand at Revised Estimates 2020-21 stages. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.3 The Committee desires to be apprised whether the Ministry of Home Affairs was able to 
get sufficient funds allocated from the Ministry of Finance for the Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh. How much amount has been raised may also be intimated to this Committee. 
 
 
Municipal Corporation 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.4 The Committee notes the condition of infrastructure in the 13 villages that have been added to 
the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh in 2019. The Committee feels a sense of urgency in allocating 
more funds to the UT of Chandigarh for proper infrastructure development of these 13 villages i.e. to 
provide drinking water, sewerage system, stormwater drainage system, street lights, roads, horticulture 
works, etc. The Committee, therefore,recommends the MHA to take up the matter of increasing the 
allocation to the UT of Chandigarh with the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage. 
(Para 5.3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.5 There are 22 villages under the jurisdiction of MC Chandigarh out of which 13 villages have 
been transferred to MC Chandigarh last year. The infrastructure for the services like drinking water 

 
 
56 
 
supply, sewerage system, storm water drainage system laid in these village about 15-20 years back. As 
these villages are in the vicinity of Chandigarh, so the population in these villages has increased 
enormously, due to which the capacity of the infrastructure have become inadequate. It is observed 
that the sewer lines laid are under sized to carry the sewage load, due to which sewage over flows on 
the streets of the villages and thus damaging these streets/roads. The blockage in the sewer lines also 
leads to contaminated water supply. The drinking water supply needs augmentation to bring its level at 
par with the urban norms. Due to increasing urbanization in these villages the kachcha area is getting 
paved day by day and construction is also coming in the vacant lands, due to which there is no space 
available for disposal of storm water, hence the storm water draining system also needs attention in 
these villages. Street lights are to be provided so as to avoid dark spots. The existing conventional 
street lights are also required to be replaced by LED lights. The roads/streets in the villages are in 
deteriorated condition, as such these roads needs re-carpeting. Ministry will take up with Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage for any additional requirement of funds. 
Further recommendation 
 
4.8.6 The Committee considers the present reply as an interim one and desires that it may be 
apprised of the action taken to increase the allocation at RE stage for Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh. 
 
 
Power 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.7 The Committee understands the importance of the National Smart Grid Mission (NSGM) 
which would serve the need of an electrical grid with automation, communication and smart meters 
that can monitor power flows from the point of generation to the point of consumption and ensure 
control of power flow or curtailment of loads matching generation on a real-time basis. This is a very 
positive move for the conservation and efficient use of power. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the MHA to expedite the administrative approval/ expenditure sanction of the Smart Grid Project of 
Chandigarh so that the project can be awarded at the earliest. 
(Para 5.3.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), GOI, has approved the Smart Grid Project for whole 
Chandigarh amounting to Rs. 241 Crores and conveyed vide letter No. U- 13034/01/2019 -CHD 
dated 18th March, 2020. The Request for Proposal (RFP) for appointment of Project Management 
Agency (PMA) to implement Smart Grid Project is under progress. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.9 The Committee considers this as an interim reply and should be informed when the 
Smart Grid Project will be finally implemented. 
 
 
Roads and Transport 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.10 The Committee is aware that the short approach road towards Chandigarh airport was 
functional in the past. But now, around extra 30 kms needs to be covered while traveling to 

 
 
57 
 
Chandigarh airport because the entry has changed to the other side and approaching the same is time-
consuming. A huge amount has been invested in this international airport. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Home Ministry should conduct a meeting with the Advisor of Administrator, 
Chandigarh, the Chief Secretaries of Punjab, Haryana and the Secretary, Civil Aviation and resolve the 
issue of seven kilometre stretch towards the Chandigarh airport. If need be, it may be taken up at 
Home Ministry level with the concerned Chief Ministers. 
(Para 5.3.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.11 Three alternate approaches were suggested in Chandigarh Master Plan (CMP) 2031. These 
alternates were discussed in various meetings. DMRC was appointed as consultant by Chandigarh 
Administration 
4.8.12 Further approach to Chandigarh International Airport: The matter w. r. t. the approach to 
Chandigarh International Airport was deliberated. It was discussed that as per CMP-2031, one option 
has been given for connectivity to International Airport from PurvMarg near Sector 48 side through 
Jagatpura area. The said issue was deliberated for the shortest route to the Chandigarh International 
Airport and it was decided that the proposal may be explored by the CE, UT for its feasibility on site in 
coordination with the Punjab Govt. for further necessary action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.13 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the decision of conducting a 
faesibility study of connectivity to International Airport from Purv Marg near Sector 48 side 
through Jagatpura area. The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made in 
this regard.  
 
Zirakpur-Tribune Road 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.8.14 The Committee is aware that the matter of Zirakpur-Tribune Road is Sub-Judice with the 
Hon’ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in para No. 
5.14.4 in 209th Report on Demand for Grants (2018-19) on the submission made by the Advisor, UT 
Administration of Chandigarh regarding better traffic management in and around Chandigarh and 
improving connectivity to the City. The Committee was given to understand that the UT 
Administration, in coordination with NHAI, is working on a new project from Zirakpur to Tribune 
Chowk road section for better traffic management in and around Chandigarh. The Committee, 
however, recommends that all new project/projects undertaken must be completed expeditiously. 
 
(Para 5.3.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8.15 The project has been approved by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. GOI, vide 
letter dated 11.2.2019 amounting to Rs.183.74 Crore. Accordingly,  the bids for the work were invited 
by Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration. The tender was approved in favour of the 
lowest bidder by the committee constituted for technical / financial evaluation of the bids. 
Subsequently, the letter of acceptance were issued to the L1 agency M/s DRAIPL-DMR Builders (JV) 
amounting to Rs.137.40 Crores. In the meanwhile, a PIL was filed in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana 
High Court regarding cutting of trees. The Hon’ble High Court has granted stay on cutting of trees 
coming in the alignment of the project on 20.11.2019. The operative para of the orders i.e. Para 5 & 6 
are reproduced below: “5. The authorities shall not take any further steps to up-root, re-locate or 

 
 
58 
 
cutting of the trees for implementing the construction of the fly-over at the Tribune Chowk until 
further Orders. The authorities in the meanwhile may undertake the exercise of examining the issue 
after taking suggestions and may place the suggestion reports or conclusions before this Court for the 
purpose of further orders from the court regarding cutting of trees. 
 
4.8.16  Looking the fact that the problem relating to traffic congestion, etc. in Chandigarh is directly 
connected with and relates to the surroundings areas of the States of Punjab & Haryana and both the 
States having their Capital in Chandigarh are duty bound and obliged to collectively resolve the 
same, the Chief Secretaries of the States of Punjab as well as Haryana are directed to depute the 
Secretaries of Urban Development, Surface and Transport, Environment, Finance Departments, etc. 
to sit along-with the authorities of the U.T. Chandigarh for the solution of traffic problems and other 
issues, and, if possible to come up with a solution to protect the trees. The officers so deputed shall sit 
with the Advisor to the Administrator, U.T. Chandigarh, who shall chair the meeting. The Committee 
so constituted may meet at regular intervals to resolve the issue”. 
 
4.8.17 As per the directions of the Hon’ble High Court, a meeting of the officers of various 
departments of Punjab & Haryana Government was held under the Chairmanship of Advisor to the 
Administrator on 20.12.2019. For seeking any objections / any alternative suggestions from General 
Public, a Public hearing was also held on 23.12.2019 under the Chairmanship of Advisor to the 
Administrator. The status report on this issue will be filed before the Hon’ble High Court before the 
next date of hearing. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.8.18 The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made and latest status 
regarding the Zirakpur-Tribune Road project. 
 
 
4.9 Demand No. 51 - Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
 
Tourism 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9.1 The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Administration of the UT of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and recommends to formulate a comprehensive Tourism Policy to 
develop and promote in the UT in a organised way. The Committee further recommends that the 
tourism potential in the UT may also be assessed and adequate funds may be allocated for fast 
infrastructural development like roads, resorts, beaches, etc. that will boost tourism in the UT needs to 
be met. 
(Para 5.4.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.9.2 The UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu has formulated and published a 
comprehensive New Tourism Policy 2019-20 to develop and promote Tourism in the UTs in an 
organized way. 
 
4.9.3 Further, UT Administration has initiated various tourism development project with required 
funding like construction of Beach Shackes in Daman, installation of Toy Trains and Airframe in 
Daman, development of sea front road along  with beautification and landscaping of Devka Beach in 
Daman, Beautification of Ghoghla Beach and Nagoa Beach in Diu, Development of INS Khukri 

 
 
59 
 
Memorial Park in Diu, Construction of Auditorium in Silvassa, Development of Kalakendra in 
Silvassa which will boost the tourism sector in the UT in coming years. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.9.4 The Committee would like to be updated about about the completion status of the 
projects mentioned by the Administration of The UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & 
Diu for development and promotion of Tourism in the UT. 
 
 
 
 
4.10 Demand No. 52 –Ladakh 
 
Administration 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.10.1 The Committee feels that in order to accelerate the pace of development in the newly carved 
UT of Ladakh, a strong and effective administration is required. Therefore, MHA should expedite the 
process of setting up of new administrative institutions and related infrastructures. 
(Para 5.5.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10.2 The UT of Ladakh is making all efforts for setting up of requisite administrative institutions 
and related infrastructures in both the districts.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.10.3 The Committee notes the reply of the UT of Ladakh and recommends setting up of 
requisite administrative institutions and related infrastructures for the newly created UT at the 
earliest to ensure smooth functioning of the administration. The Committee may be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
4.11 Demand No. 53 – Lakshadweep 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.11.1 The Committee takes note of the huge potential of fish production in Lakshadweep. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that a scientific approach for development and modernization of the 
fisheries sector in Lakshadweep may be adopted at all stages from fish catching and its subsequent 
handling to its storage, processing and packaging. The Committee also recommends that better fishing 
equipments and training should be provided to the fishermen and better deep freezing plants, canning 
facilities and fish processing units be established on a priority basis. The Committee observes that 
Lakshadweep has tremendous potential for fish export, especially Massmeen but concrete measures are 
required to harness this potential. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry 
along with the administration of the UT of Lakshadweep must chalk out a detailed strategy, in 
consultation with the Marine Products Export Development Authority, for developing the export 
potential of marine produce of Lakshadweep which would improve the economy of Lakshadweep. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to take up thematter with the Ministry of Finance for 

 
 
60 
 
allocation of a sum of Rs. 12 crore as projected by the UT, for procuring Massmeen at MSP on a 
priority basis. 
(Para 5.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.11.2 As per the recommendation/ observation of the Committee, UT Administration is preparing a 
detailed proposal to tap the huge potential of fish production. On receipt of the proposal of UT 
Administration of Lakshadweep, same will be recommended to Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
funds. 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.11.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to be apprised about the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
 
4.12 Demand No. 55 - Transfers to Jammu & Kashmir 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs along with the J&K 
Government should engage with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Airports Authority of India, to 
facilitate the operation of international flights from Sheikh ul-Alam Airport, Srinagar. The Committee 
also recommends that the infrastructure provided at Srinagar Airport must be improved for the same. 
(Para 5.8.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.2 Sheikh-ul-Alam Airport, Srinagar is already a designated international airport. The UT of 
Jammu and Kashmir is also engaged with Ministry of Civil Aviation to facilitate introduction of 
regular international flights to and from this airport to various international designations including 
those in South East Asia, Middle East, and Europe. Presently, no airline has shown interest in regular 
international air service from Srinagar. 
 
4.12.3 The infrastructure for undertaking international flights from Srinagar Airport is in place. 
However, no regular international flights are operating from there and therefore, necessary 
immigration and custom staff is not posted on permanent basis. The officials of Immigration and 
Customs, work from Srinagar Airport only during Hajj flights. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.12.4 The Committee recommends MHA to take up the matter with the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Administration of UT of J&K and sort out the problems due to which the airlines 
are not interested in operating international flights from Srinagar. The result of such 
consultations may also be intimated to this Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
61 
 
Employment 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.12.5 The Committee notes that there are vacancies of 22078, 54375 and 7552 at Class IV, Non-
Gazetted and Gazetted level, respectively and their recruitment will be done by the Staff Selection 
Board. The Committee recommends expediting the recruitment process and filling the vacancies in a 
time bound manner. The Committee further recommends to reserve seats for the local youth so that 
they can get due share in the Government jobs of the UT. The Committee also recommends the 
administration of the UT of J&K to assess the requirement of manpower after being established as a 
UT and notify it on a priority basis. 
(5.8.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.12.6 In terms of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of State Laws)Order, 2020, 
read with the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of State Laws) Second Order, 2020, 
amendments have been effected, among others, in the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services 
(Decentralisation and Recruitment) Act, 2010. Through these amendments, Domicile has been made 
a basic eligibility for an appointment to any post under the Union Territory of J&K or under a local 
or other authority (other than Cantonment Board) within the UT of J&K. 
 
4.12.7 The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has been asked to assess the requirement of 
manpower and undertake the process of recruitment in an accelerated manner. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.12.8 The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation to fill vacant posts in a 
time bound manner with appropriate reservations for the local youth. The Committee may be 
apprised on the completion of the recruitment process. 
 
 
4.13 Demand No. 56 - Transfers to Puducherry 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.13.1 The Committee takes note of the optimal utilization of funds by the UT of Puducherry in FY 
2019-20. The Committee notes that against the projected demand of Rs. 2810.02 crore in 2020-21 only 
Rs. 1703.02 crore has been granted to the UT. The Committee, therefore, recommends that MHA must 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance, citing the healthy trend of expenditure by the UT, for allocation of 
adequate funds under the projected demand of the Government of Puducherry. The Committee, further 
recommends the MHA to consider the restoration of 90:10 pattern for CSS in the UT of Puducherry as 
it is in the sensitive coastal region and has constituent districts in three States and therefore, needs more 
funds for development and administration of districts and preservation of eco-sensitive zone. 
(Para 5.9.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.13.2 According to the recommendation of the Committee the matter was referred to D/o Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance. D/o Expenditure, MoF vide O.M. NO. 37(3)/PFC-II/ 2020 dated 14.05.2020 has 
intimated that “The matter Funding Pattern of CSS was recommended by Sub Group of Chief Ministers 
and approach by the Cabinet. The approval of the Cabinet was communicated by NITI Aayog vide OM 
No. 0-11013/02/2015-CSS & CMC dated 17.08.2016.” 

 
 
62 
 
 
4.13.3 However, MHA has further taken-up the matter with NITI Aayog vide O.M. dated 15.05.2020. 
The Committee will be informed immediately after decision/comments of NITI Aayog is received. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
4.13.4 The Committee notes the present reply and awaits the final decision/comments as 
promised above. 
 

 
 
63 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
 
Allocation, projections and variations 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.1.3) 
 
Allocation for the Union Territories 
  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.2.3) 
 
Allocation Under Demand-46 (MHA) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent around 96.45% percent of the total 
allocation granted under the combined Capital Head of Demand Nos. 46 and 48 in RE 2019-20 at 
the end of the financial year 2019-20. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised about the 
completion status of the various projects being undertaken by the Delhi Police and the 
construction of Central Armed Police Forces Institute of Medical Sciences (CAPFsIMS). 
 
(Para 1.3.6) 
Allocation under Demand- 49-56 (UTs) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.4.3) 
 
Demand No. 46 - Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
 The Committee notes the measures taken by Ministry to review and monitor the 
expenditures under all the heads of the Demands and  recommends that the Ministry needs to 
obviate the uneven distribution of fund utilization pattern during the fiscal year and achieve near 
uniform utilization pattern throughout the year so that the necessary funds are not surrendered 
at RE stage.  
(Para 1.5.4) 
National Disaster Response Fund 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee further recommends that 
infrastructure and manpower requirements of the NDRF may be reviewed periodically. 
 
(Para 1.6.6) 
Demand No. 48 (CAPFs and Delhi Police) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.7.3) 
Central Armed Police Forces 
 
 The Committee notes the effort made in ensuring mobile connectivity for CAPFs 
personnel posted in far flung/inaccessible areas and recommends Ministry to coordinate with 
DoT regularly and monitor the re-provisioning of DSPTs. 
(Para 1.8.5) 

 
 
64 
 
 The Committee is extremely happy that on the basis of its recommendation the 
Government has granted 'Risk and Hardship Allowances to CAPF' personnel at par with the 
Defence Forces which was also one of the recommendation of the 7th CPC. It will surely motivate 
of CAPF personnel who are posted at difficult terrains. 
(Para 1.8.8) 
 
Intelligence Bureau 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.9.9) 
 
Central Police Organizations 
 
  The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.10.9) 
 
Modernization of Police Forces 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.11.5) 
 
Demand No. 49 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
 
Roads and Bridges 
 
 The Committee notes the Reply. 
(Para 1.12.3) 
Shipping 
 
 The Committee notes the Reply. 
(Para 1.12.6) 
Tourism 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 1.12.12) 
 
Demand No. 53 - Lakshadweep 
 
Tourism 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Administration of Lakshadweep regarding 
promotion of eco-friendly low volume high end tourism in Lakshadweep. 
(Para 1.13.3) 
 
Demand No. 54 - Transfers to Delhi 
 
 The Committee is glad to know that on the basis of its recommendation 'Delhi Disaster 
Response Fund' has been finally created and the Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi has also confirmed about the same vide their letter dated 16th April, 2020. 
(Para 1.14.3) 
 

 
 
65 
 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that no firm commitment has 
been given with regard to visit of the Central Study team within a week's time for assessment of 
damage caused by disaster. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the 
Study Teams should make a preliminary visit to the disaster affected areas within a week of the 
disaster for quick and initial assessment of the damage so that the funds can be released in time 
on the basis of realistic assessment. 
(Para 3.1.4) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs and further recommends 
that the Apada Mitra pilot scheme may be implemented as a pan India scheme and cover all the 
districts of the country, if the result of the pilot scheme is found successful. 
(Para 3.1.9) 
 
 Regarding the Community Awareness Programmes (CAP), School Safety Programmes 
(SSP) and Mock Exercises as a part of Capacity Building programmes the Committee reiterate 
its recommendation that in the pattern of National Cadet Corps (NCC), a Disaster Management 
Training Corps (DMTC) can be initiated in schools and colleges not only to play the role of a 
strong civilian corps to support the Disaster Management Teams but also to disseminate the 
practices in disaster management at the community level. 
(Para 3.1.10) 
  Helicopter Services in (a) North Eastern Region and (b) Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the ministry and further recommends to ensure air 
connectivity of the region throughout the year specially during winter season. 
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates 
 
 The Committee observes that the progress of implementation of package for returnees 
and Rehabilitation of Kashmir Migrants is quite unsatisfactory. The people living in transit 
accomodations are having issues regarding floor space, hygienic food, water supply , sanitation 
and other basic amenities and therefore the Ministry may furnish status report from the nodal 
officers that are looking after the day to day issues of the inhabitants of the camps The 
Committee lso recommends that the team of MHA may  undertake a fresh visit at an earliest 
appropriate time and submit a detailed status report on implementation of various components 
and projects of the rehabilitation package. 
(Para 3.3.4) 
 
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the 
Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) is under progress in six States but observes that 
most of the projects are yet to be tendered or are under retendering process. The delay in 
Commission in of the EWDS in these coastal States is negatively impacting the preparedness do 
deal with cyclonic storms. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
impress on the State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) to finalise the tendering and  

 
 
66 
 
clearances issues in a time bound manner and commence construction work at the earliest. The 
Committee desires to be apprised about the progress made in these projects. 
(Para 3.4.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply that NPR will consist of comprehensive  demographic 
information as well as biometric information and  aadhaar is a separate database but it 
already has biometric information of the individuals. Therefore, the Committee opines that 
already stored Aadhaar metadata of the individuals may be used in creating a family database 
for upcoming Census and updation of NPR to avoid duplicacy of biometric identification and 
wastage of expenditure. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that all the 
States/UTs should be fully convinced on various issues pertaining to the upcoming updation of 
NPR to have a national consensus so that there is absolute clarity and no apprehension among 
remaining people across the country which will help in conducting these exercises in a smooth 
manner. 
(Para 3.4.8) 
Allocation, Projections, Variations and Expenditure Trend 
 
 The Committee notes the fund utilization of the CAPFs in 2019-20 and observes the sub-
optimal utilization of the allocated funds in BE 2020-21 by Assam Rifles (AR), Central Reserve 
Police Force (CRPF) and National Security Guard (NSG). The Committee sincerely feels that the 
there should be full utilization of the allocated funds to the CAPFs, failure of which is leading to 
delay in acquisition of critical capabilities. The Committee therefore, recommends that all the 
CAPFs may share their best practices to improve their operational efficiency and steps needed to 
enhance their absorption capacity and reduce procurement bottlenecks.  
(Para 3.5.4) 
 
Central Armed Police Forces 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of Ministry regarding recruitment rally in Chhattisgarh 
in 2016-17 that is four years ago. The Ministry may furnish the data on recruitments done for 
various posts in CAPFs during the last five years and representation of tribal youths thereon. 
 
(Para 3.6.3) 
 
 The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that the Ministry has not provided its 
comment on the Committee‘s recommendation for setting up of an institutional mechanism 
outside administration of CAPFs to reduce the Court cases related to service condition including 
stagnation and other issues. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 4.3.19 
of the 224th  Report of the DFG (2020-21) of MHA  and urges the Ministry to furnish their views 
on said recommendation. 
(Para 3.6.7) 
National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that budgetary projections 
of Rs. 294.04 was made for BE 2020-21 as NATGRID Solutions are to go live by December, 2020 
and accordingly, all IT equipment of NATSTAR and OSINT and Solution development are 
planned to be undertaken in 2020-21. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to 
expedite the process of procurement of all IT equipments of NATSTAR and OSINT and solution 
development so as to achieve early operationalisation of NATGRID that is a integrated 
intelligence master database for counter-terrorism operations. 
(Para 3.7.5) 

 
 
67 
 
Modernization of Police Forces 
 
 The Committee notes the shortfall of funds for Modernisation of Police Forces Scheme 
and feels that the modernization of Police Forces through the induction of new equipments, 
training and technological up-gradation of capabilities is also equally important. Police Forces 
should be sufficiently equipped to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. Therefore, the 
Committee, recommends that more budget may be requested at RE stage.  Further, a major 
share of the modernization budget is spent on improving the infrastructure of the police forces 
but training State Police Forces in relation to its behavior with public is essential to improve its 
image as modern day police forces. The Committee further recommends that it should be 
mandatory for the State police forces to spend the allocated budget for giving better training to 
all police personnel.  
(Para 3.8.3) 
 
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that all the States have launched their 
Citizens Portal under the CCTNS and 4.85 crore citizens request have been received so far till 
29th February, 2020. The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken/ disposal 
of the requests made under CCTNS. The Committee also notes the reply that online filing of e-
FIR has been launched by three States/ UTs, namely Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan for 
property and vehicle thefts in cases where accused are unknown. The Committee recommends 
that online filing of e-FIR should be expanded to all States/UTS and devise a mechanism to 
register e-FIRs for different category of complaints. 
(Para 3.9.5) 
 
Security Related Expenditure (SRE) and Special Infrastructure Scheme for LWE areas 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Rs. 1687 crore has been released since 
2014-15 under the Security Related Expenditure (SRE) scheme and urge the Ministry to furnish 
data on the utilization of the funds since 2014-15. The Committee also notes the reply regarding 
deployment of CAPFs in LWE areas to provide support to the State police forces till the 
situation comes under control. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the  the 
CAPFs should be deployed to meet the emergency situation/crisis in states and the requests for 
extension of deployment and increase in the quantum must also be examined and linked to the 
development of State police capabilities. 
(Para 3.10.6) 
 
 The Committee notes that the out of 9338 km sanctioned roads under Road Connectivity 
Project for LWE Affected Areas (RCPLWE) only 1796 km length of roads have been 
completed. The Committee would like to know the reasons regarding abysymally slow 
progress in completion of these roads specially with respect to Telangana where 147 km has 
been completed out of 705 km and Chhattisgarh where 319 km has been completed out of 2479 
km. The Committee is of the view that delay in construction of roads in most sensitive LWE 
areas like Telangana and Chhattisgarh is also a reason for slowing down the inclusion and 
development processes of these regions and negatively affecting the capability of CAPFs/ State 
police in tackling the LWE menace. 
(Para 3.10.13) 
 
 
 

 
 
68 
 
Border Infrastructure & Management 
 
 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should establish an inter-State forum 
of all the international border sharing Sates for interaction between the heads of State Level 
Empowered Committees of different States under the guidance of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
so as to allow them to share the best practices for enhancing their absorption capacity and 
optimize utilization of allocated funds. 
(Para 3.11.3) 
 
 
Schemes for Safety of Women 
 
 The Committee notes that the funds have been allocated for Central Victim 
Compensation Fund (CVCF) Scheme for compensating women victims of acid attacks, rape, 
trafficking, etc. The Committee appreciates the necessity and significance of the CVCF Scheme. 
However, the Committee feels that this Scheme could have been funded from sources other than 
Nirbhaya Fund, which was meant for funding dedicated initiatives aimed at enhancing the safety 
and security for women in the country. The Committee feels that sanctioning funds from 
Nirbhaya Fund for schemes pertaining to compensation would render the entire fund as a fund 
for merely disbursal and would not have a desired impact at the ground level in enhancing the 
security scenario for the women. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Ministry should desist from sanctioning funds for such Schemes from Nirbhaya Fund and 
adhere to the original purpose of Nirbhaya Fund.  The Committee further recommends 
establishment of a State- of- the- art DNA Labs at various places  to strengthen forensic 
investigation across the country.  
(Para 3.12.6) 
 
 
Demand No. 49 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends to expedite the finalization of Techno-
Commercial Bid for commissioning of Tsunami Early Warning Siren System in 35 places in A & 
N Islands by BSNL so that its installation can be done to strengthen the resilience and 
prepardeness of the A&N Islands against disasters. 
(Para 3.13.7) 
 
 The Committee also notes the reply of the UT that due to lack of availibility of quarry 
products and unavoidable administrative reasons,  the UT was not able to fully utilize the funds 
allotted under several heads such as Agriculture  and Allied Activities, Rural Development, 
Medical and Public Health, Social Welfare, Roads and Bridges, Shipping, Housing and Urban 
Development The Committee feels that such underutilization of the developmental projects in 
the UT is inexplicable. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that necessary measures 
may be taken to achieve full utilization of funds under various heads. The Committee also 
recommends the MHA to ensure that the fund utilization status of A&N Islands be reviewed on a 
monthly basis and corrective measures are taken in proactive manner.  
(Para 3.13.8) 
 
Connectivity of the UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands with the mainland 
 
 The Committee understands the requirement of air conectivity of the UT of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands with the mainland and recommends the Ministry to cap the flight fares from the 

 
 
69 
 
Island to the mainland to provide affordable air travel to the Islanders especially to the weaker 
sections. The Committee further recommends to increase number of flights based on demand to 
ensure 24X7 connectivity of the island with the mainland. 
(Para 3.13.12) 
Power 
 
 The Committee appreciates the islands plan to achieve De- dieselization from 9% to 93% 
in next 3 years that will also promote the use of Renewable energy Sources (RES) in the islands. 
The Committee also notes ongoing/completed solar, wind and LNG projects to cater the energy 
demand of the island and further recommends the Ministry of Home Affairs Administration of 
the A&N islands may undertake a feasibility study of the other RES like thermal energy, tidal 
energy, floating find farm, etc. to meet the energy needs of the Islands. 
(Para 3.13.17) 
 
Demand No. 51 - Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
 
 The Committee notes that the allocation made in BE 2020-21 for UT of Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu is less than the projection. The Committee believes that shortage of 
funds will arrest the development of the UT. Therefore, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the sector-wise projects proposed/ undertaken for the holistic development of the newly 
merged UT so that correct assessement of requirement of funds can be done and accordingly can 
also be enhanced at RE stage and also in the next fiscal year. 
(Para 3.14.3) 
 
Demand No. 54 - Transfers to Delhi 
 
Water Treatment Plant 
 
 The Committee would like to know the reasons as to why the project was required to be 
revalidated. The Committee emphasize that all operational glitches be removed and expects that 
Water Treatment Plant would be operations at the earliest. 
(Para 3.15.3) 
 
Demand No. 55- Transfers to UT of J&K 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the UT of J&K that they have taken up the matter 
regarding exemption to handloom and handicraft sectors from GST with the GST Council. The 
Committee would like to know about the final decision taken by the GST Council in this matter 
as this is a crucial aspect for promoting the rich handloom and handicraft tradition in the UT of 
Jammu & Kashmir. 
(Para 3.16.3) 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about details of the projects undertaken/ 
proposed for creating necessary social and physical infrastructure for attracting new industries 
and entrepreneurs in Jammu and Kashmir. The Commiitte further reiterates its 
recommendation o f  setting up a Planning Board and investment promotion agency in J&K in a 
stipulated time to formulate investment plans and coordinate with the industries from various 
sectors and countries to increase investment in J&K. The Committee also desires to know about 
the details of investment proposals received for the UT of J&K since its creation. 
  
(Para 3.16.7) 

 
 
70 
 
Employment 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and reiterates its recommendation for 
expediting the assessement and recruitment so as to fill the vacancies in a time bound manner. 
 
(Para 3.16.10) 
Home Guards 
 
 The Committee feels that MHA should continue pursuing remaining thirteen States for 
implementing the Supreme Court's order and implement it in the UTs of Ladakh, J&K and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the division 
concerned of MHA may send a monthly reminder on this issue to the remaining States and 
obtain regular status of action taken in this matter. 
(Para 4.1.4) 
 
Delhi Police 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised about the progress made in the ITMS project in 
Delhi. 
(Para 4.2.3)  
 
Central Police Organizations 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of utilization of funds by 
NCRB for year 2019-20 to assess the pattern of spending by NCRB. 
(Para 4.3.4) 
 
Marine Immigration Posts  
 
 The Committee notes the existing infrastructure at Dhubri, Pandu, Silighat and 
Karimganj Ports of Call. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to co-ordinate with 
the Ministry of Shipping and Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) to ensure timely 
procurement and modernization/ development of necessary infrastructure at Silighat Port of Call 
and initiate the modernization/ upgradation at Pandu and Karimganj Ports of Call on priority 
basis. The Committee would like to be apprised about the completion status of these projects. 
 
(Para 4.4.7) 
Border Infrastructure & Management 
 
 The Committee notes the reply regarding progress made at Rupaidiha, Sutarkandi & 
Sunauli ICPs and further recommends to expedite the land acquisition and preparation of DPRs 
for the remainig ICPs and commence the construction at these sites at the earliest without time 
and cost overrun. 
(Para 4.5.5) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding installation of Tsunami Early 
Warning Siren System and recommends to finalise the tenders at the earliest and update the 
Committee about the progress in the matter. 
(Para 4.5.8) 
 
 

 
 
71 
 
 
Medical and Public Health 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry and desires to be 
apprised about the physical and financial progress achieved with respect the construction of 
Medical College in the UT of A&N Islands along with the timeline for completion. 
(Para 4.6.3) 
 
 
Demand No. 49- UT of A & N Islands  
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the amount to the tune of Rs 150 
crore for Vessel Related Charges and Cargo Related Services payable to PMB, Port Blair are 
outstanding from 1993-1994 due to scarcity of fund and recommends the Ministry to take up 
this matter with Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. Therefore, the Committee considers the above as an 
interim reply. 
(Para 4.7.3) 
 
Demand No. 50-Chandigarh 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised whether the Ministry of Home Affairs was able to 
get sufficient funds allocated from the Ministry of Finance for the Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh. How much amount has been raised may also be intimated to this Committee. 
 
(Para 4.8.3) 
Municipal Corporation 
 
 The Committee considers the present reply as an interim one and desires that it may be 
apprised of the action taken to increase the allocation at RE stage for Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh. 
(Para 4.8.6) 
 
Power 
 
 The Committee considers this as an interim reply and should be informed when the 
Smart Grid Project will be finally implemented. 
(Para 4.8.9) 
Roads and Transport 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the decision of conducting a 
faesibility study of connectivity to International Airport from Purv Marg near Sector 48 side 
through Jagatpura area. The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made in 
this regard.  
(Para 4.8.13) 
 
Zirakpur-Tribune Road 
 
 The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made and latest status 
regarding the Zirakpur-Tribune Road project. 
(Para 4.8.18) 

 
 
72 
 
Demand No. 51 - Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
 
Tourism 
 
 The Committee would like to be updated about about the completion status of the 
projects mentioned by the Administration of The UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & 
Diu for devlopment and promotion of Tourism in the UT. 
(Para 4.9.4) 
 
 
Demand No. 52 –Ladakh 
 
Administration 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the UT of Ladakh and recommends setting up of 
requisite administrative institutions and related infrastructures for the newly created UT at the 
earliest to ensure smooth functioning of the administration. The Committee may be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.10.3) 
 
Demand No. 53 – Lakshadweep 
 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to be apprised about the 
progress made in this regard. 
(Para 4.11.3) 
 
Demand No. 55 - Transfers to Jammu & Kashmir 
 
 The Committee recommends MHA to take up the matter with the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Administration of UT of J&K and sort out the problems due to which the airlines 
are not interested in operating international flights from Srinagar. The result of such 
consultations may also be intimated to this Committee. 
(Para 4.12.4) 
 
Employment 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation to fill vacant posts in a 
time bound manner with appropriate reservations for the local youth. The Committee may be 
apprised on the completion of the recruitment process. 
(Para 4.12.8) 
 
Demand No. 56 - Transfers to Puducherry 
 
 The Committee notes the present reply and awaits the final decision/comments as 
promised above. 
(Para 4.13.4) 
 
 
***** 

 
 
73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES

 
 
74 
 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 11th September, 2020 in Room No. G-074, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Anand Sharma   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
3. Dr. Anil Jain 
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
8. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
9. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar 
10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
13. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the 
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following four draft Reports of the Committee:- 
(i) 226 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
 
(ii) xxx   xxx    xxx; 
 
(iii) xxx   xxx    xxx; and 
 
(iv)   xxx    xxx    xxx. 

 
 
75 
 
 
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that the Committee has presented/laid six Reports in 
the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha during its tenure and thanked all the Members for cooperation, support and 
participation. 
4. The Chairman further informed the Committee that the last two meetings of the Committee 
held on 19th August, 2020 for 4 hours 12 minutes and 27th August, 2020 for 4 hours 45 minutes have 
set records as no Standing Committee has met for such a long time without a break. He also 
appreciated the work done by the officials in the Secretariat as they have worked for long hours to 
prepare the Reports despite the constraints. 
5. The Committee took up the draft 226th Report for consideration and adoption and adopted it 
without any change.  
6.  xxx   xxx    xxx.  
7. xxx   xxx    xxx.  
8.  xxx   xxx    xxx.   
9. xxx   xxx    xxx.   
10. xxx   xxx    xxx. 
11. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept. 
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12:40 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx  Relates to other matters. 