P
ARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
R
ajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
249 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(P
RESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2023) 

Hindi version of this publication is also available         
P
ARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT 
ACT
ION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT  
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(P
RESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2023) 
R
ajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii) 
3. ACRONYM (iv)-(vi) 
4. REPORT     1-52
Chapter   -   I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
2-20
Chapter   -   II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s reply 
21-48
Chapter   -   III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
49-50
Chapter   -   IV 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government have not been received 
51-52
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
53 
7. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE
6. ANNEXURE 58-61
54-57

i 
DE
PARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(
re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
1.
Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. S
hri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Digvijaya Singh
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
L
OK SABHA
11. S
hri Sanjay Bhatia
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Dr. Nishikant Dubey
†
15. S
hri Dilip Ghosh
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi
26. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
27. Shri Ravneet Singh
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
31. Vacant
† Dr. Nishikant Dubey , MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 5 th October, 2023 in place of Shrimati Kirron Kher, MP, Lok 
Sabha. 

ii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Manoj H M, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Forty Ninth  Report on Action Taken by Government on t he 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Second Report on Demands for 
Grants (2023-2024) of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
2. The Two Hundred Forty Second Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17 th March, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023. After presentation of the Report, the copies thereof 
were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs on 20 th March, 2023 requesting them to furnish Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs furnished the Action Taken Notes on 30 st August, 2023 on the above mentioned Two 
Hundred Forty Second Report to the Committee.   
3. The Committee has noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Cha irman, Rajya Sabha dated                              
24th September 2004.     
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Two Hundred Forty Ninth Report and adopted the same 
at its meeting held on 05th December, 2023. 
 
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters. 
 
 
 
 
 
05th December, 2023 
New Delhi 
14 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                                                                  
Brij Lal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
ACRONYMS  
 
AB-PMJAY Ayushman Bharat-Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana  
A&NI Andaman and Nicobar Island 
AAI Airport Authority of India 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education  
AMS Aapda Mitra Scheme 
ANOs Associate NCC officers 
AR Assam Rifles 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BADP Border Area Development Programme  
BDCs Block Development Councils  
BE Budget Estimate  
BM Border Management 
BOI Bureau of Immigration  
BoPs Border out Posts  
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research and Development  
BSF Border Security Force 
BTC Border Trade Centre 
CAP Common Alerting Protocol 
CAPFs Central Armed Police Forces 
CBMIS Centre for Border Management and Intelligence Studies  
CCPWC Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children  
CCS Cabinet Committee on Security  
CCTNS Cyber Crime Tracking Network System 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CFSL Central Forensic Science Lab  
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CIC Coordination & International Co-operation 
CIS Cyber and Information Security Division 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CMAP Crime Mapping Analytics and Productive System 
CMP Comprehensive Mobility Plan 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
COBRA Commando Battalion for Resolute Action  
CPOs Central Police Organisations 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRMI Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure  
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force  
CS Centre-State 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
CTCR Counter-Terrorism and Counter Radicalization  

v 
 
DANIPS Delhi, Andaman & Nicobar Islands Police Service  
DDA Delhi Development Authority  
DFG Demands for Grants 
DFSS Directorate of Forensic Science Services  
DM Disaster Management 
DOE Department of Expenditure 
DOL Department of Official Language 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EERR  Emergency Essential Resource Reserve 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
EOI Entry Into India 
ERK  Emergency Responder Kit 
ERSS Emergency Response Support System  
EWDS Early Warning Dissemination System 
FD Fixed Deposit  
FFR Freedom Fighters and Rehabilitation 
GIS Geographical Information System  
GLOFs Glacial lake Outbursts Flows  
GNCTD Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
HBA House Building Assistance  
I4C Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
IAF Indian Air Force 
IAW Internal Audit Wing 
ICJS Inter-operable Criminal Justice System  
IMD Indian Meteorological Department 
ITBP Indo Tibetan Border Police 
IVFRT Immigration, Visa and Foreigners Registration & Tracking  
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JNVs Jawahar Navodaya Vidhayalyas 
LAHDCs Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development councils  
LEAs Law Enforcement Agencies  
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
MCD Municipal Corporation of Delhi  
MCTP Mid-Career Training Programme  
MFVs Mobile Forensic Vans 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoE&CC Ministry of Environment Forest & Climate Change 
MoES Ministry of Earth Science 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
MOPF Modernization of Police Forces 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports Shipping & Waterways  

vi 
 
MoPSW Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
MPCS Multi Purpose Cyclone Shelter  
MRTS Mass Rapid Transport System 
NATGRID National Intelligence Grid 
NCB Narcotics Control Bureau 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau  
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project 
NCS National Center for Seismology  
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NDPS Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
NER North Eastern Region 
NFDB National Fisheries Development Board  
NFSU National Forensic Science University  
NIA National Investigation Agency 
NSG National Security Guard 
NSP National Scholarship Portal  
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. 
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendran Sangthan 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PMDP Prime Minister’s Development Package 
POL Petroleum Oil Lubricant  
PSOs Personal Security Officers 
RAF Rapid Action Force  
RE Revised Estimates  
RRU Rashtriya Raksha University 
SAPs State Action Plans  
SDRF State Disaster Relief Force  
SEA South East Asia  
SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India  
SEWA Self Employed Women’s Association 
SKUAST Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology 
SMFC Scheme for Modernization of Forensic Capacities 
SNA State Nodal Account 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SRE Security Related Expenditure  
SSB Sashastra Seema Bal 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UT Union Territory 
VVP Vibrant Villages Programme 
WPR West Pakistan Refugees  
ZIPNET Zonal Integrated Police Network  

 
1 
 
Report  
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Forty -Second Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on the 'Demands for 
Grants (2023-2024) of Ministry of Home Affairs. The said Report of the Committee was presented 
to Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) received from the Ministry of  Home Affairs in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Forty -Second Report have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I: The observations/recommendations, which have been accepted by the Government:  
Paras Nos: 2.5.3, 2.6.8, 3.2.5, 3.3.9, 3.3.10, 3.3.11, 3.3.12, 3.4.8, 3.4.9, 3.5.8, 4.5.4, 4.5.5, 4.5.6, 
4.6.6, 4.7.2, 4.8.2, 4.8.3, 4.9.5, 4.9.6, 4.12.2, 4.13.7, 4.13.8, 4.13.13, 4.13.15, 4.13.17, 4.13.19, 
4.14.9, 4.14.10, 4.20.7, 4.21.5, 4.22.4, 5.3.6, 5.7.9, and 5.9.6, (of the Two Hundred and Forty -
Second Report) Total recommendations- 34.   
 
Chapter II: The observations/recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: - Paras Nos.: 2.5.4, 3.3.13, 3.4.10, 3.4.11, 3.4.12, 
3.5.7, 3.5.9, 4.3.3, 4.4.3, 4.10.4, 4.11.2, 4.13.5, 4.15.2, 4.16.6, 4.17.3, 4.17.4, 4.17.5, 4.18.5, 4.18.6, 
4.19.4, 4.21.4, 4.22.5, 5.2.6, 5.2.7, 5.2.8, 5.2.9, 5.3.7, 5.4.5, 5.4.6, 5.4.7, 5.5.4, 5.5.5, 5.5.7, 5.5.8, 
5.5.10, 5.5.12, 5.6.6, 5.6.7, 5.7.8, 5.8.4, 5.8.8, 5.8.10, and 5.8.11, (ibid) Total recommendations- 
43.   
 
Chapter III: The observations/recommendations in respect of which the Committee is not 
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Paras Nos .: 4.14.14, and 4.16.5, (ibid)  Total 
recommendations- 2. 
  
Chapter-IV: The observations/recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government have not been received:  Para Nos.: 2.6.7, and 4.14.11, ( ibid) Total 
recommendations- 2. 
  
3. The para-wise details of the ATNs are being discussed, as per the categorisation indicated 
above, in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

 
2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
1.1 Head-wise Projections and allocations at BE 2023-24 for Demand No. 51 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.1.1 The Committee finds, from the above -mentioned information, that allocations under several 
heads of Demand No. 51 have been less than the projected figures. Noticeable among them are some 
important heads such as the allocations made for Central Police Reser ve Police Force, Indo-Tibetan 
Border Police, Assam Rifles and Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), Modernization Plan IV, Delhi Police, 
Police Infrastructure and Border Area Development Programme (BADP). The Committee observes 
that such decrease in allocations are l ikely to affect many important schemes under these heads, and 
may inter-alia, slow down the modernization programmes of Central Armed Police Forces and Delhi 
Police. Similarly lower allocations against the projections of the year 2023- 24 may affect the 
execution of developmental projects particularly in border areas. Hence, the Committee, 
recommends, that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Finance to increase the allocations 
under these heads in consonance with their projections so that the developmental schemes under 
these heads do not get hampered due to want of sufficient funds.  
 
(Para 2.5.3 of 242nd Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  The matter will be taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance at RE 2023-24 stage if the additional funds will be required. 
1.2 Budgetary Allocation (2023-24) of Demand No. (52-59) for Union Territories 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes that the fund utilization in the UT of Ladakh is improving. But it is 
still below 50% (as per figures provided by the MHA till 31.01.2023). The Committee appreciates 
the efforts of the Ministry and the UT administration for improvement in fund utilization in Ladakh 
and recommends that the MHA may try to optimize utilization of funds in Ladakh in the next 
financial year. The Ministry of Home Affairs, being the controlling Ministry, may ensure timely 
release of funds to coincide with the working season of the UT of Ladakh. 
 
(Para 2.6.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 The utilization of funds has improved substantially in the financial year 2022- 23 as 
compared to the financial year 2021- 22. Expenditure of ₹4179.66 crores (70.15%) was incurred in 
the financial year 2022-23 out of the BE of ₹5958 crores as compared to ₹3795.78 crores (63.71%) 
in the  financial year 2021- 22. The recommendation and suggestion of the committee have been 
noted and the capacity of the UT to utilize the funds will be further improved. 
 
1.3 Demand No. 49 on Official Language 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.3.1 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department of Official Language (DOL) for the 
promotion of Hindi language in the country. The Committee opines that the documents introduced 
in Parliament like Bills, all Central Acts, Ordinances, Subordinate Legislations etc. as well as the 
judgments of the courts should be translated in Hindi. The Department of Official Language should 
take up with the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice for translation of these 
documents. Easy and simple words could be used so that common man can easily understand and 
interpret it. Efforts should also be made for the timely preparation and publication of standard Legal 
Glossary and availability of it in Hindi and other Eighth Schedule Languages as well. The 
Committee hopes that with the enhanced allocation this year under this head, the schemes planned 
by the MHA are implemented and the funds are properly utilized. 
 (Para 3.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 Hindi terms and expressions used in Hindi text of Central Bills, Acts, Ordinances, 
Subordinate Legislations and Legal Glossary etc. prepared by Official Languages Wing.  
Legislative Department were determined and approved by the various experts of the erstwhile 
Official Language (Legislative) Commission.  The C ommission consisted of eminent legal and 
linguistic experts of India and the Hindi text of the most of the important Acts was finalized by them.  
However, an attempt is made to use such terms and expressions by which language can be 
simplified further and the legal language is comprehensible to the general public.  The process of 
law making is a continuous process, wherein attempts are made to incorporate legal and technical 
terms and expressions which the general public can easily understand. 
 
1.3.3 Hindi texts of some important judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts are being 
published by the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan of the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice.  As per the latest information, the issues of UchchtamNyayalaya Nirnay Patrika upto 
February 2022, UchchNyayalaya Civil Nirnay Patrika upto April 2021 and UchchNyayalayaDandik 
Nirnay Patrika, upto July 2021 have been uploaded on the website of the Legislative Department 
and are available for the readers. 
 
1.3.4 Apart from this, Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan, on the request of Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
January 2023 has made available to the Supreme Court the Hindi texts of judgements published in 
the UchchtamNyayalaya Nirnay Patrika from 1968 till date. This includes about ten thousand 
judgements translated into Hindi.  The Supreme Court has uploaded these judgements on their 
ESCR portal http://main.scci.gov.in/e-SCR for public viewing. 
 
1.3.5 Standard Law books including dictionaries are also published by Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan 
of the Legislative Department.  These books are written by eminent authors of law and vetted by 
Editors.  As per the latest information, a total of 34 books have been published by the Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashan in its authority. 
 
1.4 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.1 The MHA has informed the Committee that the NDRF has been allocated ₹ 1601.02 crores 
against the projected amount of ₹ 1704.98 crores. The Committee notes that aga inst the projected 
demand and the allocation in BE 2023- 24, there is a shortfall to the tune of ₹  100 crores. The 
Committee hopes that this shortfall will not affect the process of raising of new battalions of the 
NDRF. The Committee urges the MHA to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and seek 

 
4 
 
this amount at RE stage so that the requirement of additional personnel in NDRF can be fulfilled on 
time to meet the nations demand during exigency. 
 
 (Para 3.3.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 NDRF has been allocated an amount of Rs.1706.04 crore in Budge t Estimates 2023- 24. In 
case, additional funds are required by NDRF, the same will be projected at RE stage 2023-24. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.3 The Committee notes that 1 lakh volunteers will be trained by NDRF under Aapda Mitra 
Scheme for 350 disaster prone District in the country which will be 285 volunteers per district on an 
average. However, the MHA has not given any timelines by which the Ministry proposes to train 
and raise these volunteers. It also notes that the information regarding the ratio of the volunteers to 
the populations that they are going to cover has also not been provided. The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the details of the plan in this regard. 
(Para 3.3.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.4 Aapda Mitra Scheme is being i mplemented by National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) at a total cost of Rs.369.41 Crore in 350 highly vulnerable districts in order to train 
100000 community volunteers by March -2024 which is being funded from Preparedness and 
Capacity Building Funding Window of National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF). All trained 
volunteers will be provided an Emergency Responder Kit (ERK) including an insurance covering 
death/permanent disablement/hospitalization. In all 350 Districts, a list of equipment under 
Emergency Essential Resource Reserve (EERR) will be reserved.  
 
1.4.5     86,113 volunteers have been trained till 30.06.2023. The targets of the scheme will be 
achieved by 31.03.2024. State/UT wise number of volunteers was decided based on the population 
of the concerned district, as per the criteria mentioned below: 
 
S.  No. Population Number of Volunteers selected 
1. Above 30 Lakhs 500 
2. Between 10-30 Lakhs 300 
3. Between 5-10 Lakhs 200 
4. Less than 5 Lakhs 100 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.6 The Committee notes that the intensity, magnitude and frequencies of natural calamities have 
increased over the past few years in the changing weather and ecological scenario across the globe. 
The Committee understands the role and responsibilities of NDRF has  also increased manifold in 
providing immediate and timely intervention and relief to the victims in post- calamity scenario. 
Therefore, there is a need to further bring down the disaster resilience at community level which can 
be done by grooming volunteers under the Aapda Mitra Scheme to train and raise awareness among 
people for speedy dissemination of alerts and mobilization of the people during evacuation 
operations at the time of disasters. The Committee also recommends that the Civil Defence 
Volunteers in States/ UTs may also be trained by the NDRF on the lines of Aapda Mitra Scheme to 
further increase the number of trained people at local level for rescue and rehabilitation activities at 
the time of disasters. 

 
5 
 
 
(Para 3.3.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.7 NDRF already conducts School Safety Program, Community Awareness Program, Mock 
Exercises etc for the capacity building of community volunteers. Apart from this, NDRF also 
conducts 01-day sensitization training through lecture cum demonstration, exhibition e tc from time 
to time for awareness of community. 
 
1.4.8 NDRF conducts exclusive disaster management training for Civil Defence, Associate NCC 
officers (ANOs)/NCC, State Disaster Response Force, other Central State organizations CAPFs.  
 
1.4.9 NDRF also conducts capacity building training for Nehru Yuva Kendran Sangthan (NYKS), 
Jawahar Navodaya Vidhayalya (JNVs) etc with focus to traine local volunteers as First Responders. 
The details of capacity building Program conducted by NDRF in the Financial Year 2022- 23 is 
mentioned below: 
 
Nomenclature Number of 
Events Beneficiaries 
DM Training    
State Disaster Response Force(SDRF) -- 1325 
Civil Defence (CD) -- 622 
Aapda Mitra -- 20290 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan(NYKS) -- 3970 
Jawahar NavadayaVidhyalya(JNVs) -- 37315 
NCC -- 12867 
Capacity Building Program (CBP)   
Community Awareness Program (CAP) 1493 2,66,222 
School Safety Program (SSP) 1420 4,87,800 
Mock Exercises (MExs) 587 1,25,670 
Akhil Bhartiya TerapanthYuvak Parishad 
(ABTYP) 
-- 119 
 
1.4.10 NDMA is also working with NSS, NYKS, and Bharat Scout & Guides to initiate formulation 
of a proposal which would aim to train their volunteers on the line of Aapda Mitra Scheme. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.4.11 The Committee notes the low representation of w omen in NDRF and recommends that the 
NDMA may chalk out a plan to increase the representation of women in NDRF in a phased manner. 
This will add to the strength and skills of the NDRF in rescuing and handling of women, children, 
and old people during disasters. 
 
(Para 3.3.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.12 All CAPFs have been requested to send nomination of 108 Mahila personnel for each NDRF 
Unit within the authorization of Constables (General Duty) in NDRF for rescue and relief 
operations for women victims. Details of Mahila personnel posted in NDRF Units is furnished as 
under: 
 

 
6 
 
Unit CAPFs Total posted 
1st Bn NDRF 
BSF 
16 
2nd Bn NDRF 15 
9th Bn NDRF 18 
16th Bn NDRF 02 
7th Bn NDRF 
ITBP 
38 
8th Bn NDRF 53 
14th Bn NDRF 01 
15th Bn NDRF 0 
11th Bn NDRF SSB 32 
12th Bn NDRF 07 
13th Bn NDRF Assam Rifle 16 
5th Bn NDRF 
CRPF 
14 
6th Bn NDRF 8 
10th Bn NDRF 12 
3rd Bn NDRF CISF 7 
4th Bn NDRF 0 
Total  239 
 
1.4.13 Total 239 Mahila personnel have joined NDRF so far. CAPFs are being requested 
continuously to nominate Mahila contingents for deputation to NDRF and this will be closely 
followed up at the Ministry level. 
 
1.5 Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.1 The Committee notes from the information provided by the Ministry that while expenditures 
of allocated funds in the FYs 2020- 21 and 2021- 22 were good. However, during FY 2022- 23, till 
31st December, 2022, an expenditure of ₹ 182.08 crores against the alloca tion of ₹ 383.42 crores at 
RE stage, could be made. The Committee hopes that the MHA may take necessary ste ps to improve 
optimal utilization of funds allocated for the relief and rehabilitation of the migrants and repatriates.  
 
(Para 3.4.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 As regards the North East Region, the rehabilitation of Bru Migrants in Tripura is a sub-
scheme under the umbrella scheme of ‘Relief and rehabilitation of migrants and repatriates. In the 
financial year 2022- 23, Rs. 130 crore was allocated for ex penditure under Bru Agreement. 
Subsequently, on receipt of demand from State Government for more funds, additional amount of Rs. 
28.74 crore was allocated.  A total of Rs. 158.74 crore allocated during the financial year 2022- 23 
has been released to State Govt. of Tripura by 31.03.2023 for meeting expenses under Bru 
Agreement.  
 
1.5.3 The releases of funds are made as soon as utilization certificates are received for past 
releases along with proposal from State Government for release of money.  The same is released by 
the Ministry expeditiously and constant follow up with the State Government is undertaken. 
 
1.5.4 For the other regions too, 100% funds have been released in the financial year 2022- 23 for 
schemes as detailed below: 

 
7 
 
                                                                          (Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme/ 
Head 
BE 
2022-23 
RE 
2022-23 
Exp 
2022-23 
1 Dalai Lama Central             Tibetan Relief 
Committee 
8 - 8 
2 Repatriates from Sri Lanka  50 80 80 
 
1.5.5 Regarding, Jammu & Kashmir, as per SRE Guidelines, SRE (Relief &Rehabilitation) scheme 
is a reimbursement -based scheme in which 60% of the claim amount is reimbursed based on 
certification of the officer of not below rank of Additional Secretary of Govt. of UT of J&K  and 
remaining 40% is reimbursed based on Audit (IAW), MHA.  Therefore, fund is released based on 
availability of fund and claims received from the UT of J&K. During 2022- 23, Rs. 719.73 crore 
were released under SRE (Relief and Rehabilitation). 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.5.6 The Committee notes that there has been a delay in the release of funds under, Land 
Boundary Agreement between India & Bangladesh‟ due to pending utilization certificate by the 
State of West Bengal. Now a release of ₹  15 crores to the State Govt. of West B engal is approved 
but the State is yet to open State Nodal Account (SNA) for the release of the funds . The Committee 
recommends that the MHA may take up with the State of West Bengal to open SNA at the earliest 
so that the funds are released to the State. 
 
(Para 3.4.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.7 It is stated that this Ministry took up the matter vigorously with the State Govt. of West 
Bengal to provide UCs and opening of SNA account. The fund amounting to ₹108 crores has been 
released to the State Government in financial year 2022-23. 
 
1.6 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 With regard to the implementation of works on Early Warning Dissemination System 
(EWDS) and Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (CRMI) for Goa and Karnataka, the Committee 
notes that the progress of work in these States are extremely slow. The MHA has also not given 
details regarding the projected tasks to be covered during the dedicated time frames and the 
achievements made by these States. The picture, hence, in this regard is not clear. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommends that the MHA may take up the matter with the States under Phase II of 
NCRMP and remove the bottlenecks to speed up the creation of i nfrastructures under EWDS and 
CRMI, so that the projects get completed within the stipulated time. The Committee would like to 
be apprised about the status of implementation of the project in Maharashtra and West Bengal. 
  
(Para 3.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.2 The current status of the physical progress of the works taken up in NCRMP -II in the States 
is enclosed as Annexure - A. It may be seen that 100 % progress has been achieved in most of the 
activities, except mostly for EWDS component. There was slow pr ogress in EWDS due to the 
technical complexities and poor capacity of few contractors. Further, there was delay on account of 
certain permissions needed from Department of Telecommunication. The matter of slow progress 

 
8 
 
had been reviewed extensively with th e States and the design of EWDS was simplified in view of the 
latest advancements which facilitated speedier execution. Even for the remaining incomplete 
activities as on date, it can be seen that substantial progress has been achieved and over 97% of 
works were completed by June 2023, with States also incurring expenditure out of their own 
resources.  
 
1.6.3 The EWDS for the States of Maharashtra, West Bengal and Gujarat was not taken up under 
NCRMP II and this is being proposed in the next phase of NCRMP. 
 
1.7 Attrition of CAPF Personnel 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.7.1 The Committee takes note of the suicide and attrition in Central Armed Police Forces 
(CAPFs) during the past 5 years. From the information provided in the table pertaining to the 
‘attrition due to other reasons', the Committee notes that the attrition rates have arisen significantly 
in the case of Assam Rifles and Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), remained similar in case of 
Border Security Force (BSF) and Central Reserve P olice Force (CRPF) and Indo -Tibetan Border 
Police (ITBP) while reduced in case of Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) during 2022, over the previous 
year's figures. The Committee is of the view that such a level of attrition may affect the working 
conditions in the CAPFs. Therefore, urgent measures may be taken to improve the working 
conditions significantly to motivate the personnel to stay in the force. 
 
(Para 4.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 The following steps have been adopted in CAPFs for stress management counselling of 
personnel to improve the working conditions significantly to motivate the personnel: 
 Organizing Chopal system to reduce the stress of Jawans. 
 Strengthening/Revamping of Grievance Redressal system. 
 Regular physical activities, Team Games, Yoga, Cultural programs, Celebration of various 
festivals. 
 Courses on stress management, personality development, psychiatric disorders and topics on 
suicides are being discussed compulsorily. 
 A Grievance Management System has been introduced. A dedicated Mobile/Smart phone with 
internet facility installed in c/room for all personnel to lodge their grievances in the form of 
Voice call/SMS and WhatsApp message which is being effectively monitored by Nodal officers & 
HOO at Unit/office level, Range, Sector Zone &Dte through reports. In this regard, a monthly 
random survey about awareness of this system is being conducted. 
 24x7 toll free number (CRPF -18005990019 of DoEPWD has been circulated at force level so 
that the Force personnel could approach the psychologist for counselling. 
 Providing a respectable infrastructure to CAPFs personnel. 
 Better road connectivity upto the CAPFs posts. 
 Better mobile/internet connectivity has been provided in CRPF camp for utilization of Jawans 
for entertainment as well as for speeding of office work. 
 Facilities of Chopper and Air courier has been provided to CAPFs for utilization of Jawans 
deployed in interior areas. 
 6 Field Hospitals have been raised in Chhattisgarh for providing better medical facilities to 
Jawans. MHA has accorded sanction of Rs.12.06 crore for their up- gradation and developing of 
infrastructure. 
 Field Surgical Units (FSUs) have been raised by conducting training programmes in AIIMS 
Delhi and AIIMS Raipur,  

 
9 
 
 Better equipment for night surveillance has been provided to the CAPFs troops. 
 Camps have been fortified with advanced defence mechanism and system in sensitive areas of 
J&K and LWE areas. 
 Courses on handling of IED have been imparted  
 More Bullet Proof vehicle is being provided to units in J&K and LWE areas. 
 Buddy pair practice is being adopted during operation for 360º security. 
 Every personnel is interviewed by the respective company commanders as well as by the 
Commandant prior to proceeding on leave/temporary duty and post re-joining also. This process 
provides another platform for the personnel to project any issues being faced by them. 
 All Headquarter locations have family accommodations and therefore, individuals have been 
provided with an opportunity to stay with their family for at least 100 days. In unit location at 
field areas, 60 days Earned Leave and 15 days Casual Leave is authorized. In addition, journey 
period (on average 10- 12 days) suffix, inter -fix and prefix is also being availed by the troops. 
There by ensuring 100 days with the families. 
 
1.7.3 Frequent Sainik Sammelans held by commanders at all levels also provide a platform in 
which Jawans are free to present their problems. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.7.4 The Committee also recommends that the CAPFs may follow a rotation policy of 
deployment so that the jawans do not stay in tough and inhospitable conditions for longer durations 
at a stretch. The Committee is of the view that this could help in reducing not only the tendency to 
seek transfers to preferred locations but also help in addressing attrition to a certain extent. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should conduct exit interviews or surveys among 
the personnel opting for voluntary retirement and resignation to assess the factors leading to attrition 
and undertake appropriate measures to address the concerns of the personnel so that attrition in the 
Force can be curbed. 
 
(Para 4.5.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.5 A rotation policy for transfer of officers/jawans from one place to another already exists in 
CAPFs & AR. The personnel are accordingly rotated after completion of their tenure prescribed in 
the transfer policy from Hard/field areas to soft/static posting. Further, for redressal of posting 
related grievances, an objective and transparent grievance redressal m echanism/software exists in 
CAPFs, requests are considered as per merit, vacancies, and the gravity of grievances.  
 
1.7.6 All personnel proceeding on superannuation and voluntary retirement are interviewed and 
feedback of the same is documented and utilized to improve Human Resources Management. 
 
1.8 Housing satisfaction level of CAPFs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.8.1 The Committee notes that the Government has withdrawn the facility of retaining 
Government accommodations in Delhi or any other cities for the officers of All India Services (AIS) 
posted in the North Eastern States. The Committee is given to understand that in most of the cases, 
the families of the officers posted in North Eastern States are staying in other cities due to various 
reasons, but after the withdrawal of this facility, now they have to vacate these accommodations at 
the last place of posting after being posted to North Eastern States. The Committee recommends that 
the MHA may take up the matter with the Directorate of Estates, Min istry of Housing and Urban 

 
10 
 
Affairs to reconsider its decision of withdrawal of accommodation and may extend the facility to the 
CAPFs for some more time. 
 
(Para 4.6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 The matter for reconsideration of the decision of withdrawal of  accommodation and for 
extending the facility of retaining Government accommodations in Delhi or any other cities for the 
officers of All India Services (AIS) posted in the North Eastern States for some more time has been 
taken up with MoHUA. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.8.3 The Committee notes that the housing requirement of the CAPFs has been a sticky issue. 
While discussing the issue during the course of the meeting, it is observed that due to location 
disadvantage owing to their distance from adequate  urban amenities such as educational institutions 
medical facilities, etc., the personnel are unwilling to accept the accommodations offered to them 
which are located in semi -urban or far -flung from urban areas. Further, not everyone is requiring 
accommodations as families of many CAPF personnel prefer to stay in one place for pursuing the 
education of their children whereas the personnel are on the active move from one place to another 
on transfers. Keeping all this in view, the Committee recommends that the MHA should draw a 
roadmap in consultation with the M/o Housing and Urban Affairs/CAPFs, etc. for locating 
construction of dwelling units at a place having urban amenities such as educational institutions and 
medical personnel facilities so that the families of the CAPFs personnel do not face difficulties in 
accessing them when they are performing duties away from home. Also, if their quarters are located 
not far from their place of posting, they can visit the families frequently. The Committee, also, 
recommends that the MHA in coordination with CAPFs should initiate a target- oriented drive for 
improving the housing satisfaction level to 70- 80% in coming years. The CAPFs may use rapid 
construction technologies to achieve the targets for the construction of houses. 
 
(Para 4.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.4 The following steps have been taken: 
 Family quarters have been constructed according to authorization norms available with 
Unit/GC/Institution. However, preferences are given for construction of dwelling units at 
popular locations/urban areas.  
 Also, Separated Family Accommodations (SFAs) are  being constructed/proposed to be 
constructed in the Metro cities/urban areas where all the facilities like medical and education 
are available.   
 Accordingly, future planning for construction of dwelling units in the 15th Financial 
Commission (FC) Cycle i s being made at the various locations where all urban amenities are 
available. 
 Suitable measures are being taken for usage of rapid construction technologies to achieve the 
targets for construction of houses. 
 Presently, the housing satisfaction level is 48%.  A total of 28,546 numbers of dwelling units for 
CAPFs are proposed to be constructed / completed during the 15th Financial Commission (FC) 
cycle. After completion of construction of above dwelling units in CAPFs, the housing 
satisfaction level will increase from 48% to 60% during 15th FC.  
 Further, delegation of financial powers to DsG/Director of the CAPFs, AR, NSG, IB & NIA for 
execution of Major Works from Rs. 15.00 crore to Rs. 20.00 crore and Minor Works from Rs. 
1.00 crore to Rs. 2.00 crore has been enhanced to timely sanction of works. 

 
11 
 
 
1.9 Transit Accommodation for CAPF Personnel 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.9.1 The Committee notes that the CAPF personnel who are airlifted to their place of deployment 
do not get adequate facilities of stay and other basic amenities during their transit at the airports 
which causes lots of inconvenience and discomfort to CAPF personnel. The Committee, hence, 
recommends that the MHA may take up this matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to identify 
and arrange transit accommodations with basic amenities for jawans in airports that are being 
frequently used to deploy them.  
 
(Para 4.7.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
1.10 Airport Security 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.10.1 The Committee notes that passenger footfall in airports has increased over the years. During 
security check-in, the passengers are required to take out laptops, tabs and other electronic devices 
from their baggage which causes inconvenience and wastage of time. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may take up the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation for installing 
scanners based on Computed Tomography in the airports which will eliminate the need for air 
passengers to take out electronic items from their hand baggage. This will speed up the security 
procedure and help in hassle -free check -in of the passengers at the airports. The Committee also 
recommends that this facility may be extended to all metropolitan city airports.  
(Para 4.8.2 ibid) 
 
1.10.2 The Committee also notes that there is a delay in the supply of equipments to CISF by the 
airport operators. This may hamper the functioning of CISF in the airports. The Committee is of the 
view that the MHA along with CISF may take up the matter with the concerned authorities to ensure 
that the equipment are provided to CISFs as early as possible in airports for smooth and fast -paced 
security checks. 
(Para 4.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.10.3 The Ministry of Civil Aviation has been requested vide O M dated 12.04.2023 to take 
necessary action as per recommendations of the DRPSC. 
 
1.10.4  It is also informed that: 
 
 A Committee under the Chairmanship of DDG/Tech, BCAS was constituted to finalize the 
technical specifications and testing protocol of CT sc anner/CTX machine and CISF was also a 
member of the said committee. 
 On 29.03.2023, BCAS has already issued minimum standards/specifications w.r.t CT (Computed 
Tomography) S-Ray for Pre-embarkation security check point. 
 BCAS has also proposed timelines for implementation of CT (Computed Tomography) 
Technology at the airports. 
 From the design stage itself for all upcoming non-RCS Greenfield airports in India. 

 
12 
 
 All X-Ray machines currently installed at Pre -embarkation Security Check points (PESCs) for 
screening of cabin baggage at airports where passenger movement is more than five (05) million 
per annum shall be replaced with CT (Computed tomography) S-Ray by 31.12.2023. 
 The following trial runs of CTS machines were conducted at Delhi and Mumbai Airports: 
 
Airport Time Period CTX Machines 
Delhi 24.01.2020 to 07.02.2020 Detect 1000 CT Checkpoint 
Mumbai 16.04.2022 to 30.04.2022 CTIX (Smiths Detection) 
 
1.10.5 Presently the trial of CTX machine (CT Machine 6040 CTIS) is under progress at Terminal -
2 of Delhi Airport w.e.f. 08.02.2023. 
 
1.11 Modernization Plan IV of CAPFs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.11.1 The Committee notes that under Modernization Plan IV of CAPFs, the sanctioned outlay is 
₹1523.16 crores. Out of this, ₹ 248.30 crores was sanctioned for 2022 -23 at BE stage. However, it 
was reduced to ₹ 154.40 crores at RE and the total expenditure that could be made by all the CAPFs 
under this head till 7th February, 2023 has been stated to be ₹  22.16 crores. The Committee  notes 
that of the total sanctioned amount, the expenditure is 14.35%.  
(Para 4.9.5 ibid) 
 
1.11.2 The Committee further notes that against the expenditure of ₹  22.16 crore by the 7 CAPFs, 
Assam Rifles has spent ₹ 14.21 crore, CRPF has spent ₹  3.97 crore, CISF has  spent ₹ 2.74 crore 
while BSF has spent ₹ 1.24 crore. ITBP, NSG and SSB have not started any of their schemes under 
this programme and have reported NIL expenditure. The Committee notes that last year too, some 
CAPFs had reported low e xpenditure under Mode rnization Plan III. The Committee observes that 
persistent low utilization/NIL utilization by the CAPFs under such an important programme is not a 
healthy trend. It wonders that when the CAPFs have themselves been repeatedly requesting for 
upgrading and modernization, what could be the reasons for the low utilization of funds. The 
Committee feels that it will also lead to a delay in the procurement of weapons and other 
technological equipments, which in turn will affect the capabilities  of CAPFs. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the MHA direct the CAPFs to remove the bottlenecks hampering the 
modernization plans of CAPFs and set up a monitoring mechanism to ensure optimal utilization of 
funds during the next financial year. 
 
(Para 4.9.6 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.3 The main reason for underutilization of allocated funds under this Scheme are as under: 
 
 Previous financial year (i.e. 2022- 23) was the first year of implementation of Modernization 
Plan IV. After issuing Scheme guidelines on 25/05/2022, CAPFs could get only eight months 
during financial year 2022-23. 
 Most of the items under this Scheme are highly technical in nature. They are not available in 
domestic market off the shelf. Hence, delivery period of these items are longer res ulting in long 
gestation period and delayed procurement process. 

 
13 
 
 Advance sample(s) provided by participating bidders did not meet the approved Qualitative 
Requirements (QRs), resulting in scrapping of tenders. In some cases, firms were unable to give 
advance sample during the technical evaluation process. 
 Non-availability of QRs/upgraded QRs is a major road block in procurement process under 
Modernization Plan-IV. Due to frequent change in technology, even QRs of so many items that 
are available need revision/upgradation. 
 Successful bidders were unable to supply the ordered items within the agreed delivery period. 
 
1.11.4 This Ministry is closely monitoring the implementation of this Scheme. To ensure optimum 
fund utilization during current financial year, CAPFs have been advised: 
 To set up a dedicated QRs/TDs Cell to expedite the finalization/revision of QRs/TDs for 
approved items under Modernization Plan- IV.  CAPFs have been directed to finalize QRs/TDs 
of approved items by the first quarter of the current FY i.e. 2023-24. 
 CAPFs have been allowed to initiate procurement process for all approved items under 
Modernization Plan-IV, irrespective of funds availability at that particular point of time subject 
to the condition that tendered amount must not exceed 2.5 times of allocated funds for that 
financial year and that the supply order will be placed by the CAPFs concerned only after 
ensuring availability of funds. CAPFs have been sensitized to initiate procurement process for 
items for the current  financial year i.e. (2023-24). 
 Further, a Committee headed by AS (CIS&PM) with JS(JKL), JS(BM -I) and representative of  
LWE Division, MHA, O/o Principal Scientific Adviser to Govt. of India, DRDO, BPR&D and 
CAPFs as Members has been constituted to critically analyze the needs of  CAPFs including 
Action Plan, Procurement Plan for 5 years, Modernization Plan, Gap between authorization and 
holding in CAPFs etc. 
 Lead Force concept for procurement of common weapons, equipment etc. is being followed to 
the extent possible to avoid repetitive efforts for the common items by different CAPFs, has also 
been enforced. 
 
1.12 Training of CAPFs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.12.1 The Committee notes that sufficient number of CAPF officers are not being sent to foreign 
countries for any kind of training. The Committee believes that for learning best practices 
particularly in forensics, narcotics and new -age technology-related crimes , it is important that the 
CAPF officers receive training from foreign countries as well.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the MHA may include foreign training component in the training of CAPF officers 
as part of their career training programme. 
(Para 4.12.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. It may be mentioned that officers of 
CAPF are sent from time to time for meetings, training and exposure visits to foreign countries. 
 
1.13 Delhi Police 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.1 The Committee recommends that two different mechanisms should be devised for improving 
coordination between Delhi Police and the Police of neighbouring States. One mechanism should be 
for the maintenance of law & order in  the bordering areas of NCR and the other should be used for 
the investigation of inter -State crimes. A unified communication system may also be created by 

 
14 
 
Delhi Police with neighbouring States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana for the exchange of 
crime-related information. 
 (Para 4.13.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.2 As recommended by the Parliament Standing Committee, a unified communication system 
would be created sharing information without exhausting the crucial time between Delhi Police and 
the Police of neighboring states. Besides, Special Cell of Delhi Police is considering actively the 
improving of coordination with the neighboring states.      
 
1.13.3 Delhi and its neighboring states have become an urban continuum. Accordingly, Interstate 
Coordination meetings are being regularly organized and attended by senior officers from the 
police organizations of UP, Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, J&K and 
even from Bihar and Jharkhand. 
 
1.13.4 Various Districts of Delhi Police are sharing their boundaries with Haryana & Uttar 
Pradesh. The Inter -state coordination meetings of the bordering districts at the level of beat staff, 
SHOs, ACsP/Sub Divisions and Head of the District Police are held periodically to have better 
sharing of crime and criminal data and patterns being analyzed. Sharing of various ideas/methods 
of prevention and detection of crime and criminals is also done through such aforesaid meetings. 
Creation of Whatsapp groups at the aforesaid levels of police offici als for quick sharing of data 
pertaining crime and criminals is also being practiced. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.5 The Committee has been informed about the best practices and initiatives taken by Delhi 
Police for the maintenance of law & order and  the investigation of crimes in the National Capital 
Region (NCR). The Committee feels that the police of neighbouring States of Delhi may share their 
best practices and initiatives regarding investigation, collection of evidence including forensics, use 
of technology in policing, training of personnel, etc. Hence, the Committee recommends that the 
MHA may create a platform for knowledge and experience sharing among the police of these States 
and Delhi Police. This will strengthen their coordination mechanism and yield better results in the 
maintenance of law & order. 
 
(Para 4.13.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.6 The recommendations of the committee is noted. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.7 The Committee takes note of the reasons given by Delhi Police for the  low housing 
satisfaction level of its personnel. The Committee opines that it will not be possible to allot official 
accommodations to the personnel near their place of posting due to a shortage of land in different 
areas of Delhi. Hence results in long c ommuting time from his place of official accommodation The 
Committee recommends that a Survey may be conducted by Delhi Police may conduct a survey to 
ascertain the willingness of its personnel to take house rent allowance instead of official 
accommodations. Accordingly, Delhi Police may conduct a fresh assessment of the housing 
satisfaction level of its police personnel and revise the housing satisfaction level which includes the 
number of personnel who are willing to take official accommodations to those who have been given 
official accommodations. This will give a clear picture of the housing satisfaction level of Delhi 

 
15 
 
Police. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the MHA/DP in this 
regard. 
 
(Para 4.13.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.8 All police personnel/officers who do not have a Govt. accommodation or living in a rented 
house, are availing house rent allowance. With regard to recommendation of the Committee to 
conduct a fresh assessment of Delhi Police personnel who are willing to take official 
accommodation, a wide publicity has been given for registration of such employees who are 
interested in Govt. Quarter, on QAC website. SMSs are being sent to all Delhi Police employees 
regularly every month so that those willing to take of ficial accommodations could avail the 
opportunity for allotment of the Govt. quarter. 
 
1.13.9 As on 31.03.2023, 9306 officers/men have registered themselves on QAC website. Apart 
from this, 9454 officers/officials have been given official accommodations of  different type. Two 
special drives have also been carried out for allotment of vacant accommodations. For allotment of 
accommodation at Narela, additional opportunity of choice posting in the nearby District has been 
offered to willing employees. At prese nt, 2036 Govt. qtrs. of different types, are lying vacant due to 
major/minor repair or beyond repair in colonies where officers/personnel can prefer to apply for 
Govt. accommodation. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.10 The Committee notes that there are 13,525 vacancies in Delhi Police which is around 
14% of the sanctioned strength of 94,254. The Committee takes note of the ongoing recruitment 
process to fill the 3,861 posts and recommends that the recruitment process should be completed 
within a time fra me and remaining 9,664 vacancies may also be filled as planned by the Delhi 
Police. This will increase the strength of Delhi Police and further enhance their capability for 
maintenance of law & order in National Capital Region. 
  
(Para 4.13.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.11 At present, there are total 13347 vacancies (including anticipated vacancies for the 
year 2023 and 2024) of group ‘C’ posts of various ranks/cadres for filling up through direct 
recruitment. Out of which, 3,861 vacancies have been advertise d by SSC and recruitment will be 
completed tentatively by December, 2023. The remaining 9486 vacancies will be advertised through 
SSC during the year 2023 and 2024. Out of 9486 vacancies, the schedule for advertisement of 8597 
vacancies has been received from SSC, which is as under: 
 
SI No. Name of post Vacancies Tentative date of advertisement 
1. Const. (Exe.) 7547 01.09.2023 
2. MTS (Civilian) 888 10.10.2023 
3. Sub-Inspr. (Exe.) 162 20.07.2023 
Total  8597  
 
1.13.12 Remaining 889 vacancies will be advertised by SSC during the later part of the year 
2023 and 2024. 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.13 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that there has been discrepancy in 
salary of officials of Delhi Police like Sub -Inspector and Inspectors as compared to their 
counterparts in States. The Committee also notes similar pattern in Grade Pay of Asst. 
Commissioner of Police of Delhi Police and Delhi, Andaman & Nicobar Islands Police Service 
(DANIPS). The Committee recommends that the MH A along with Delhi Police may take up the 
matter with concerned Ministry to sort out this anomaly in salaries of officials of Delhi Police as 
compared to their counterparts in other States. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
steps taken by the MHA in this regard. 
  
(Para 4.13.17 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.14 The issue is being looked into by the concerned UT Governments / Organizations in 
MHA. The same will be taken up suitably in consultation with the Department of Expenditure. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.13.15 The Committee notes that the Personal Security Officers (PSOs) attached to the 
dignitaries have to wait outside Parliament House Complex with no arrangement for rest, sitting and 
toilets. They are also exposed to heat, rain and cold during different seasons. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may take up with Delhi Police to arrange for AC buses with 
toilets for PSOs which may be parked outside the Parliament House Complex, so that they can take 
rest and withstand the weather. The Committee also recommends to allocate necessary funds for the 
purpose.  
(Para 4.13.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.16 As per recommendation of Parliamentary Standing Committee, a letter dated 
17.04.2023 to Joint Secretary (Security), Parliament House has already been sent by Delhi Police 
for making the provision for Air -Conditioned Buses with toilets for Personal Security Officers 
(PSOs). The issue will be taken forward suitably. 
 
1.14 Bureau of Immigration (BoI) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.14.1 The Committee notes that there are 20 non- notified marine Immigration Check Posts (ICPs) 
that are technically functioning in violation of the Passport (EOI) Act  1920 and the Rules made 
there under. The Committee agrees with the Ministry that these non -notified ICPs are entry points 
for unregulated and unchecked passengers/crews and potential security hazards, having implications 
on national security. The Committee has been given to understand that the MHA has been taking up 
the matter with the State Governments and the Local Port Authorities (LPAs). It would like to be 
apprised about the responses from these authorities on this sensitive matter and the steps taken by 
them to address the concerns raised with them by the Ministry. 
(Para 4.14.9 ibid) 
1.14.2 The Committee observes that as these marine ICPs have an impact on national security, the 
MHA may delineate a timeline for the State Governments and LPAs for completion of upgradation 

 
17 
 
work from BOI and security angles. The MHA should take up the matter with t he State 
Governments at the appropriate level for discussing the bottlenecks and speeding up the work on 
modernizing the remaining ICPs so that they do not remain a potential threat from internal security 
points of view. The Committee would like to be appr ised about the steps taken by MHA and the 
response of the State Governments, and other concerned Ministries in this regard. 
(Para 4.14.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.14.3 The matter has been taken up with the concerned States and with M/o Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways (MoPSW). The status in respect of non-designated Marine Check Posts is as follows: 
 A Joint Team comprising officers of MHA/BoI, NIC and Gujarat State Home Department Local 
Police visited 6 non- designated seaports (namely Hazira, Dahej, Pipavav, Sikka, Navlakhi and 
Tuna Old Poet (Adani Tuna Port) of Gujarat. After assessing the infrastructure and manpower 
requirement, the State Government has been requested to provide the same. 
 The required infrastructure in respect of Kollam Seaport has been provided by the State Govt. of 
Kerala and a notification for designating Kollam Seaport as an authorized Immigration Check 
Post is under examination. 
 Dhamra Seaport has already been notified vide notification dated 11.07.2023 as an authorized 
ICP. The State Governm ent of Odisha has been requested to provide manpower on as 
attachment basis to BOI to operationalize immigration functions at the earliest. 
 For the Hemnagar (Riverport), the State Govt. of West Bengal and MoPS&W have been 
requested to provide necessary infrastructure.  
1.14.4 In respect of the remaining 11 non notified marine seaports, the matter has been taken up 
with the respective States. 
1.14.5 The issue will be taken forward with the concerned State Governments and pursued till their 
logical conclusion. 
1.15 Border Area Development Programme (BADP) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.15.1 The Committee takes note of the 'Vibrant Village Programme' under which physical and 
social infrastructure will be created for the villages at the northern border  areas of the country. The 
Committee recommends that the MHA may focus first on the villages which require immediate 
attention or have fallen behind on development initiatives. To select villages, MHA may categorize 
villages based on sensitivity, remotenes s, cultural diversity, etc. For this, the MHA may take the 
support of Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) to identify such villages and their 
inputs may be utilized for the purpose. 
 
(Para 4.20.7 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.2 The Government of India has approved Vibrant Villages Programme (VVP) on 15th 
February, 2023. 
 

 
18 
 
1.15.3 The recommendation of the Committee that MHA may focus first on the villages which 
require immediate attention or have fallen behind on development initiatives is appreciat ed. In this 
regard, it is submitted that in deference to the above recommendations, all the villages, numbering 
2967 at present, situated in the blocks abutting the northern boundary in the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and UT of Ladakh have been identified for 
coverage in the programme. Out of 2967 villages, 662 villages in the above -mentioned States & UT 
of Ladakh based on the status of development deficits and their paramount importance to border 
security have been identified for coverage of priority.  
 
1.15.4 Selection of villages have been done after consulting the stakeholders concerned with 
security and well versed with the field situation of these villages. However, based on need, 
Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs, would consult BPR&D for their 
specific suggestions/ inputs in specific areas of development initiatives. 
 
1.16 Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.16.1 The Committee has been given to under stand that the Inter -Operable Criminal Justice 
System (ICJS) serves as a platform for data analytics for forecasting/ predicting trends in crimes 
reported region- wise, category -wise, etc. for management and control of crimes in future. The 
Committee would like to apprised, if any, pilot study of this feature of the ICJS has been made in 
any of the States/ UTs where this system has been integrated. 
 
(Para 4.21.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.2 NCRB has provided tools/applications like CMAPS, COGNOS etc. to State s/UTs for the 
purpose of doing crime analytics based on the crime and criminal data available in ICJS/CCTNS. 
These tools are also used to perform forecasting or predicting the trends of crimes related to 
specific region or category based on various modus operandi available in the databases of ICJS 
Pillar applications. 
 
 CMAPS (Crime Mapping Analytics and Predictive System): CMAPS application has been given 
to 6 States, viz. Telangana, Haryana, Punjab, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan for the pilot 
testing. Of them, Haryana, Delhi (not provided by NCRB), Punjab, Odisha and Rajasthan have 
completed deployment process and are using CMAPS. 
 COGNOS: Installed in 10 States, viz. Karnataka, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh. NCRB is 
coordinating with other States for the implementation of COGNOS. 
 
1.17 Modernization of Prisons 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.17.1 The Committee notes that the allocation of Rs 400 crores was made in BE 2022- 23 for the 
Modernization of Prisons which was reduced to Rs 100 crores at RE stage as funds could not be 
released due to technical problem that arose in the wake of implementation of Central Nodal Agency 
and State Nodal Account. Further, there has been no expenditure under this head for FY 2022- 23 
(till 31st December, 2023). The Committee is of the opinion that this will delay the procurement of 
equipments, etc., for the prisons in the States. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the funds 

 
19 
 
for the FY 2022- 23 may be released to the States before the end of financial year. The Committee 
also recommends that the MHA issue advisory to the States and provide adequate funds for 
installation of jammers, door frame/ hand held metal detectors, baggage scanners, body -worn 
cameras, CCTV surveillance systems, computers, etc. for strengthening the security as well as to 
prevent inmates from using contrabands in the prisons. The MHA may also a dvise the States to 
arrange for appearance and trials of criminals from inside the prisons through video conferencing 
facilities within a specified time frame. 
 (Para 4.22.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.2    Funds of Rs. 100.00 crore were released to the designated Central Nodal Agency (CNA) of 
the Modernisation of Prisons Scheme in January, 2023. States and Union Territories (UTs) have 
been informed about the same and have been requested to take immediate necessary action for 
implementation of the project , which includes improving the Video Conference Infrastructure, 
procurement of Security Equipments like Baggage Scanners, Phone Jamming Solutions, 
Frisking/Searching equipments, etc. MHA, vide letter No. 17013/26/2019- PR dated 9.1.2023, 
advised the States and UTs to make use of the grant in aid provided to them for strengthening the 
video conference infrastructure in jails so as to facilitate the trial hearing of the prison inmates 
through video conferencing facility. This will be suitably followed up for i mplementation in the right 
earnest. 
1.18 Demand No. 53 – Chandigarh 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.18.1 The Committee notes that there are no stadiums of international level in Chandigarh due to 
which all international games are being hosted in the stadium  situated in Mohali. The Committee 
recommends that the UT Administration should take the necessary steps for the renovation/ 
upgradation of Sector 16 Stadium so that international games can be hosted here. For this, the MHA 
may dedicate the necessary funds . The MHA may also take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for developing the stadiums at 
Sector 16 and exploring the feasibility of new buildings in this beautiful city. 
 (Para 5.3.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.2 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The matter has been taken up with 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
1.19 Demand No. 57 – Transfers to Delhi 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.19.1 The Committee takes note of the lingering issue of land encroachment in Delhi. The 
Committee also notes that the land demarcation in Delhi is very old. Hence, it recommends that the 
UT Administration may consider fresh demarcation of lands in Delhi in consultation with all 
concerned stakeholders. This will help in the identification of encroached lands in Delhi. After the 
demarcation exercise is complete, a special drive may be conducted by the UT Administration for 
removing encroachments. It should al so be ensured that a grievance redressal mechanism may also 
be created to deal with the complaints of land encroachment in Delhi. 
 (Para 5.7.9 ibid) 
 
 

 
20 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.19.2 GNCTD has been requested to comprehensively examine the matter in consultation with the 
concerned Departments, in light of the recommendations of the Committee. 
1.20 Demand No. 59 – Transfers to Puducherry 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1.20.1 The Committee notes that the Scheme of Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment 
with 50 years of the interest -free loan is applicable only to the States due to which the Union 
Territories with Legislature are paying the high -interest rate for the market borrowings. Due to a 
lack of assistance from the Centre, certain important projects like the expansion of Puducherry 
Airport, the creation of infrastructure for health, education, etc. sectors have been affected in the UT 
of Puducherry. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the MHA along with the 3 Union 
Territories with Legislature (Delhi, Jammu &Kashmir and Puducherry) may request the Ministry of 
Finance to consider including these 3 Union Territories under the Scheme. This will help these 
Union Territories to get interest- free financial assistance for their developmental projects. The 
Committee hopes that the plan of action decided upon for the expansion of runways may be 
monitored by the MHA and the work related to the acquisition of land be completed on time. 
 
 (Para 5.9.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.20.2 The matter has been taken up with M/o Finance. 
 
 
 
  

 
21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
  
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire to pursue the matter 
in view of the Government’s reply 
 
 
2.1 Head-wise Projections and allocations at BE 2023-24 for Demand No. 51  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.1.1 The Committee finds that the Capital expenditure under Demand No. 51 (Police) has been 
60.41% (till 31st January, 2023) against the allocation made at RE 2022 -23. The Committee has 
been noticing similar pattern during past few years where a large chu nk of funds are spent in the last 
quarter of the financial year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that during the project 
planning and finalization stage, the Ministry may equitably distribute the expenditure to be incurred 
under the project among all four quarters to prevent rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the 
financial year. 
 (Para 2.5.4 ibid)  
 
Action Taken 
 
2.1.2 Capital Expenditure in projects on border/hilly areas cannot be equitably distributed to all 
four quarters as the weather is not conducive for work throughout the year.  The work gets stalled 
during monsoon, winter, and bad weather.  However, recommendations of the Committee have been 
noted for compliance to the maximum extent. 
 
2.2 National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.2.1 The Committee takes notes of the efforts of NDRF in advocating for the sustainable 
development through and developing various guidelines/studies to deal with natural disasters. 
Considering the increase in intensity and frequenc y of natural disasters and potential danger posed 
by the climate change, it is important to assess the future requirements for adaptation and mitigation 
during disasters. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the NDMA may conduct a research to 
prepare a long- term roadmap for creating disaster resilience and adaptation in the country. The 
Committee also recommends that the Government may increase investment in building disaster 
resilient infrastructure including buildings and transport networks to reduce  the impact of natural 
disasters.  
(Para 3.3.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 Building of disaster resilient infrastructure is the responsibility of the respective Ministries. 
NDMA issues time to time various guidelines for building of infrastructure which can mitigate the 
effect of disasters and be resilient. NDMA has developed several guidelines and projects which talks 
about strengthening of codes, by -laws, and infrastructures in vulnerable areas. The major 
guidelines issued by NDMA are as follows. 
 
 Management of Chemical Disaster (2007) 
 Management of Earthquakes (2007) 
 Medical Preparedness and Mass Casualty Management (2007) 
 Biological Disasters (2008) 

 
22 
 
 Management of Floods (2008) 
 Management of Landslides & Snow Avalanches (2009) 
 Psycho-Social Support and Mental Health Services (2009) 
 Nuclear and Radiological Emergency Management (2009) 
 Management of TSUNAMI’s (2010) 
 Management of the Dead in the aftermath of Disasters (2010) 
 Seismic Retrofitting of Deficient Buildings (2014) 
 Hospital Safety (2016) 
 Guidelines on Boat Safety (2017) 
 Landslide Risk Management Strategy (2019) 
 Home Owner's guide for Earthquake & Cyclone safety (2019)  
 A Primer on Rapid Visual Screening (RVS) Consolidating Earthquake Safety Assessment Efforts 
in India (2020) 
 Management of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) (2020)  
 Simplified Guidelines for Earthquake Safety (2021)  
 
2.2.3 Moreover, for promotion of resilient infrastructure across the world, Coalition for Disaster 
Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) was approved in August 2019 and officially launched by the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister at the UN Climate Action Summit in New York on 23 September 2019. At 
present, 31 countries and 8 multi-lateral organizations have joined CDRI by endorsing its charter. 
 
 
 
2.3 Relief and Rehabilitation for Migrants and Repatriates 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee notes that as on 31st December, 2022, out of the allocation of ₹ 150 crores in 
2022-23, the Ministry has spent ₹ 125.52 crores. However, by 27th January, 2023, 5,907 Bru 
families have been settled in the 12 identified locations in Tripura out of which HBA has been 
released to 5,603 families and 2,689 houses have been completed. Fixed Deposit (FD) of ₹  4 lakhs 
and monthly cash assistance of ₹  5000/- has been released to 2,600 families. The Committee feels 
that the settlement of the Bru refugees has been taking a long time. The Committee recommends that 
the remaining 1,052 families may be settled within a stipulated time and houses, cash assistance and 
other am enities should be ensured for all 6,959 families of Bru migrants during the forthcoming 
fiscal year. 
 
(Para 3.4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.2 In last financial year 2022-23 a total of Rs.158.74 Cr. was released for meeting all expenses 
under Bru Agreement. 
 
2.3.3 After signing of Agreement, settlement of Bru families is being done by the Central 
Government along with the State Government, in consultation with various stakeholders, by 
persuading Bru migrant families to shift to the resettlement locations at the earliest. 
 
2.3.4 As per latest information dated 30.06.2023 from Government of Tripura, 6302 families have 
been shifted and settled in the eleven (11) locations namely Kaskaupara, Wainbukcherra- Ranipura, 
Bongaphapara, Haduklaupara, Bhandarima- Pushporampara, West Kalajhari, Hamsapara, 
Ultacherra, Ashapara, Gachirampara and Silacharra.  First installment of house building 

 
23 
 
assistance has been released to 6300 families and second/third instalment will be released subject to 
completion of construction of hous es.  A total of 4658 houses have been constructed at above re -
settlement locations and construction of remaining houses is under way. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.5 The Committee takes note of the construction of 6,000 transit accommodations in Kashmir 
Valley under PMDP in 2015. However, the construction of transit accommodations have not been 
completed till now. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may evolve a mechanism 
to fast track the construction of transit accommodations for Kashmiri Migrants. 
 (Para 3.4.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.6 To, settle Kashmiri Migrant employees, construction of 6,000 transit accommodations have 
been taken up in Kashmir Val ley under PMDP, 2015. Out of 6,000 transit accommodations , 816 
have been constructed. Further, additional 1500 flats are likely to be completed during the current 
financial year and remaining are at various stages.  Department of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh 
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs monitors construction of transit accommodations in Kashmir 
Valley on regular basis. 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.3.7 The Committee notes that an amount of ₹  301.61 crores has been allocated in BE 2023 -24 
under the head relief and rehabilitation of migrants and repatriates. It hopes that the MHA must have 
assessed the reasons for delays in release of funds during 2022- 23 and take appropriate steps such 
that there may not be any repetition of the bottlenecks faced this year in the forthcoming fiscal. 
 
(Para 3.4.12 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.3.8 In current financial year 2023-24, an amount of Rs.181.89 Cr. has been earmarked for Bru 
rehabilitation and resettlement and out of which Rs.45.05 Cr. has been released to Government of 
Tripura by 30.06.2023.    As soon as utilization certificates are received for past releases along with 
proposal from State Government for release of money, the same is released by the Ministry 
expeditiously. 
 
2.3.9 A Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC), constituted under the provisions of Agreement, 
oversees implementation of the Agreement, and holds regular meetings.  MHA regularly reviews 
implementation of Bru Accord with Government of Tripura at  various levels to expedite the 
rehabilitations process. 
 
2.3.10 It is also stated that under the Umbrella Scheme “Relief and Rehabilitation of Migrants and 
Repatriates “, 03 sub schemes pertain to Rehab Wing, FFR Division. These schemes are: 
 
 Rehabilitation package to enhance amenities for people who came back after transfer of 
enclaves between India and Bangladesh under Land Boundary Agreement in Enclaves and 
Cooch Behar District. 
 Relief assistance to Sri Lankan refugees living in camps in Tamil Nadu and Odisha. 
 Grant-in-aid to the Central Tibetan Relief Committee (CTRC) for five years for administrative 
and social welfare for the settlement of Tibetan people. 

 
24 
 
 
2.3.11 In above sub scheme 100% funds have been released in the financial year 2022-23.  
 
2.3.12 In the financial year 2022- 23, a total amount of ₹33.11 crore was also allocated for 
financial assistance to families of West Pakistan Refugees and 100% expenditure was done till the 
end of the financial year. 
 
2.4 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.1 The Committee notes that under the Scheme National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project 
(NCRMP), the MHA has allocated ₹  110 crore during 2023- 24 against the projected demand of ₹ 
221.67 crore. From the table above, it may be seen that there has been a constant underutilization of 
funds against the allocations during 2020-21 and 2021-22 and 2022-23. The Ministry has informed 
that the scheme under this project is going to be closed by March, 2023 and no activity will be 
affected due to the reduction in allocation in forthcoming fiscal. The Ministry has also informed that 
under phase II of the NCRMP, with an outlay of ₹2059.83 crore, the project is being implemented in 
6 Indian Coasta l States i.e. Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and West Bengal. 
However, while providing details on the sta tus of implementation in the States above, the MHA has 
not furnished any information regarding the status of work in the States of Mahara shtra and West 
Bengal. Further, it has not provided a breakup of the amounts allocated to each States under phase II 
of the project. 
 
(Para 3.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 The outlay of NCRMP has been revised from Rs.2059.83 crore to Rs. 1864.38 crore due to 
savings in different components. The break -up of the amount allocated to each State Project 
Implementation Unit (SPIU) under Phase II of the Project is as under: 
(Amount in crores of ₹) 
Sr. 
No  
SPIU GOI outlay 
(March 2023) 
State 
Share 
Total Outlay GOI releases till March 
2023 
1 Goa 83.50 19.44 102.94 83.50 
2 Gujarat 327.54 93.27 420.81 326.48 
3 Kerala 120.50 14.40 134.90 115.09 
4 Karnataka 129.53 37.00 166.53 128.03 
5 Maharashtra 199.31 56.93 256.24 199.11 
6 West Bengal 558.43 178.18 736.61 570.64* 
Total SPIU 1418.81 399.22 1818.03 1422.85 
7 PMU 46.35 0.00 46.35 35.28 
Total NCRMP 1465.16 399.22 1864.38 1458.13 
* The outlay for the state of WB had been reduced after the releases. Accordingly the State is being 
followed up to refund the excess releases of about Rs. 12 crore made to the State as compared to the 
revised outlay. 
 
2.4.3 The total releases of central share as on March 2023 against the total outlay of Rs. 1465.16 
crore are Rs. 1458.13 crore. Further, though the project has been completed in March 2023, but the 
expenditure committed during the project period would be eligibl e to be booked under the project 
even if the bills of the same are submitted within grace period of 4 months after closure of the 

 
25 
 
project. It is expected that the balance central share of Rs.7.03 crore may be utilised within the said 
grace period with the settlement of bills to be received. Accordingly, there may not be any shortfall 
in the utilization of the funds.  
 
2.4.4 Further, there would be no effect on the activities under NCRMP II due to reduction in the 
budget for the year 2023- 24 as most of the f unds under the approved outlay are already released 
and balance would be released during the said grace period. In fact, a maximum of about Rs. 19.24 
crore may be required towards release of the balance outlay of NCRMP II and remaining funds of 
about Rs. 90 crore which would be available under the total budget of Rs. 110 crore for year 2023 -
24 are proposed to be utilised for the next phase of NCRMP. The next phase of NCRMP is under 
approval process but, as per the World Bank norms, the expenditure incurred up to 1 year before 
approval of the project would be eligible for the retro- active financing and the same would be met 
out of the funds provided under FY 2023-24.  
 
2.4.5 Further, the status of work in the States including that of Maharashtra and West Bengal is at 
Annexure-A. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.4.6 The Committee notes that a Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) based on integrated Alert 
System (Sachet) Phase- I is being implemented in 36 States/ UTs under which Alert Generating 
Agencies and Alert Dissemination Agencies have been integrated and access has been provided to 
them with CAP for alert dissemination through SMS for Cyclones. The Committee believes that an 
alternate early warning/ information dissemination system should also be in place along with CAP. 
In case the telecom network fails during disaster, the alternate mechanism may be used to continue 
rescue and relief efforts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that automated sirens and loud 
speakers connected with wireless system may also be in stalled in disaster prone areas for swift 
dissemination of information during disasters. 
 
(Para 3.5.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.7 Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) based on integrated Alert System (Sachet) involves 
dissemination of alerts over multiple media like TV, Radio, Public addressing system of Indian 
Railways, Costal Siren in Coastal States, Satellite receivers (GAGAN &NivIC), social media 
(Bowser Notification, RSS Feed, Google etc) in addition to SMS/Cell Broadcast (CB). In CAP 
Phase-I, proof of concept  (PoC) for TV, Radio, CB, Indian Railway has been carried successfully. 
PoC on Coastal Siren is in progress. These functionalities will be rolled over in CAP Phase -II on 
PAN India basis. 
 
2.4.8 Further under NCRMP, there is a provision for installing Early  Warning Dissemination 
System (EWDS) in coastal states. 
 
2.5 Representation of Women in CAPFs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.5.1 The Committee notes that women presently constitute 3.82% of CAPF which is higher than 
the figures of the past 2 years. The Committee observes that the progress in increasing the 
representation of women in CAPFs is slow. The Committee recommends that MHA may take 
necessary steps to increase representation of women in CAPFs. 
 

 
26 
 
(Para 4.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 Efforts and initiatives are being taken to encourage recruitment of women and provide 
suitable working conditions. This has led to nearly doubling the representation of women in CAPFs 
since 2014 to the present number of 36,842 (as on 31.03.2023) 
 
2.5.3 To further encourage the enrolment of women, feedback/suggestions in this regard have 
been solicited from the Forces keeping their operational requirement in mind. The Forces have 
enlisted difficult terrain and hard-working conditions which hinder the participation of women. 
 
2.5.4 The steps taken to encourage recruitment and to improve the representation of Women 
personnel in CAPFs are as under: 
 Recruitment is being conducted by making wide publicity through print/electronic media. All 
female candidates are exempted from payment of application fee. 
 There are relaxations in Physical Standard Test (PST) and Physical Efficiency Test (PET) for all 
female candidates for recruitment in CAPFs in comparison to Male candidates. 
 Facilities already available under the Central Government like Maternity Leave, Child Care 
Leave, are also applicable to CAPFs women personnel. 
 One female member is detailed as a Member of the Board in the recruitment of women 
personnel. 
 Creches and Day Care Centres have been provided by the CAPFs to women employees. 
 Committees have been constituted at all levels to check sexual harassment and to expeditiously 
deal with the complaints of women personnel. 
 Women personnel are given equal opportunity in their career progression i.e., promotion/ 
seniority as per the RRs at par with male counter parts. 
 
2.6 Vacancies in Medical Staff of CAPFs 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.6.1 The Committee notes that there is a vacancy of 25.42% in the Paramedical staff of CAPFs 
against the authorized strength of 4,420. The Committee feels that since the forces play an important 
role in search and operations, lack of adequate medical/ Paramedical staff may have an impact on 
the well-being of its jawans. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent measures must be 
taken to fill all the vacancies of Para -medical staff of the CAPFs in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee further recommends that the CAPFs may explore the feasibility of recruitment on an ad -
hoc basis till regular appointments are made for Paramedical staff. The Committee would like to be 
informed about the role of the Paramedics and medical staff in the forces and the ratio in which their 
deployment is made vis-a-vis the number of person in the various Police forces under CAPFs. 
 
(Para 4.4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.2 The filling up of the vacant posts of Paramedical staff authorized in direct recruitment quota 
is under process. The vacancy to be filled up through promotion is already under process which is 
likely to be completed soon. As of now, there is no provision f or recruitment of Paramedical staff on 
ad-hoc basis in Forces. Medical Officers, including specialists, though are being filled on 
contractual basis. 
 
2.6.3 The role of Medical and Paramedical Staff are as follows: 
 

 
27 
 
 Medical & Para-medical Staff in CAPFs pr ovide primary medical cover to the troops and their 
families. The hospitals in which they serve range from the Mini MI rooms in Border 
Outposts/FDLs to 10/20 bedded Hospitals in Battalion and also the 50/100/200 beds in CH/RH. 
 CAPFs Medical Officers provid e primary Medical care at Unit level to the troops and their 
dependents. In composite Hospitals, Specialists Medical Officers provide secondary medical 
cover. Apart from providing medical care, all the Medical Officers including Specialist Medical 
Officers take part in various recruitment procedures conducted throughout the year in various 
types of Medical Boards (Annual Medical Examinations, Review Medical examination etc) 
which are constituted for this purpose. They also provide medical cover during Elect ion Duties, 
Internal Security Duties, Disaster Management or any other duty assigned, as and when 
required. CAPFs Medical Officers are also deployed in areas like High Altitude Areas, Border 
Out Posts in desert areas or in other areas having adverse climat ic condition, where usually the 
Civilian Doctors do not want to perform their duties. They are also entrusted in providing 
Medicare to the AB-PMJAY patients reporting to them. 
 Paramedical staff is an integral part for giving medical support either at far f lung Border Out 
Posts of in any adverse climate as well as at LWE areas also. These Paramedical staff, 
especially the trained Nursing Assistant and Medics, are the backbone or the First Line Medical 
Care providers to the troops where Medical Officers are not immediately available, and during 
patient evacuation. Similarly, Lab. Assistants, Radiographers, Pharmacists, Nurses 
(Male/Female) are the integral part of any Composite Hospital. Trained Nursing Assistants and 
Pharmacists are the important supporting s taff in Unit Hospitals in CAPFs organizations. A 
Medical Set-up without these Paramedical Staff remains incomplete and Medical Officers and 
Paramedical Staff work hand- in-hand to render optimal medical care to the serving personnel 
and their dependents. 
 The available strength of MO/Paramedical Staff of CAPFs is not adequate to provide Medicare 
to the troops and dependents. 
 The following recommendations are proposed in the aforesaid matter: 
 To augment the strength of Paramedical Staff in all existing Hospitals. 
 To explore the feasibilities for appointment of Paramedical staff on contractual /ad- hoc/ 
outsourcing basis to reduce the deficiencies and help in better Medicare to the troops. 
 
2.7 Pending Payments for Deployment of CAPFs in States/UTs 
  
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.7.1 The Committee notes that a substantial amount of ₹  49,912.37 crore is outstanding against 
the various States/UTS as on 1st October, 2022 for the deployment of CAPFs. Out of this ₹  
44,083.51 crore is due for the deployment of CRPF personnel alone in the States/ UTs. The 
Committee observes that the Ministry should adopt a firm view in this regard and raise this issue 
with defaulter States/UTs on monthly basis, to clear the pending bills/payments at the earliest. The 
Committee recommends that the Government of India may take necessary steps to recover the 
pending dues from States in a time bound manner. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the reasons given by the State/UT Governments for seeking waiver of deployment charges 
towards deployment of CAPFs personnel and the stand taken by the Ministry to resolve this issue. 
 
(Para 4.10.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 Regular requests are being made by this Ministry to the States concerned to clear their 
outstanding deployment charges while issuing deployment orders. The concerned States are also 
being requested for clearing their outstanding deployment charges of CAPFs on quarterly basis and 

 
28 
 
regular follow -up action is being taken with the States for timely payment. DO letters dated 
26.04.2023 have been sent from Union Home Secretary to all Chief Secretaries of defaulter 
States/UTs to clear outstanding dues of deployment charges at the earliest.  
 
2.7.3 Various States have requested for waiver of deployment charges citing reasons like -  (a) 
Precarious financial condition of the State Govts, (b) Limited revenue resources, (c) Mining ban in 
Goa, (d) Post Covid-19 financial crunch, (e) Large number of CAPFs Battalions are being deployed 
in LWE States which results in accumulation of huge amount of principal outstanding dues. 
 
2.7.4 It may be mentioned that the Centre has a constitutional responsibility to assist the States i n 
maintaining internal security, election duties including law and orders duties for such deployment. 
The States have to bear the cost of deployment which is bare minimum in comparison to the huge 
cost involved in raising and maintenance of the CAPFs as pr escribed by the Government of India 
from time-to-time. Considering the requests of States/UTs Government, a comprehensive review of 
the policy was undertaken in 2019 to rationalize the deployment charges.  The revised rates, as 
applicable from 2019-20, are much lower than the rates prevailing in 2018- 19. 90% exemption has 
already been granted to some of the States like Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, UT of J&K, LWE 
affected areas and the North-Eastern States. 
 
2.8 Representation of local people in Assam Rifles 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
  
2.8.1 The Committee agrees with the views of the representations of Assam Rifles that since it 
mostly operates in the NE region, preference may be given to local people of NER at the time of 
recruitment.  However, this should be made on the basis of functional requirement of the Assam 
Rifles, so that the efficiency of the force is not affected by the shortage of recruits from NE region. 
The Committee feels that as an alternative, the personnel posted there should be trained in local 
languages and dialects so as to understand and interact with the local population for intelligence 
gathering at local levels. 
 (Para 4.11.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 The personnel of Assam Rifles are already being trained in the following local languages 
courses at various locations to enable them to understand and interact with the local population for 
intelligence gathering at local levels: - 
 Nagamese Language Course at Kohima (Nagaland). 
 Lai language Course at Serchip (Mizoram). 
 Mara Language Course at Lunglei (Mizoram). 
 Hmar and Lushai Language Course at Aizwal (Mizoram). 
Myanmar Language Course at Assam Rifles Training Centre and School, Dimapur (Nagaland). 
 
2.9 Delhi Police 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.9.1 The Committee notes that the CCTV cameras installed/proposed to be installed by Delhi 
Police will be connected to the "Integrated Command, Control, Coordination and Communication 
System” which will help in faster access to footage for the investigation of crimes. The Committee 
recommends that the footage of CCTV cameras may be linked with a facial recognition system to 
identify criminals. If required, the MHA may request the Ministry of Finance for additional funds 
for the purpose. 

 
29 
 
 (Para 4.13.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 It is submitted tha t CCTV Cameras installed/proposed to be installed by Delhi Police, have 
been included for integration under Safe City Project with the objective to make it interactive to 
each other and connected to  “ Integrated Command, Control, Coordination and Communication 
Centre (I4C)” to be established in police Headquarters, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi. 
 
2.9.3 Provisions for Facial Recognition System has already been made under Safe City Project. 
 
2.10 National Investigation Agency 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.10.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the sanctioned strength of NIA was 1,227 
which has now been increased to 1,719 and there are around 650 vacancies in the agency which is 
approximately 38% of the 1719 sanctioned posts of NIA. The Committee is  of the opinion that such 
large-scale vacancies in the NIA may affect its effective functioning. As the NIA is a premier 
investigating agency for terror-related crimes in the country, the Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the MHA should prioritize fill ing the vacant posts of NIA within a specified timeline and take 
all necessary steps in this regard. 
 
(Para 4.15.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 Currently, the National Investigation Agency (NIA) has 1719 sanctioned posts in its Hqrs 
and 18 branch offices, which includes recently sanctioned 412 various posts.  Out of these 1719 
posts, 634 posts are vacant, which represent 36.88%  of the sanctioned strength. Regular efforts are 
being made to fill -up the vacant posts by various means like direct recruitment or de putation or 
promotion as per the relevant recruitment rules. 
 
2.10.3 Further, recently NIA has been exempted from consultation from Union Public Service 
Commission for appointment of Additional Superintendent of Police and Deputy Superintendent of 
Police on deputation basis vide Gazette notification dated 03.04.2023, as such process of filling up 
these vacancies is at an advanced stage and is likely to filled up soon. 
 
2.10.4 Besides, this Ministry has approved fixing of deputation quota @75% of 828 deputation 
posts in various ranks in the NIA from CAPFs and Assam Rifles.  This would facilitate filling up 
vacant posts in the NIA and vacancies across the grade would reduce significantly.   
 
2.10.5 In addition to above, the vacancies in the rank of Sub- Inspectors have already been 
communicated to Staff Selection Commission and the same is likely to be filled up soon as soon as 
possible. The progress is regularly reviewed at the highest level. 
 
2.11 Modernization of Police Forces (Assistance to States) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.11.1 The Committee observes that one of the major hurdles which come across in the task of 
timely release of funds is the non -submission of utilization certificates by State/UT Governments or 
concerned divisions. The Committee  feels that the Ministry should evolve a better coordination 

 
30 
 
mechanism with the States/UTs, especially those which lag behind in the timely submission of 
utilization certificates. 
(Para 4.16.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11.2 It is submitted that the new procedure helps not only in effective cash management but also 
brings more efficiency into public expenditure management. The States and UTs transact 
mandatorily on Public Finance Management System (PFMS) clearly depicting the fund's status and 
eligibility of states/UTs for further release of funds.  
 
2.11.3 The observations made with reference to a better coordination mechanism with the 
States/UTs, and the guidance provided is deeply appreciated.  
 
2.11.4 This Ministry has been holding meetings through video conf erence from time to time to 
understand/address bottlenecks (if any), faced by the states/UTs in implementation of the projects 
for which funds had been released. 
 
2.12 Modernization of Forensic Capacities 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.12.1 From the information provided by the MHA, it may be seen that the Ministry had allocated ₹ 
300 crores in BE 2022-23, which was reduced to ₹ 250 crores at RE while up to 31st January, 2023, 
a very minimal amount of ₹ 5 crores could be spent out of it. The Committee notes that the schemes 
under such an important head could not take off during the entire year. The Ministry has also not 
provided any reason as to why the scheme could not be initiated during the year. For 2023 -24, the 
MHA has placed a demand for ₹ 700 crores under this head. The Committee hopes that the Ministry 
utilizes this fund fruitfully and optimally during 2023-24. 
(Para 4.17.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 Department of Expenditure (DoE) had implemented the new guidelines dated 09.02.23 
pertaining to release of funds under Central Sector Schemes through Central Nodal Account due to 
which the initial release and utilization took time. Funds allocated to this Ministry under the Major 
Heads ‘3601’ and ‘3602’ were required to be shifted under Major Head ‘2055’. This Ministry then 
designated the National Forensic Sciences University as the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) for the 
Scheme.  
 
2.12.3 In the FY 2022- 23, Rs. 250 Cr was allocated under the Scheme, and this Ministry released 
funds to the tune of Rs. 187.5 Cr to the CNA. 
 
2.12.4 The Cabinet approved the Scheme for Modernization of Forensic Capacities (SMFC) as a 
Central Sector Scheme under the umbrella Scheme for  Modernization of Police Forces. This 
Ministry released funds under the Scheme in the Previous FY 2022- 23 as a Central Sector Scheme 
by implementing CNA model prescribed by DoE. However, in the Current FY 2023- 24, the DoE has 
marked the SMFC as Centrally Sponsored Scheme due to which fund release have been stalled. On 
the request of this Ministry, the DoE has issued O.M. dated 25.05.2023 suggesting the SMFC to be 
shifted to another Central Sector Scheme of MHA which has since been done. The progress under 
this scheme is likely to pick up as a result. 
 
 
 

 
31 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.12.5 The Committee appreciates that there are 7 Central Forensic Science Laboratories (CFSLs), 
32 State Forensic Science Laboratories, 106 Regional Forensic Science Laboratories and 516 
Mobile Forensic Units are available with the States and Union Territories. The Committee 
recommends that Training Institutions for forensic science may be set up in all the States/ UTs to 
increase the number of trained manpower, for forensic science laboratories . The MHA may also 
introduce this as a course in more colleges across  the country to increase trained manpower in this 
field. 
(Para 4.17.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs has established the National Forensic Sciences University 
(NFSU) in 2020. The Act mandates National Forensic Sciences University f or imparting specialized 
education and training in the field of Forensic Sciences.  At present NFSU is operating in 12 
States/UTs and about 5000 students are studying in forensics and related areas. NFSU operates 
through their campuses, affiliated colleges and institutions and through their training centers. 
 
2.12.7 The National Forensic Sciences University also conducts Forensic Aptitude and Calibre Test 
(FACT) on an annual basis, to screen forensic professionals.  
 
2.12.8 The NFSU conducted the FACT examination at the National Level in March 2022. A total of 
1256 experts have been shortlisted in this process. These forensic experts are being engaged by 
various Forensic Science Laboratories across the country. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.12.9 The Committee appreciates that under “Modernization of Forensic Capabilities” Mobile 
Forensic Vans, will be procured in FY 2023-24. The Committee is of the view that Mobile Vans can 
reach the crime scene at the earliest to assist the investigating officer in identify ing and collecting 
relevant forensic evidences from the crime scene, victims and suspects. It can ensure that the 
forensic evidence at the crime spots are collected quickly which will strengthen the investigation 
and prosecution process and increase the conviction rate of criminals. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the MHA may provide financial assistance to States/ UT for procuring an adequate 
number of Mobile Forensic Vans. This will help in setting a uniform standard of using forensic 
procedures in the investigation of crimes all across the country. If required, the MHA may seek 
additional funds from the Ministry of Finance for the purpose. 
 (Para 4.17.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.10  Under the SMFC scheme, support from MHA to the States for Mobile Forensic Vans (MFV) 
for all districts in the country has been envisaged.  
 
2.12.11 The Directorate of Forensic Science Services (DFSS), MHA has also issued SOP 
regarding the collection of evidence/samples through MFV and a ready reckoner for procurement of 
MFV has also been issued. 
 
2.13 Border Infrastructure and Management 
  
 
 

 
32 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.13.1 The Committee notes that under 'Border Infrastructure and Management', out of the 
allocation of ₹  3738.98 crores in RE 2022- 23, ₹ 1834.69 crores could be spent by 31st December, 
2022, which is less than 50% of the funds allocation, considering the fact tha t there are nearly 40 
ongoing projects under the scheme. The Committee believes that the Sch eme is very important for 
the creation of physical assets for strengthening border management in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the MHA may form a team of officers for financial monitoring as well 
as task them to focus on monitoring specific schemes that have lagged behind in utilizing funds so 
that the pace of work on these are quickened and rush of expenditure in last quarter for this crucia l 
scheme is prevented. The Committee also recommends that the MHA may take up with the CAPFs 
for providing telecommunication, 24×7 electricity facilities, and adequate accommodation with 
basic amenities to the personnel deployed at all Border Out Posts (BO Ps) of the country within a 
time frame. 
(Para 4.18.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.2 During FY 2022-23, BE was Rs. 2727.02 crore and RE was Rs. 3738.22 crore. Expenditure 
during FY 2022- 23 was Rs. 3349.46 crore, which is 122.8% of BE and 89.6% of RE. The 
enhancement of fund at RE stage was due to additional requirement of funds  for infrastructure 
works during January – March 2023, as it is the working season for most of the border areas. Thus 
the expenditure was more than the BE. 
 
2.13.3 Physical & Financi al progress of projects under 'Border Infrastructure and Management’ 
schemes are being monitored on regular basis through monthly review meetings in the Ministry and 
regular review meetings within the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) and Executing Agencies.  
Progress of the projects are also monitored through visits at work sites by the officers of the BGFs 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
2.13.4 Border Guarding Forces have taken adequate steps for providing telecom connectivity, 
electricity facilities, accommod ation with basic amenities, and water supply. Wherever feasible,  
solar power and air connectivity have been provided to the personnel deployed at all Border Out 
Posts (BOPs) / Company Operating Bases (COBs). DG Sets are also being used for providing 
electricity facilities at BOPs / COBs. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.13.5 The Committee notes that the “Border Management‟ courses are available at Jawaharlal 
Nehru University and Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU), Gandhinagar.   The Committee opines 
that border management requires special skill sets for handling people, and goods and securing the 
border. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA may strive to create a cadre of trained 
personnel in Border Management by enrolling them in Border Management courses. A few more 
colleges/universities across the country may be explored where the course can be incorporated to 
train people. 
 (Para 4.18.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.6 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed by BSF and ITBP with RRU for 
accrediting academic programmes, undertaking up skilling and training programmes etc.  
 
2.13.7 ITBP: ITBP has asked RRU to workout detailed scheme for Advance PG Diploma in Border 
Management for direct entry officers and PG Diploma in Border Management for Direct Entry 

 
33 
 
Officers and PG Diploma for other ranks. A senior officer of ITBP Academy has also been sent to 
RRU for discussion with Joint Committee of RRU to work out the modalities. 
 
2.13.8 Assam Rifles: Assam Rifles have subscribed “Training Programme on Border Management 
for In-Service Police Personnel” conducted by RRU and is in a process to create pool of trained 
personnel for Border Management. 
 
2.13.9 SSB: SSB personnel are being trained in Border Management courses at RRU and CDTI, 
Ghaziabad (UP) on topics of security challenges and management of Border Areas as per allotment 
of training slots by institutions. SSB will explore possibility to train personnel in other colleges / 
universities. 
 
2.13.10 BSF: BSF has formed Working groups and future course of action / engagement is in 
progress. 
 
2.14 Schemes for the Safety of Women 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.14.1 The Committee notes that no expenditure has been incurred (till 31st December, 2022) 
against the allocation made in RE 2022-23 under the Schemes for Safety of Women due to technical 
problems in the wake of the implementation of Central Nodal Agency and State Nodal Account. The 
Committee also notes that the allocation has been reduced by ₹  100 crores in BE 2023- 23 as 
compared to the allocation made in BE 2022- 23. This will cause a delay in the implementation of 
projects under the Scheme. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take corrective 
measures to fast-track the implementation of the projects under the scheme to cover up the delay and 
if required, seek additional allocation from the Ministry of Finance a t the RE stage. The Committee 
also recommends that the Safe City Projects may be extended to all State/ UT Capitals in the next 
phase. 
(Para 4.19.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.14.2 All the Cities have opened their SNA account except Delhi and Chennai. They are y et to map 
their SNA account with the scheme code 4077 in PFMS due to which funds could not be released.  
During FY 2022- 23 Rs. 85.00 crore was released to Bengaluru & Kolkata (Bengaluru - Rs. 58.75 
crore & Kolkata - Rs. 26.25 crore) 
 
2.14.3 With respect to extending Safe city projects in other States/UTs, it is informed that Phase II 
of Safe City Projects was brought before EFC with an outlay of Rs. 3525 crore (Central Share) and 
vide an OM dated 17.04.2023 Department of Expenditure did not recommend the continuation of 
Phase II of Safe City Projects and requested MoHUA to ensure that all the appropriate components 
under the Safe City Project are included in the Smart City Projects in 100 smart cities where the 
projects are being currently implemented. It was  also informed that the specific details and amount 
shall be finalized in consultation with the MHA. MoHUA shall form a working group with Home 
Secretary or his representative as Member to initiate this activity. 
 
2.15 Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.15.1 The Committee notes that currently 14 States/ UTs have been integrated with ICJS with flow 
of information between police and courts, prisons, forensic and prosecution. The Committee 

 
34 
 
recommend that the Minis try may issue advisory to the remaining States/UTs to implement ICJS in 
a specified time to strengthen criminal justice system in the country. The MHA may extend 
necessary budgetary support to the States/ UTs for the purpose. 
 
 (Para 4.21.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.15.2 The Cabinet in its meeting held on 19th January 2022 has accorded approval to the MHA's 
proposal for the implementation of Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) during the tenure 
of 15th Finance Commission (2022- 23 to 2025-26) at a total estimated cost of Rs.3,375 Crore. The 
project aims at the integration of the five pillars of the criminal justice system, namely, Police 
(CCTNS), e -Forensic (for forensic labs), e -Courts (for Courts), e -Prosecution (for public 
prosecutors) and e -Prison (for Prisons) and will be built on 'one data one entry' to the system 
approach. NCRB is the Nodal Agency responsible for the implementation of the project in 
association with the National Informatics Centre (NIC). NCRB is working closely with all 
States/UTs, that have not been able to complete integration, by organizing regular meetings and 
workshops. NCRB is also providing assistance and guidance to States/UTs in the deployment of 
APIs. 
 
2.16 Modernization of Prisons 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.16.1 The Committee notes that in some cases, the prison staff including medical personnel of the 
prison hospitals have been found involved in arranging mobile phones and other contraband items 
for the prison inmates. This is due to the fact that the prison staf f stay posted in one prison for long 
period of time. It leads to collusion between them and the prisoners. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the MHA may advise all the States to follow rotational policy for transfers and 
postings of prison staff including medical staff and set a maximum tenure for which a staff can work 
in one prison. The MHA may consider creation of a cadre of prison staff for the Union Territories so 
that the personnel are transferred to different UTs and will not stay posted in one prison of any UT 
for long period of time. This along with the technological interventions for the security of jail cited 
in the Para above, will help in curbing the use of mobile phones and other contraband items by the 
criminals inside prisons. 
 (Para 4.22.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.16.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs, vide letter No. V -17013/11/2022-PR dated 2.5.2022, had 
already advised the States that to discourage complacency and corrupt practices in Prisons, Prison 
staff may be rotated on a regular basi s. They have been advised that the prison staff should be 
transferred to other jails on periodic basis. On the point of creation of a separate cadre of prison 
staff for the Union Territories, it is informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs had assigned th e 
responsibility of examining the feasibility of transfer of prison staff between the Union Territories 
(UTs) to the Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D), who, after receiving responses 
from all UTs, had informed that there are various administr ative and procedural limitations 
regarding transfer of prison staff between UTs, such as difference in Pay Scales, Service Conditions, 
Allowances, Language barriers, etc. Also, NCT of Delhi and Puducherry are UTs with legislature 
and are guided by their own rules and regulations and therefore transfer of Prison Staff between 
UTs was not found practical and viable. 
 
2.16.3 The other recommendations of the Committee are noted and continuous efforts will be made 
to streamline the procedure. 

 
35 
 
 
2.17 Demand No. 52 - Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.17.1 The Committee is pleased to note that the UT of A&NI is currently exporting around 44,000 
metric tonnes of fish. It enjoins with the UT Administration that the export prices of fish per kg 
could be reduced by ₹  80 per Kg by exporting them directly from Por t Blair to Bangkok. It will not 
only be beneficial to the country but al so to the fishing business and fishermen as well. The 
Committee believes that the fisheries sector is economically crucial for the UT and appropriate steps 
should be taken to realize i ts full potential. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MHA 
and UT Administration may take up the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministry 
of Ports. Shipping and Waterways to explore the possibility and initiate action for transporting the 
harvested fish to Bangkok directly rather than routing it via Chennai at higher costs. It also adds that 
a complete plan may be developed for harvesting, storage, and packaging at Port Blair itself. This 
will also add to the development of bus iness and industry there and create more employment 
avenues for the people of UT while adding to its revenues and overall development. 
 (Para 5.2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.17.2 The A & N Administration has identified 05 verticals for promoting the direct export of 
seafood from A&N Islands which include: 
 
1. Policy and Roadmaps 
2. Infrastructure & Logistics 
3. Capacity building 
4. Augmentation of fish production (Deep-sea Fishing/Aquaculture) 
5. Fisheries Management 
 
2.17.3 Shortly, the Policy & Road map of  fisheries development which shall also cover harvesting, 
storage, and packaging shall be finalized. A proposal to invite RFP (Request for proposal) for 
hiring of consultant to prepare Master Plan & Roadmap, Feasibility and DPR for Deep Sea 
Fishing, Handling, and Processing and Aquaculture projects to promote Direct Seafood export from 
the Islands is under active consideration. 
 
2.17.4 Further, as recommended by the Committee, the Administration shall take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways to explore the possibility 
and initiate action for transporting the harvested fish to South East Asian countries 
. 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.17.5 With regard to the funds allocated to the UT in FY 2022- 23, the Committee notes that only 
52% of funds have been spent in the first three-quarters of the FY under the head "Water Supply and 
Sanitation”, which is an important project to improve water supply in the islands of the UT. The 
Committee recommends that the UT Administration should aspire for the maximum utilization of 
funds during a financial year. The UT Administration should also ensure equitable utilization of 
funds in all quarters for the crucial projects, to prevent the rush of expenditure in the last quar ter, 
and hopes that in FY 2023-24, the situation on this count improves noticeably. 
(Para 5.2.7 ibid) 
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.17.6 There was delay in finalization of the tender of the work “C/o 10 MLD Water Treatment 
Plant with all its functional appurtenances and utilities at Garacharma, Port Blair in A&N Islands” 
with an estimated amount of ₹17,02,18,137/- (Rupees Seventeen Crore Tw o Lakhs Eighteen 
Thousand One Hundred Thirty Seven Only) leading to les s expenditure in the first three quarters of 
FY 2022-23. Considering the delay in this project, other works were sanctioned and started to meet 
the financial target, hence major expendi ture was incurred in the last quarter. The instructions 
contained in the para have been noted for future compliance. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.17.7 The UT Administration has informed the Committee that it has started 5 electric buses in 
Swaraj Dweep I sland and 14 electric buses are being procured for operating them in Port Blair, to 
promote eco -tourism. The Committee recommends that a blueprint may be prepared by the UT 
Administration for the development and promotion of eco -tourism in the Islands of t he UT. A 
feasibility study may also be conducted for the development of tourism in other islands of the UT, in 
the context of developing eco-tourism. 
 (Para 5.2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.17.8 At present, 40 Electric AC buses have been hired by the Transport Department, A&NI for 
public transport. Out of 40 E -buses, 5 Electric Buses introduced in Swaraj Dweep, 4 Buses are 
deployed for Go- Go (Get on -Get off) services for promotion of tourism. Remaining electric buses 
are operated in Port Blair and Suburban areas . The instructions contained in the para have been 
noted for future compliance. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.17.9 The Committee notes that due to intensive development in the UT, the natural habitat and 
nesting ground of the species like Giant Leatherbac k Sea Turtle is being threatened. The Committee 
recommends that the MHA along with the UT Administration may take up with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change of India to take appropriate measures for the conservation 
of the species in the UT which are facing the threat of extinction. 
 (Para 5.2.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.17.10 For conservation and management of Sea Turtles, many of the Turtle nesting beaches 
have been declared as Protected Areas. The Department of Environment & Forests is maintaining 
hatcheries where the eggs are hatched and hatchlings released in the Sea. The UT Administration 
has notified a Leatherback Turtle Sanctuary at Little Nicobar Island under Section 26(A) of Wildlife 
(Protection) Act,1972 for conservation of this species. The Wildlife Institute of India has prepared a 
plan for conservation and long term monitoring of sea Turtles of the Nicobar Islands including the 
leatherback Turtle under the holistic development of Great Nicobar Island project for conservation 
of sea turtles including Leatherback Turtles. 
 
2.18 Demand No. 53 – Chandigarh 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.18.1 The Committee takes note of the influx of population in Chandigarh which is causing 
congestion in the city. The influx is understandably related to prospects of better livelihood and 

 
37 
 
opportunities for the poor and not -so-well population from the surrounding areas. The Committee 
recommends that the UT Administration should draw a plan whereby livelihood opportunities are 
created for this populace in the peripheral areas of the city so that the brunt of the influx is shifted 
outwards from the main areas of the city . The Committee also recommends that the UT 
Administration may take necessary steps for expansion/ upgradation of the basic amenities in the 
periphery of the city to cater to the needs of the increasing population of Chandigarh. The 
Committee, also, recommends that the UT Administration may carry out geometric improvements, 
construct new underpasses, and flyovers at appropriate places to addr ess the problem of traffic 
congestion in Chandigarh. It observes that swift action in this regard needs to be taken otherwise by 
the time these measures of decongestion are completed the vehicular population would have 
increased to offset the facilities. 
(Para 5.3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.18.2 In order to undertake the remedial measures for the traffic conditions in the future, the 
Chandigarh Administration has already appointed M/s RITES Ltd. as consultants for the 
preparation of Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) covering Chandigarh including s urrounding 
tri-city area. M/s RITES Ltd. has submitted Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) which has been 
submitted to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) for approval.  
 
2.18.3 The CMP consists of various traffic improvements like geometric im provement of junctions, 
construction of new underpasses and flyovers at different locations including Mass Rapid Transport 
System (MRTS) for the tri city. 
 
2.19 Demand No. 54 – Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.19.1 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the UT Administration for the development 
of tourism in Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. The Committee opines that the UT has a 
huge potential for tourism and it can become a model for eco -tourism in the country. It recommends 
that the MHA and UT Administration may take up the case with the Ministry of Tourism and take 
necessary steps for the development of various water sports, home stays, sea -facing hotels/ resorts, 
and other tourist infrastructures for holistic development of tourism in the UT. Efforts should be 
made for the creation of Tourism circuits in the UT which will help in showcasing all important 
tourist spots as well as increase employment and generate revenue for local people. 
 (Para 5.4.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.19.2 Seven water sports operators are currently in operation across the UT.  
 
2.19.3 Bed & Breakfast/ Home stay Establishment have been classified as a category "E" hotel. 
This step is encouraging and facilitating the locals to provide hospitality services to the tourists. 
Further, the department is facilitating Star Classification of Hotels by the Ministry of Tourism to the 
hotel keepers in the UT to attract the high-end tourists. The department is also developing three-star 
luxurious tent cities along the beaches in Daman and Diu i.e. at Light house beach and near 
Jampore beach in Daman and at Ghoghla beach, Chakratirth beach, Nagoa beach in Diu. The 
administration is also Planning to develop 5 Star resorts at Ghoghla beach in Diu and at Dudhni in 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli. 
 
2.19.4 To increase the tourist footfall and to provide better services to the tourists, the 
administration has developed two seafronts in Daman namely Ramsetu seafront (3.5 km long) and 

 
38 
 
NamopathDevka seafront (5.5 km long) with various amenities like landscaping, benches, Parking 
space, toilets, cafes and food stall spaces that are reserved for the locals. Professional agencies 
have been also engaged to ensure the cleanliness of the beaches in Daman. Whereas, Ghoghla 
beach in Diu is a blue flag certified beach. 
 
2.19.5 The UT administration is in process of starting a Tourism bus circuit between Diu- Sasan-
Gir-Somnath in collaboration with Gujarat Transport Corporation (GSRTC) and Somnath trust 
board, Gujarat. 
 
2.19.6 The above-mentioned steps taken by the administration have given opportunities to the local 
businesses to grow, which has led to increase employment and revenue for the local people. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.19.7 The Committee also recommends that adequate publicity should be given via print/ 
electronic media including social media about the tourist places of the UT. The tourism office of the 
UT should distribute printed brochures showcasing the natural beauty and lush greenery with 
captivating pictures to attract tourists. The UT Administration may collaborate with tour and travel 
companies to create tour packages and advertise the tourist attractions of the UT. 
 (Para 5.4.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.19.8  Steps have been taken to market various tourist  destinations in the UT through 
various mediums like print ads and promotional video. The events/festival organized by the 
department are widely publicized through newspaper ads, radio jingle and social media handles. 
 
2.19.9  The Brochures prepared showcase various tourist destinations of the UT in its 
natural beauty and lush greenery for dissemination among tourists and visitors to provide 
information and attract more tourists. 
 
2.19.10 Besides, the UT Administration is conceptualizing to collaborate with  tour and travel 
companies to create tour packages and advertise the tourist attractions through them for increasing 
tourist footfall in the UT. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.19.11 The Committee opines that low air connectivity to the UT is also a reason for the lack 
of development of tourism there as a lot of time of the tourists is spent travelling long distances by 
road. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Diu and Daman airports may be connected to 
more places which will cut the travel time and fa cilitate the smooth visit of tourists from other parts 
of the country. 
 (Para 5.4.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
2.19.12 Airport work is in progress in Daman. Under RCS UDAN scheme, following routes 
are identified for 5.0 bidding round: 
 
1) Ahmedabad-Diu-Ahmedabad.  
2) Diu-Surat-Diu.  
3) Daman-Goa-Daman. 
4) Diu-Goa-Diu.  
5) Vadodara-Diu-Vadodra.  

 
39 
 
 
2.19.13 Recently, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Gol apprised that Daman- Diu-Daman and 
Daman-Ahmedabad-Daman routes have been awarded to the SAO (Selected Airline Operation) and 
the SAO may commence operation after readiness of Daman Airport and acquisition of Aircraft. 
 
2.20 Demand No. 55 – Ladakh 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.1 The Committee is of the view that considering the large area of the UT of Ladakh, there is a 
need to strengthen the administrative institutions and infrastructure along with the delegation of 
powers to the local administrative units in the UT of Ladakh. The Committee recommends that the 
Administration may assess the need for additional administrative posts in the UT and may take up 
with the MHA to fill up these posts for improving administrative outreach and public service 
delivery system. 
 (Para 5.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.20.2  
i. Financial powers have been delegated to Lieutenant Governor, UT of L adakh and his 
subordinate authorities from time to time.  
ii. After the formation of the UT of Ladakh,1034 regular appointments have been made. 
iii. After the formation of the UT of Ladakh, 1893 persons have been engaged through 
outsourcing, contractual engagement and hiring under Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
iv. To strengthen the administration, the Department of Personnel & Training, Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension has fixed the cadre strength of IAS, IPS and IFS 
as 10,10 and 7 respectively in the UT of Ladakh. 
v. To strengthen the infrastructure, Sindhu Infrastructure Development Corporation (SIDCO) 
has been set up for infrastructure and industrial development of the UT of Ladakh. 
vi. Central Public Sector Undertakings are also being roped in to take up infrastructure works 
as per requirement. 
vii. The administration of the UT of Ladakh has taken a note of the recommendation of the 
committee. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.3 The Committee notes that Leh Autonomous Hill Development Council has utilized ₹  500.67 
(till 31st January, 2023) against the allocation of ₹ 754.53 crores at RE 2022-23 which is 66.35% of 
RE allocation. Similarly, Kargil Autonomous Hill Development Council has utilized ₹ 568.55 crores 
(till 31st January, 2023) against the allocation of ₹ 756.37 crores at RE 2022-23 which is 75.16% of 
RE allocation. However, the allocation for Leh and Kargil Autonomous Hill Development Councils 
have been reduced to ₹ 334.68 crores and ₹  333.32 crores in BE 2023- 24 respectively. The 
Committee would like  to apprised about the reasons for the curtailment, and recommends that the 
budgetary allocations may be enhanced for them at the RE stage. The Committee feels that 
devolution of financial power to the LAHDCs will help them in executing their developmental  
projects. 
 (Para 5.5.5 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.20.4 The funds allocated to Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council (LAHDC), Leh and 
LAHDC, Kargil during financial years 2020- 21, 2021-22, 2022-23 & 2023- 24 and expenditure in 
the last three financial years are as under: 

 
40 
 
(Rs. In crore) 
 LAHDC Leh LAHDC Kargil 
Year BE RE Exp. BE RE Exp. 
2020-21 238.07 237.56 129.58 238.87 238.75 184.38 
2021-22 238.03 240.83 218.73 239.00 239.07 225.72 
2022-23 264.19 276.14 259.52 264.27 278.55 266.60 
 
2.20.5 While mentioning the figures for RE 2022- 23 and expenditure till 31.01.2023, both for 
LAHDC Leh & Kargil, the committee has taken into account the grand total of RE and expenditure 
of financial years 2020-21, 2021-22 & 2022-23.  
 
2.20.6 The RE for LAHDC Le h and Kargil during 2022 -23 were ₹ 276.14 cr and ₹ 278.55 crore 
respectively. The allocations to LAHDC, Leh and LAHDC, Kargil in the financial year 2023- 24 
have been increased to ₹ 334.68 cr and ₹333.32 cr respectively, leading to an approximate increase 
of 26.68% and 26.12% in the allocation for the current financial year over the last financial year for 
LAHDC Leh and Kargil respectively as compared to the BE for the financial year 2022-23. 
 
2.20.7 It may, thus, be seen that there is no curtailment in the  allocation of Leh & Kargil 
Autonomous Hill Development Councils during BE 2023-24. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.8 The Committee observes that the UT of Ladakh receives good insolation being situated at a 
great height. It also has good wind resources due to its valley terrain and temporal variation. This 
can be used for generating solar and wind power in the UT. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the UT Administration may conduct a feasibility study for harnessing solar and wind power as 
well as other renewable energy sources to cater to the power requirement of the UT. It may rope in 
the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy for this endeavour. 
 (Para 5.5.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.20.9  
i. Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has done an assessment of solar power potential of 
Ladakh, and estimated a potential of 35 GW. 
ii. A 50 MWP solar plant with 20 MW AC and 50 MWh battery storage system at Phey, Leh is 
under construction by Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI). 
iii. For assessing the wind power potential, National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) and 
SECI have installed wind masts at various locations in Leh and Kargil districts of Ladakh 
for collecting wind data. 
iv. ONGC Energy Center (OEC) is also taking up a pilot project of developing Geothermal 
Energy in Puga valley by initial drilling and setting up a 1 MW Geothermal energy plant 
and conducting further studies for commercial development. 
v. National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. (NTPC) is taking up a pilot project of setting up 
green hydrogen plant which wi ll be powering fuel cell based electric vehicles (5 buses) for 
clean mobility in Ladakh. NTPC is setting up 1.7 MW solar plant for powering the 
hydrogen plant. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.10 The Committee also recommends that the UT Administration of  Ladakh may take 
steps to increase green cover in Ladakh by planting more trees. This will help in generating 

 
41 
 
employment and increase the revenue of the local people. The MHA may extend necessary 
budgetary support and technological interventions to the UT for the same. 
  
(Para 5.5.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.20.11 Forest Department of the UT of Ladakh has undertaken a mega plantation drive in 
the UT of Ladakh with a target of planting about 20 lakh plants during the next three years. During 
the current financial year (2023- 24), the Forest Department has planned to plant about 15.80 lakh 
saplings covering an area of about 1460 hectares under different schemes like Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), Special Developme nt Package 
(SDP), District Plan. Saplings of poplar, willow and seabuckthorn, etc will be planted mostly on 
community, gonpa and other governmental lands. 
 
2.20.12 After the formation of the UT of Ladakh in 2019, MHA has been providing necessary 
support to the UT of Ladakh in the form of budget allocation of ₹ 5958.00 crore every year since 
2020-21 for ensuring all round development of Ladakh. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.13 The Committee notes that no substantial progress has been made in the construction 
of the infrastructure of the medical college in Ladakh. The detailed project report (DPR) for the 
construction of the medical college is still under process/examination whereas the project was 
approved in 2019. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends that the MHA may take up the case with 
the concerned Ministry/ Department on a priority basis to remove administrative bottlenecks and 
expedite the construction of the medical college. In the meantime, the college may commence its 
academic activities from the existing hospital of the UT so that the medical students of the UT can 
get the option of pursuing medical education in the UT. 
 (Para 5.5.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.20.14 
i. Land measuring 737 kanals and 18 marlas has been allotted at SpitukPharka, Le h for 
establishment of new Medical College at Leh. 
ii. Construction of boundary wall on the allotted land has been started. 
iii. For early commencement of the operation of the new Medical college, MHA has advised 
the UT of Ladakh to proceed with 50 seated medical c ollege in Leh, initially, with a 
provision to expand the same to 100 seats in subsequent phases and to access the necessary 
infrastructure and manpower accordingly. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.20.15 The Committee notes that the acquisition of small airc raft to commence flights from 
Kargil airport is in progress. The Committee understands the urgent requirement for flights from 
Kargil airport and recommends that the MHA may take up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
commence commercial flights from Ka rgil Airport within a specified time. The Committee also 
recommends that considering the large size and difficult topography of the UT, the establishment of 
airports at Nubhra, Nyoma and Zanskar may also be explored to improve connectivity. 
 (Para 5.5.12 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 

 
42 
 
2.20.16   This para has been brought to the notice of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA). The 
status provided by the MoCA is as under: 
 
Kargil Airport: 
 Kargil airport, which is owned by the Indian Air Force (IAF), was identified for development 
and to operate Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) flights in the 2nd round of bidding under 
the UDAN scheme.  
 MoCA has held a meeting with M/s Spicejet Ltd. on 24.05.2023 to discuss the operationalization 
of awarded RCS routes, including connecting Kargil Airport with Srinagar and Jammu. 
 The Selected Airline Operator (SAO) has informed MoCA that they need some more time for the 
routes allotted to them in UDAN round 4.2 with 19- seats type of aircraft with frequency of 133 
seats per week.  
 
Thoise (Nubra) Airport: 
 Thoise (Nubra) Airport in Ladakh belongs to Indian Air Force (IAF) 
 The following routes connecting Nubra (Thoise) airport was awarded to M/s Spicejet Ltd. for 
operation of RCS flights: 
a) Thoise – Srinagar- Thoise 
b) Thoise – Chandigarh – Thoise 
 
 However, the SAO has requested MoCA on 24.05.2023 to surrender the routes.  
 Presently, this airport is available in UDAN document for bidding. An airline bidder may submit 
the proposal to connect Nubra Valley airport. On receipt of a valid bid connecting Nubra 
Valley, the same shall be considered for the award as per UDAN provisions.  
 
2.21.17₹ 1.00 Crore has been allocated for development of this airport under UDAN  scheme. 3 
Parcel of land has been offered by IAF. Additional land has been requested from IAF authorities. 
Work may be taken up after the land is made available. 
 
2.21 Demand No. 56 – Lakshadweep 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.21.1 The Committee notes that Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) has been declared as the 
Nodal Agency declared for developing green/ new & renewable energy projects in the Union 
Territory of Lakshadweep. SECI has prepared the proposal for setting up 25.14 MW capacity solar 
power plants in the Lakshadweep Islands. The Committee recommends that the MHA may take up 
with the UT Administration of Lakshadweep to conduct a feasibility study on the prospects of 
harnessing wind and tidal energy as well. 
 
 (Para 5.6.6 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.21.2 SECI & NIWE (National Institute of wind Energy) has carried out site survey for deployment 
of wind Power Projects at Kavaratti, Agatti, Kalpeni, Andrott, Kadamath & Minicoy islands before 
3-4 years back, but the execution was held up due to Covid 19 pandemic. The UTLA will request 
SECI to explore the feasibility on the prospects of harnessing wind and tidal energy. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.21.3 The Committee notes that there has been low utilization of funds (till 31st December,2022) 
by the UT, against the allocation made in RE 2022- 23 for some crucial sectors like tourism 

 
43 
 
development (₹ 1.53 crores spent against ₹  6.75 crores), Road, Bridges and Road Transport ( ₹ 2.88 
crores spent against ₹  7.15 crores), employment and training ( ₹ 17.28 crores spent against ₹  53.13 
crores), agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and cooperation (₹ 4.25 crores spent against ₹ 10.09 
crores), Social Forestry & Ecology & Environment( ₹ 0.06 crores spent against ₹  2.41 crores), 
Health (₹ 17.28 crores spent against ₹ 53.13 crores) and Schemes for Port & Shipping and Aviation 
(₹ 216.27 crores spent against ₹  401.65 crores). The Committee observes that all these are crucial 
sectors which form the backbone of development of that UT and believes that optimal  utilization of 
funds is necessary for the holistic development of the UT. Therefore, it recommends that the MHA, 
along with the Administration of the UT of Lakshadweep, should make efforts to remove the 
bottlenecks which are delaying the execution of the projects in various sectors. The UT 
Administration may form a Committee to oversee the utilization of funds for crucial developmental 
projects in the UT. 
 (Para 5.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.21.4 The allocation in BE 2022- 23 was Rs. 1421.50 Crore which was revised to Rs. 1333.35 
Crore at the final Grant stage, out of which an amount of Rs. 1275.12 Crore has been utilized. Thus, 
95.63% of the final allocation has been utilized. 
 
2.21.5 As to the saving of 4.37%, it is mentioned that the Lakshadweep islands ar e scattered in 
Arabian Sea at the west coast of Kerala and each island is isolated from other.  All the materials, 
including the construction materials, are required to be transported from mainland. Transportation 
of materials as well as implementation of projects/ works is not possible in islands during Monsoon 
period i.e. from May to September every year due to heavy rain and sea roughness.  Hence, 
practically six months are available for the administration to implement projects/ works. 
 
2.21.6 Amidst the se geographical constraints, all possible efforts are being made to implement/ 
complete the projects/ works in a time -bound manner for which regular review meetings are taken 
at appropriate level with concerned departments/ agencies to remove the bottlenec ks which are 
delaying the execution of the projects in various sectors.  Further, monthly/ quarterly meeting with 
all the Departmental Heads and Secretaries of the UTLA are arranged by Finance Department to 
sort out the inter -departmental issues as well as  hurdles faced by the any departments in 
implementation of the Schemes/ Projects/ Works. 
 
2.22 Demand No. 57 – Transfers to Delhi 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.22.1 The Committee observes that the Chandrawal Water Treatment Plant project is proposed to 
be executed in 6 packages and was expected to be completed by October, 2024. But due to the delay 
in the execution of the project, the timeline for completion has been revised to January, 2027. 
Considering the shortage of water in different parts of Delhi, the Committee believes that the project 
is vital for Delhi as it will help in providing continuous and equal water distribution in Delhi. The 
Committee, hence, recommends that the MHA may take up with the UT Administration of Delhi to 
remove the bottlenecks  hampering the progress of the project and create a mechanism for periodic 
monitoring of the progress of work to ensure that the 6 packages of the project are executed in time 
and the completion date of the project is not revised further. 
 (Para 5.7.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 

 
44 
 
2.22.2 The project is being monitored regularly and is now on track. Delhi Jal Board (DJB) is 
taking steps to expedite these projects. All the 6 packages have been planned to be executed before 
extended loan period i.e. up to January 2027. 
The present status of the project is as under: 
 Package-1: The work has been awarded to M/s L&T Ltd. on 24.07.2019 at a total cost of Rs. 
599 Crores. The Capex cost of work is Rs. 298 Cr. The work is likely to be completed by March, 
2024. Present progress is about 34% and approximately Rs. 105 crores have been spent on the 
work. 
 Package-2: The work has been awarded to M/s JWIL Infra Ltd. at a total price of Rs. 658 Cr. 
The work is expected to be completed by March, 2026. 
 Package-3: The tenders have been received on 27.03.2023. The work is likely to be awarded by 
July 2023 and expected to be completed by July, 2026 
 Package-4: The work is under process of award and is likely to be awarded by May, 2023 and 
expected to be completed by May, 2026. 
 Package-5: Bid d ocuments approved by JICA. NIT will be floated after award of work of 
Packages 2, 3 & 4. The work is expected to be completed by March, 2026. 
 Package–6A: Work completed in Feb 2021. 
 Package-6B: Bid documents under preparation. NIT will be floated after award of work of 
Packages 2, 3 & 4. The work is expected to be completed by August, 2026. 
 
 
2.23 Demand No. 58 – Transfers to Jammu & Kashmir 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.23.1 The Committee notes that while ₹  273 crore was sanctioned in BE 2022-23, the UT 
Administration has not provided details regarding its utilization. The Committee notes the 
prgrammes undertaken by the UT Administration for conservation and restoration of the lake. 
However, it observes that there are large number of encroachments in the Dal Lake area. Weeds, silt 
and untreated sewage are increasingly choking the beautiful lake, which draws tens of thousands of 
tourists each year. The waste discharge from houseboats also adds to the pollution in the lake. The 
Committee observes that the visible outcome of the projects is yet to be seen. The Committee 
recommends that the UT Administration may conduct fresh mapping of Dal Lake to get an 
understanding about the percentage of the lake‟s water which is relatively clean or severely 
degraded. This will help the UT administration to make a conservation plan for Dal Lake as well as 
in removing encroachments fruitful. The cleaning ofthe lake should be completed within a time 
frame. Additional allocations, if required, may be sought from the Ministry o f Finance at the RE 
stage for this purpose. 
 (Para 5.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.23.2    
A. Utilization of 273.00 crore 
As per the directions of Wetlands Department, Ministry Environment Forests and Climate Change, 
the Govt. of J&K formulated a revised DPR as per the format of the guideline of NPCA to the tune 
of Rs 273.00 Crore submitted to MoE&CC on 03.03.2023, under inti mation to MHA. The MoE&CC 
has subsequently referred the matter to IIT Roorkee for technical vetting, the reply with reference to 
the observations have been furnished to that Department.  
 
B. Encroachments: 
 The progress is submitted hereunder: 
 

 
45 
 
Year Demolitions FIR against 
violations 
illegal 
constructions  
FIR 
against 
vehicles/ 
seized 
vehicles  
Total 
FIR 
lodged 
(4+05) 
Sealed 
Structures 
2019 187 80 03 83 03 
2020 447 2018 21 239 06 
2021 446 130 15 145 8 
2022 398 165 4 169 4 
 
 Further many steps have been taken for scientific surveillance and monitoring of illegal 
structures and encroachments as mentioned briefly hereunder: 
1. Delineation of Lake Boundary  - Delineation & demarcation of the boundary of the lakes 
done for the 1st time and 302 boundary pillars/markers installed along the boundary using 
time stamped Survey of India Maps, GIS data from Drones and ground-truthing; 
2. Drone Survey -1st operation of Drone Survey of 200m adjoining area, inside the lake and 
along the lake periphery done and has been repeate d in January, 2023. It will help to have a 
check on illegal constructions. 
3. Installation of CCTV cameras  - For better and effective monitoring of lake cleaning 
activities like deweeding, solid waste collection, dredging and to also to check the illegal 
ferrying of construction material in the peripheral areas of the lake, 23 cameras ANPR/PTZ 
installed at different locations in Phase 1sl on eastern and northern side and 25 cameras are 
proposed to be installed in Phase 2nd from Habak to Dalgate through western side of the 
lake.  
4. Installation of Barricades: 12 barricades predominantly in the areas that fall on the western 
side of the Dal have been placed to check the ferrying of the construction material within the 
jurisdiction of the Authority. 
5. Construction of Western Foreshore Road  -The proposed road from Dal Gate (Kohnakhun) 
to SaidaKadal of 2.9 Km length on t he Western Periphery of the lake will help in 
demarcating the Dal boundary on the western side and check encroachments. The same is 
being taken up under Local Area Plan. 
 
C. Weeds / Lilly Infestation 
 Various steps have been taken in the last two-three years as mentioned briefly hereunder: 
1. Bathymetric Survey - Bathymetric/hydrography Survey of the lake done for the 1st time. It 
enables scientific deweeding and dredging of the lake without damaging its eco system. 
2. Deweeding and lake cleaning — Massive Janbhagidari campaign under "ATHWAAS 
INITIATIVE" launched for the first time for Dal cleaning. Thousands of people participated. 
More than 70000 man days created and 10000 volunteers participated. Mechanical  
deweeding being done - departmentally as well as on out sourcing basis. The Cleaning has 
been taken up under Mission Mode method and in the last two-three years out of one third of 
the Lake has been rejuvenated .and now is being maintained, cleared till date. The open 
space details are tabulated hereunder: 
 
(Area in square KMs) 
Description  Year 1985 
(Settlement by Sir 
Walter Lawrence) 
ETS survey 
carried out by 
Revenue 
Authorities in 
2009 
Satellite 
Imagery 2020 
Description  
Land mass/crop 
land/Vacant land 
25.86 25 24.605 25.86 

 
46 
 
with or without 
Vegetation  
Watery land 18.21 19.83 20.37 18.21 
Total 7.65 5.17 4.235 7.65 
 
 
* In the last two -three years, all the emergent invasive Lilly infested area has been cleared 
taking the Open Space area to 20.37 sq.KM. 
 
1. Disposal and Bio- methanation of the weed and other waste from lake - A project in 
collaboration with National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. 
(NAFED) undertaken for scientific disposal of the waste and selling off the gas. [waste to 
energy]. Plant is expected to be made operational during the current financial year. 
 
D. Siltation/ Dredging 
1. Dredging of settling Basin is being done departmental by using department Cutter Suction 
Dredger to improve the efficacy of the Settling Basin. About 140,000 cum of silt has been 
dredged out from the Settling Basin during in last two years. 
2. Oxidation ponds have been created in the in the periphery of the Lake especially on Northern 
side, the main catchment. Out of the Sewerage load of 48 MLD, 36 MLD is addressed through 
STPS, 8-10 MLD is being routed through these oxidation ponds.   
3. Twenty navigation channels retrieved by way of desilting, widening/deepening and, desilting 
10.00 KM navigation al channels completed. 
4. The authority has recently shifted another departmental Cutter Suction Dredger from  
Hazrathbal Basin to near NPL bund & the same to be utilized for dredging along shoreline of 
Lake from NPL bound to KralSangri (About 2 KM in length). First ever dredging of shoreline in 
Nishat basin. 
5. Catchment Area treatment to prevent siltation: Plantation of 150000 plants completed in the last 
two years. Slope stabilization works in TailbalNallah( main inflow Nalla) and MeerakhshNalla . 
Check dams / other anti-erosion works in MalooriNallah&Asthan pore Nallah.100 Compost Pits 
have been provided to farmers in catchment area etc  
 
E. Untreated Sewage: 
1. The total Load on the Dal lake is 48 MLD. Out of the Sewerage load of 48 MLD, 36 MLD is 
addressed through the 5 STPS. 
2. 3 existing STPs at of 14 MLD load have been refurbished; another additional with 30 MLD 
being constructed at Gupt Ganga to cater the left -over are as of lake periphery on the east -
northern side, project being undertaken by UEED. The same is being taken up under 
AMRUT2.0. 
3. In the meanwhile, all the sewer through the Northem Catchment is being rout ed through the 
Oxidation/ Detention ponds that have been created in the periphery of the lake in 2022- 23. As 
such no untreated Sewage goes to the lake from Catchment area. 
4. Houseboats: The process for connecting the House boats with the existing sewer lines  has been 
already initiated. The work for connecting about 160 House boats in two clusters with the 
existing sewer line of already established 16.1 MLD STP is in pr| ogress. The remaining 495 
House boats in nine clusters to be completed in this year. In Nigeen Lake, 84 House boats stands 
already connected with the sewer line of already established STP Nalla Amir Khan. 
5. The Sewer coming from the hamlets has been taken up and incorporated under the 273 Cr 
Project.  
6. Solid waste: 9- 10 MT solid waste is being col lected on daily basis from the House boats, 
hamlets/ villages inside lake & form open water surfaces including inflow & outflow channel of 

 
47 
 
Dal Nageen Lake. The collected waste of around 9- 10 MT is being brought to the shore of lake 
at designated sites, from where these are taken by SMC for final disposal. 
 
 
F.  Quality of Water 
 
 Fifty Percent of the water is B class as per the analysis and it is regularly being monitored. 
Display units have been installed at 5 places Nehru Park, Oberoi Ghats, Nishat, Dockyard and 
Hazratbal for information of General Public showing the parameters of the lake waters and 
STPs. Further the Authority is in the process of Installing Online Continuous Effluent 
Monitoring System at STPs. Fresh map ping as advised will be started 
 Further many steps have been taken for scientific surveillance and monitoring of illegal 
structures and encroachments as mentioned briefly hereunder 
 
1. Delineation of Lake Boundary  - Delineation & demarcation of the boundary of the lakes 
done for the 1st time and 302 boundary pillars/markers installed along the boundary using 
time stamped Survey of India Maps, GIS data from Drones and ground - truthing; 
2. Drone Survey -1st operation of Drone Survey of 200m a adjoining area, inside the lake and 
along the lake periphery done and has been repeated in January, 2023. It will help to have a 
check on illegal constructions. 
3. Installation of CCTV cameras  - For better and effective monitoring of lake cleaning 
activities like deweeding, solid waste collection, dredging and to also to check the illegal 
ferrying of construction material in the peripheral areas o f the lake, 23 cameras ANPR/PTZ 
installed at different locations in Phase 1st on eastern and northern side and 25 cameras are 
proposed to be installed in Phase 2nd from Habak to Dalgate through western side of the 
lake. 
4. Installation of Barricades: 12 barricades predominantly in the areas that fall on the western 
side of the Dal have been placed to check the ferrying of the construction material within the 
jurisdiction of the Authority. 
5. Construction of Western Foreshore Road -The propos ed road from Dal Gate (Kohnakhun) 
to SaidaKadal of 2.9 Km length on the Western Periphery of the lake will help in 
demarcating the Dal boundary on the western side and check encroachments. The same is 
being taken up under local area plan. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.23.3 The Committee takes note of the delegation of powers to the District Development Councils 
(DDCs)/ Block Development Councils (BDCs) for development in J&K. The Committee, 
recommends that due representation may be given to the minority communities and smaller groups 
in the District Development Councils and Block Development Councils, to facilitate proper 
addressal of their issues. 
 (Para 5.8.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.23.4 Section-4(3), section - 7(3), Section 45- A(4) of J&K Panchayati Raj Act. 1989 provides 
reservation of seats in Halqa Panchayats (HPs), BDCs and DDCs for SC, ST, and Women. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.23.5 The Committee observes that the Ambri apple is unique to the Kashmir region and it has 
great demand at the local as well as at the national level. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the UT Administration should consider growing Ambri at a commercial scale, provide geo -

 
48 
 
tagging to the fruit and popularize its unique characteristics like the attractive sweet taste, crispiness, 
fragrant flavor, flavour aroma, etc. for exporting these apples to the national and international 
markets. This in turn will boost the revenue for the local farmers a s well as conserve the indigenous 
variety of apples of the Kashmir region. 
 
 (Para 5.8.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.23.6 Ambri variety of Apple is mostly grown in Shopian District of Kashmir and is the only apple 
variety indigenous of Kashmir. This variety is known for its unique attractive pink color, sweet taste, 
crispness, fragrant flavor, aroma and excellent keeping quality and comparatively resistant to 
various diseases. The total area under the Ambri Apple variety is around 23 Ha with production of 
around 322 MT. The issue of GI tagging of the variety is under process with the concerned quarters. 
The variety is liked by one and all, however, its cultivation has not got much attention compared to 
delicious group. The Department is contemplating for product ion of fruit plants of this variety in 
Departmental Nurseries and all efforts to be taken to promote this variety under Area Expansion 
Programme. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2.23.7 The Committee notes that the Gucchhi mushroom grows in the Kashmir region and is of 
very high commercial value. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the UT Administration 
may explore the possibility of commercial harvesting of Gucchi as it can be a good source of income 
for the local people in Kashmir. 
 (Para 5.8.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
2.23.8 Gucchhi is a wild niche crop commonly found in forest/hilly areas. The Department of 
Agriculture Kashmir is working in close coordination with SKUAST -Kashmir for domestication of 
the crop. However, the crop has been nominated for G.I. tagging for which an Apex Committee has 
been framed by Government of UT of J&K for better price realization to enhance the economic 
status of the farmers. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
49 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
3.1 Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3.1.1 The Committee appreciates that a prototype of a digital kit for testing narcotics has been 
developed by National Forensic Science University (NFSU) wh ich can detect various types of 
narcotics including synthetic drugs. The Committee recommends that the prototype, when finalized, 
may be given to the Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) in the States/ UTs and CAPFs having the 
power of seizure of narcotics unde r the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, 
1985. The Committee also recommends that the Bureau of Police Research and Development 
(BPR&D) may prepare a model FIR for the registration of cases of narcotics and circulate it to the 
States/ UTs. This will help in strengthening investigation and prosecution procedures in narcotics 
cases all across the country. 
(Para 4.14.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 NFSU has informed that Prototype development of the NDPS detection kit is completed and 
they will provide kits to NCB (Ahmedabad) very shortly to ascertain the effectiveness of the kit to 
test its sensitivity and precision. Based on the feedback obtained from the NCB (Ahmedabad), NFSU 
will compile the date for finalization of manufacturing of the indigenous NDPS detection kit.  
Accordingly, NCB Ahmedabad Zonal Unit was directed to extend required assistance to NFSU. On 
the receipt of the feedback from NCB Ahmedabad further necessary action regarding procurement 
and distribution of Indigenous drug detection kit will be made as per the laid down rules and 
regulations. 
3.1.3 Further, BPR&D has constituted a joint committee to carry out a study in collaboration with 
NCB to prepare a model FIR’ for the registration of the cases of Narcotics in order to help in 
strengthening Investigation and Prosecution procedure in Narcotics cases. The composition of the 
Committee is as under:  
 Shri Pawan Srivastava, Director, CAPT, Bhopal - Chairman 
 Ms Uma Meena, DD, NPM, BPR&D - Member 
 Shri Ajay Kumar, Asstt. Director (Ops), NCB Hqrs  - Member 
 Shri Rajesh Deo, DCP, SE District, Delhi Police - Member 
 Shri Japan Babu, Addl. Legal Advisor, NCB, New Delhi - Member 
 Shri Deepak Dhamanda, Asstt. Director, NPM, BPR&D – Member 
 
3.1.4 Meeting of the Joint Committee has been conducted on 19.05.2023 at BPR&D Hqrs. New 
Delhi. After detailed deliberations, the committee agreed that the assigned tasked could be 
competed in three steps as per details given below: 
 Preparing SOP for investigation of NDPS cases.  
 Preparing Flow Chart (Details of the procedures with time line) emphasizing on mandatory 
sections of NDPS Act.  
 Preparing draft Model FIR. 
 

50 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.1.
5 The Committee would like to be apprised whether the prototype, when finalized, would 
be given to the Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) in the States/ UTs and CAPFs having the 
power of seizure of narcotics under the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) 
Act, 1985.  
3.2
 Modernization of Police Forces (Assistance to States) 
O
bservation/Recommendation 
3.2.1
 The Committee notes that against the allocation of ₹  620.45 crore under the scheme 
Assistance to States & UTs for Modernization of Police, ₹  4.55 crore has been released till 31st 
December, 2022 to six UTs. The information has  been provided about a minuscule portion of the 
allocated funds, no information has been provided in respect of States and othe r UTs. The 
Committee desires to be apprised about the allocation of funds made under this head to States and 
other UTs along with the status of projects undertaken by them for the implementation of 
Modernization of Police Forces in their respective States and UTs. 
(
Para 4.16.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2
 With a view to have more effective cash management and bringing more efficiency into 
public expenditure management, new guidelines for the release of funds under the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes issued by the Department of Expenditure are being followed since 01.07.2021. 
As per the new guidelines, for being eligible for release of the first installment of 25% of the current 
year allocation, States/UTs have to bring their unspent balance out of Central and State shares to or 
below 25% of the current year allocation. Further, for second and subsequent instalments of 25% 
(of the current year allocation), States/UTs have to spend 75% of the funds released.  
3.2.3
 Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ‘Assistance to States & UTs for Modernisation of 
Police’ (erstwhile scheme of ‘Modernisation of State Police Forces (MPF)’), a total amount of Rs. 
36.69 crore has been released to States and UTs during FY 2022- 23.  Only three States, namely, 
Karnataka, Telangana, and Goa could be released the first instalment of 25% of their allocation 
total of Rs. 9.07 crore and a total amount of Rs. 5.1125 crore could be released to UTs against their 
allocations. Further, under Home Minister's Contingency Reserve, an amount of Rs. 12.13 crore has 
been released for implementation of National Cybercrime Helpline number 1930 to States(except 
Karnataka) and UT of Puducherry and an amount of Rs. 10.20 crore has been released to Assam, 
Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, and Mizoram for certain projects as per requests of these States. 
Fu
rther Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.4
 The Committee notes that a total amount of ₹  36.69 crore has been released by the 
Ministry during Financial Year 2022- 23 under the scheme Assistance to States & UTs for 
Modernization of Police Forces against the allocation of ₹ 620.45 crore. The Committee feels 
such low budget utilization by States and UTs on modernisation of Police forces will hamper 
the implementation of projects under this scheme. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
furnish the status of projects undertaken by the States/UTs under this scheme. The Ministry 
may also urge the States/UTs to be more efficient in budget planning and utilization of the 
unspent balance so that it may result in timely completion of projects.  

 
51 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government have not 
been received 
 
4.1 Budgetary Allocation (2023-24) of Demand No. (52-59) for Union Terrirories 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.1.1 The Committee notes that there has been an increase of 4.01 % in allocations made for the 
Union Territories (UTs) in year 2023- 24 as compared to 2022- 23. But there has been no substantial 
increase in the capital budget for the UTs during past three years. The Committee understands that 
the developmental needs of the UTs requires adequate capital funds for creation of physical and 
social infrastructure like roads, power, water and sanitation, health and education in all UTs. 
Further, to ensure that the sensitive and fragile ecology of some of the UTs are not affected, special 
measures will have to be taken while implementing the developmental projects. This requires extra 
expenditure which in turn demands more allocation of funds. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may strive for increasing the cap ital budgets for the Union Territories 
in coming financial years laying special emphasis on planning ecological sustenance along with 
developmental prosperity. 
 
(Para 2.6.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 The details of the total funds allocated, capital budget and capital expenditure over the past 
three financial years (2020-21 to 2022-23) in respect of the UT of Ladakh are as under: 
(Amount in crores of ₹) 
Financial Year Total Funds 
Allocated 
Capital Budget Capital 
Expenditure 
2020-21 5958 3626.28 788.58 
2021-22 5958 3626.36 1855.58 
2022-23 5958 3404.71 2090.15 
 
4.1.3 The Union Territory of Ladakh is striving hard to utilize the funds allocated to it. Over the 
past three financial years, the Union Territory of Ladakh has taken several steps/measures to 
improve the utilization of funds allocated under the capital compone nt. These steps/measures have 
resulted in a noticeable upward trend in capital expenditure in the UT of Ladakh over the last three 
financial years despite limited working season of about seven months only (May to November).  
 
4.1.4 It may be seen that adequate capital funds were available during the last three financial 
years. Further, an amount of Rs. 3149.92   crore is also allocated during the current financial year 
2023-24 under capital component to undertake developmental activities in the UT of Ladakh. 
 
4.1.5 In respect of the other UTs too, the advice of the Committee has been noted and 
communicated to all UTs. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.1.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that the reply of the Ministry 
is focused only on the Union Territory of Ladakh. The Committee would like to be updated on 

 
52 
 
the capital expenditure incurred in the last three financial years including the ongoing 
financial year and the capital assets created in respect of the other Union Territories also.  
 
4.2 Bureau of Immigration (BoI) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4.2.1 The Committee notes that the MHA has suitably sensitized the Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
and Waterways (MoPS&W) for addressing the issues at these ICPs. But no information regarding 
the action taken has been furnished to the Committee. The Committee would like to be apprised by 
the MHA regarding the action taken by MoPS&W in this matter for its consideration. 
(Para 4.14.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 This Ministry vide OM No.25022/03/2023-Imm dated 05.04.2023 has requested MoPS&W to 
furnish Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in this regard. This was followed up with subsequent reminders 
dated 12.04.2023, 12.05.2023 and 14.06.2023. The issue will be taken forward and elevated to the 
appropriate level. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.2.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has requested Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPS&W) to furnish Action Taken Notes to address the 
issues of these Immigration Check Posts (ICPs). The Committee desires that   information in 
this regard may be furnished to the Committee for its consideration after its receipt from 
MoPS&W.  
 
  

53 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
N
arcotics Control Bureau (NCB) 
T
he Committee would like to be apprised whether the prototype, when finalized, would 
be given to the Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) in the States/ UTs and CAPFs having the 
power of seizure of narcotics under the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) 
Act, 1985.  
(Para 3.1.5) 
Modernization of Police Forces (Assistance to States) 
The Committee notes that a total amount of ₹  36.69 crore has been released by the Ministry 
during Financial Year 2022- 23 under the scheme Assistance to States & UTs for 
Modernization of Police Forces against the allocation of ₹ 620.45 crore. The Committee feels 
such low budget utilization by States and UTs on modernisation of Police forces will hamper 
the implementation of projects under this scheme. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
furnish the status of projects undertaken by the States/UTs under this scheme. The Ministry 
may also urge the States/UTs to be more efficient in budget planning and utilization of the 
unspent balance so that it may result in timely completion of projects.  
(Para 3.2.4) 
B
udgetary Allocation (2023-24) of Demand No. (52-59) for Union Terrirories 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that the reply of the Ministry 
is focused only on the Union Territory of Ladakh. The Committee would like to be updated on 
the capital expenditure incurred in the last three financial years including the ongoing 
financial year and the capital assets created in respect of the other Union Territories also.  
(Para 4.1.6) 
B
ureau of Immigration (BoI) 
T
he Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has requested Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways (MoPS&W) to furnish Action Taken Notes to address the issues of 
these Immigration Check Posts (ICPs). The Committee desires that   information in this 
regard may be furnished to the Committee for its consideration after its receipt from 
MoPS&W.  
(Para 4.2.3) 

MINUTES 
54

55 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 p .m. on Tuesday, the 05 th December, 2023 
in Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, PHA-Extention, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri  Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Dr. Anil Jain
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Dr.(Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Shri Dulal Cha ndra Goswami
8. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
9. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
10. Shri R.K.Singh Patel
11. Shr
i  Vishnu Dayal Ram
12. Shr
i Rahul Ramesh Shewale
13. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

56 
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Joint Director
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
Shri Manoj H M, Committee Officer
2. xxx * xxx x xx.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman moved on to inform about the agenda of the
m
eeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following two draft Reports of the
Committee:-
i. 249th Report on the Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty
Second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs; and
ii. xxx* x
 xx xxx
4. The Chairman further explained that the Ministry of Home Affairs
f
urnished the Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty Second Report on 30 th August, 2023 xxx*
xxx  xxx. It was also shared to the Members that most of the
recommendations, as proposed by the Committee, were accepted by the
concerned Ministries. In this context, the Chairman asked the Members to offer
their suggestions, if any, on the recommendations and observations given in the
draft Reports.
5. The Committee then took up the draft 249
th and xxx* xxx     xxx. 
for consideration and adopted them without any change.
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any
typogr
aphical/factual errors and also to nominate Members for
presentation/laying of the Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha during the current
Session of Parliament and nominate Members for presentation/laying of the
* xxx Relates to Other matters

57 
Reports to Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha so t hat further necessary action can be 
initiated on the said Reports.
7. xxx ∗ xxx xxx.  
8. xxx* xxx xxx.
9. xxx*  xxx x xx. 
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee
wa
s kept.
11. The meeting adj ourned at 3.22 p.m.
*****
∗ xxx  Relates to Other matters

ANNEXURE 
58

59 
Annexure-A 
(R
eply to Para 3.5.7 & 3.5.8) 
Sta
tusof Physical Progress of the Works Taken up Under NCRMP Phase-II 
Sl. 
No. 
State Sub-
component 
Planned Completed Remarks 
1 Goa EWDS Installation and 
Commissioning 
of EWDS 
90% There was poor performance 
by the contractor. Further, 
the Scope of work was 
revised by the State in 
consultation with PMU, 
NDMA to reduce certain 
items which had become 
redundant due to latest 
advancement like possibility 
of alte rnate design (for 
instance, installation of 
Sirens on existing 
communication telecom 
towers instead of erecting 
new standalone towers) and 
experience from other states 
(for instance, reliance on 
GPRS & OFC connectivity 
in place of RE connectivity 
etc.). 
The activity is likely to be 
completed by May 2023. 
MPCS 11 No. 11 No. 
(100%) 
- 
Underground 
Cabling 
315 KMs 315 KMs 
(100%) 
- 
2 Gujarat MPCS 76 No. 76 No. 
(100%) 
- 
Road 157 KMs 157 KMs 
(100%) 
- 
3 Karnataka EWDS Installation and 
commissioning 
of EWDS 
63% There was poor performance 
by the contractor. Further, 
the Scope of work was 
revised by the State in 
consultation with PMU, 
NDMA to reduce certain 
items which had become 
redundant due to latest 
advancement like possibility 
of alternate design (for  
'instance, installation of' 
Sirens on existing 
communication telecom 
towers instead of erecting 

60 
Sl. 
No. 
State Sub-
component 
Planned Completed Remarks 
new standalone towers) and 
experience from other states 
(for instance, reliance on 
GPRS & OFC connectivity 
in place of RF connectivity 
etc.) 
The Activity is li kely to be 
completed by June 2023 
MPCS 10 No. 10 No. 
(100%) 
- 
Road 48 KMs 48 KMs 
(100%) 
- 
Bridge 2 No. 2 No. 
(100%) 
Saline 
Embarkment 
7.8 KMs 7.8 KMs - 
4 Kerala EWDS Installation and 
Commissioning 
of EWDS 
90.48% There was delay in 
modification of the licensing 
conditions by DoT which 
was required by Kerala State 
for installation of the sirens 
on the existing 
communication towers. 
The project is likely to be 
commissioned after due 
testing of by May 2023. 
MPCS 17 No. 16 No. 
(100%) 
- 
1 No. (92%) The work for Kadappuram 
MPCS was delayed due to a 
stay order by Hon’ble High 
Court of Kerala. As directed 
by Hon’ble HC, the work 
has now been resumed. 
The physical progress of said 
MPCS is 92% and is likely 
to be completed by June 
2023. 
5 Maharashtra Saline 
Embankment 
Narvel (16.44 
KMs) 
16.44 KMs 
(100%) 
The physical works 
equivalaent to the estimated 
amount approved by World 
Bank (WB) are completed 
100%. However, there are 
variations of about 98% over 
and above this amoun.t 
These variations are not 
approved by the WB. There 
is about 14% physical works 
which are yet to be 

61 
Sl. 
No. 
State Sub-
component 
Planned Completed Remarks 
completed as per the revised 
BoQ. 
The variations are being 
funded by the State from its 
own fund and the balance 
physical works of about 14% 
are likely to be completed by 
June 2023. 
KachliPitkari 
(5.82 KMs) 
5.82 KMs 
(100%) 
- 
Underground 
Cabling 
621.52 KMs 544.51 KMs 
(87.6%) 
1. Alibag UGC – 205.33
KMs
2. Ratnagiri UGC – 282.19
KMs
3. Palgarh UGC – 56.99
KMs
Due to increase in scope of 
work, it could not be 
completed within the project 
period.  However, the 
remaining work will be 
completed by June 2023 by 
the State Government from 
their own resources. 
6 West 
Bengal 
MPCS 146 No. 146 No. 
(100%) 
- 
Underground 
Cabling 
500 KMs 472.46 KMs 
(100%) 
Although target was 500 
KMs but after completion of 
works, total length of Cable 
reduced to 472.46 KMs. 