PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIVEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 19th April, 1999) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 22nd April, 1999) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 1999/Chaitra 1921 (Saka) 
C O N T E N T S
1. Composition of the Committee 
2. Introduction 
3. Report
4. *Relevant Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
 *to be appended at the printing stage
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(1998-99)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
  1 Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
2. Shri Suresh Pachouri
3. Shri H.Hanumanthappa
4. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh
6. Shri Prafull Goradia
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri K.M. Saifullah
9. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
10. Shri Janeshwar Misra
11. Shri Drupad Borgohain
12. Dr.(Ms.) P. Selvie Das
13. * Dr. Jagannath Mishra
14. · Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Krishna Kumar Chaudhary
17. Shri Satya Pal Jain

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
18. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Pushpadan Shambhudan Gadhavi
21. Shri Vaidya Vishnu Datt
22. Shri Anant Kuma Hegde
23. Dr. Swami Sachchidanand Hari Sakshi
24. Maj. Gen. B.C. Khanduri
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Smt. Meira Kumar
27. Shri Ravi Sitaram Naik
28. Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
30. Shri Nedurumalli Janardhana Reddy
31. Shri Ishvarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
32. Shri Motilal Vora
33. Shri Moni Kumar Subha
34. Shri Sudhir Giri
35. Shri Samar Choudhury
36. Shri Mohan Singh
37. Shri C, Sreenivaasan
38. Mohd. Ali Asharaf Fatmi
39. Shri Lalu Prasad
40. Shri Abdul Ghafoor
41. Shri Ramesh Chandrappa Jigajinagi
42. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
43. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
44. # Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
45. @Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer
#Nominated with effect from 26th June, 1998.
@ Nominated with effect from 12th April, 1999.
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised
by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (1999-2000) relating to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Committee heard the concerned officers of the Ministry in its meeting held on 24
th March and 1st April,
1999.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the following :-

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
i. Presentation made by the concerned officers of the Ministry;
ii. Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1999-2000;
iii. Detailed Demands for Grants of the Union Public Service Commission for the year 1999-2000;
iv. Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 1998-99;
v. Annual Report of Central Bureau of Investigation for the year 1996;
vi. Explanatory Note on the Demands for Grants (1999-2000) received from the Ministry;
vii. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Forty-forth Report on the
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry;
viii. Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaire sent to it by the Secretariat; and
ix. Written clarifications on the points/issues raised by the Members in the meeting of the Committee.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the
15th April, 1999.
New Delhi PRANAB MUKHERJEE
April , 1999 Chairman
Committee on Home Affairs
REPORT
The management of personnel policies in Government of India, to begin with, was the joint responsibility of the
Ministries of Home Affairs (Services and Establishment Wing) and Finance (Establishment Division) with Union Public
Service Commission playing an important advisory role. The Establishment Officer to the Government of India,
functioning under the Cabinet Secretary had an important role to play in the senior appointments under the Government
of India. All this made for improper division of responsibility and lack of a unified central didrection.
2. To plug this organisational loophole, the Estimates Committee of the Third Lok Sabha in its 93
rd Report (April 1966)
observed that "the ever expanding role of the Government in a welfare state with its natural concomitant of a large civil
service calls for effective personnel control through a single agency". The Administrative Reforms Commission too
urged upon the Government to set up a separate Department of Personnel, to be placed directly under the Prime Minister
to serve as a nodal agency for the personnel functions of the Government.
3. The Union Government accepted this recommendation and as a consequence the ‘Department of Personnel’ was set
up in August, 1970 and placed within the Cabinet Secretariat. In February 1973, the Department of Administrative
Reforms, till then with the Ministry of Home Affairs, was amalgamated with the Department of Personnel and the
newly created department was christened, the ‘Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms’. In 1977, this
department was transferred to the Ministry of Home Affairs. In March, 1985 a full fledged ‘Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions’ was created. The Ministry comprises three departments, namely :-
1. Department of Personnel and Training.
2. Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances.
3. Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare.
4. The Ministry is under the overall charge of the Prime Minister, assisted by a Minister of State. All the three
departments are functioning under the charge of Secretary (Personnel) assisted by seven additional Secretaries/Joint
Secretaries and other officers and staff.
5. Functionally, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions is divided into the following seven divisions

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
:-
Establishment Officer
Services and vigilance
Establishment
Administrative Tribunal and Administration
Training
Pension and Central Services
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
6. DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING AND THE VARIOUS AGENCIES UNDER ITS
ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL
1. The role of the Department of Personnel and Training can be conceptually divided into two parts. In its
larger nodal role, it acts as the formulator of policy and the watch dog of the Government ensuring that
certain accepted standards and norms, as laid down by it, are followed by all Ministries/Departments in the
recruitment, regulation of service conditions and deputation of personnel as well as other related issues.
Towards this end, guidelines are issued by it for the benefit of all Ministries/Departments and it monitors
the implementation of these guidelines. It also advises all organisations of the Central Government on
issues of personnel management. At a more immediate level, the Department has the direct responsibility of
being the cadre controlling authority for the Indian Administrative service (IAS) and the Central Secretariat
Service (CSS). The Department also operates the Central Staffing Scheme under which suitable officers
from All India Services and Group ‘A’ Central Services are selected and then placed in posts at the level of
Under Secretary on the basis of tenure deputation. The Department also deals with cases of appointment to
posts of Chairman, Managing Director, full-time functional Director/Member of the Board of Management
of various public sector undertakings/enterprises, corporations, banks and financial institutions. It also deals
with the assignment of Indian experts to various developing countries.
Recruitment Agencies
2. The two organisations through which the Department ensures recruitment of personnel for the Government
are the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the Staff Selection Commission (SSC). The former
is constituted under a provision of the Constitution and is responsible for conducting examinations for
appointment to the higher civil services and civil posts under the Union Government, including recruitment
to the All India Services. There is a mandatory provision for consulting the Commission on all matters
relating to methods of recruitment, principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers from one
service to another and all the disciplinary matters. The SSC is responsible for making recruitment for Group
‘B’ non-gazetted posts of Assistants, Stenographers, etc.
Training Institutions
3. Two major training institutions directly under the administrative control of the Department are the Lal
Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie and the Institute of
Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), New Delhi. The former is mainly responsible for providing
induction training to recruits to the Indian Administrative Service and other all India Services and Central
Services. The Institute of Secretariat Training and Management provides induction as well as in-service
training to members of the Central Secretariat Service.
Senior Appointments under the Government of India
4. All proposals for senior appointments under the Government of India, which require the approval of the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) are processed through the Establishment Officer as
Secretary of the ACC. These include board level appointments to Central Public Sector Undertakings and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
appointments of Joint Secretaries, Directors and Deputy Secretaries in the Ministries/Departments. In
additional, all appointments by promotion, which require the approval of the ACC are also processed
through the Establishment Officer.
Public Enterprises Selection Board
5. The Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) is entrusted with the responsibility of making
recommendations for appointment to the full-time Board level posts of Chief Executive and functional
Directors and part-time Chairman in the Central Public Undertakings.
Administrative Vigilance
6. The Department of Personnel and Training determines Government policy for the maintenance of integrity
of the public services and eradication of corruption and coordinates the activities of various
Ministries/Departments in that area.
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)
7. Advice on all vigilance matters is provided by the Central Vigilance Commission. It has jurisdiction and
power in respect of all matters to which the executive power of the Union Government extends. The
Commission enjoys the same measure of independence and autonomy as the Union Public Service
Commission.
Central Bureau of Investigation
8. The CBI is the premier investigating agency of the country. Originally set up as an anti-corruption agency
of the Government of India, the role of CBI has undergone a sea change. It is now dealing with a variety of
offences which include anti-corruption, special crimes, economic offences, major financial frauds, terrorist
crimes and other serious crimes having inter-state and international ramifications. A large number of such
areas are now referred to the CBI by High Courts and the Supreme Court.
Joint Consultative Machinery
9. There is a well-structured machinery for joint consultation between the Central Government and its
employees on a wide variety of service matters having a bearing on the administration and the general
interests of the Government employees. It is a three-tier machinery consisting of the National Council, the
Departmental Council and the Regional/Office Council. Service matters pertaining to the interests of the
generality of employees or specific groups of them are dealt with by this machinery.
Central Administrative Tribunal
10. In order to provide speedy and inexpensive justice to employees aggrieved by Government decisions, the
Government set up the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) in 1985, which now deals with all cases
relating to service matters which were previously dealt with by Courts upto and including the High Courts.
There are now 17 regular Benches of the CAT functioning in various parts of the Country, including its
Principal Bench in Delhi.
Staff Welfare

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
11. The Department supports various programmes, which are provided in various Ministries/Departments,
Central Government Employees Welfare Coordination Committee in Central Government offices located
outside Delhi, Residents’ Welfare Associations/Area Welfare Officers; Benevolent Fund and Departmental
Canteens. Department of Personnel and Training is the nodal agency for three registered societies set up for
the welfare of the Government employees and their families. These societies are the Central Civil Services
Cultural and Sports Board, Grih Kalyan Kendra and Kendriya Bhandar. As a welfare measure, the
Government had also decided, during the course of the year, to have a Civil Services Officers Institute in
Delhi which has been set up as a registered society.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
7. The Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare is the nodal agency of the Government of India for
formulation of general policy on pension and other retirement benefits, as also for redressal of grievances on
retirement benefits. The Department was set up in 1985 as a part of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions and has been rendering service for the benefit of pensioners since then. Department has taken a number
of steps over the years for streamlining the pension administration system, for greater convenience and welfare of
the pensioners.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
8. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances is the nodal agency of the Government of
India for administrative reforms as well as redressal of public grievances relating to the State in general and
grievances pertaining to Central Government agencies in particular. The Department disseminates information on
important activities of the Government relating to administrative reforms and public grievance redressal through
Management Publications and Documentation. It also undertakes activities in the field of international co-
operation and exchanges to promote public service reforms.
9. Demand No. 64 which pertain to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions includes requirements
of funds for the Department of Personnel & Training, the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances, the Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare, the Central Administrative Tribunals, the Staff
Selection Commission the Central Bureau of Investigation (including Interpol and Coordination Wing), the
Institute of Secretariat Training & Management, the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration,
Training Scheme, the Central Vigilance Commission, the Public Enterprises Selection Board, and loans to State
Government for payment of Home Building Advance to All India Services Officers.
A statement indicating the BE and RE 1998-99 and BE 1999-2000 in respect of Demand No. 64 given below:
(Rupees in crores) 
 
  
Major
Head
1998-99
Plan
(BE)
Non-
Plan
Total 1998-
99
Plan
(RE)
Non-
Plan
Total 1999-
2000
Plan
(BE)
Non-
Plan
Total
 REVENUE
CAPTIAL
 13.30
1.20
149.60
10.40
162.90
11.60
13.30
1.20
149.14
11.09
162.44
12.29
13.90
1.10
159.37
10.16
173.27
11.26
 TOTAL  14.50 160.00 174.50 14.50 160.23 174.73 15.00 169.53 184.53
1 Secretariat
General 
Services
2052 1.10 16.88 17.98 1.25 17.48 18.73 1.83 22.44 24.27
2 Central
Administrative
Tribunal
2014 - 21.55 21.55 - 21.50 21.50 - 19.46 19.46
3 Staff Selection 2051 - 14.52 14.52 - 11.54 11.54 - 12.89 12.89

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Commission
4 Police (CBI &
Interpol)
2055
4055
1.18
-
77.58
1.40
78.76
1.40
1.03
-
79.52
0.92
80.55
0.92
0.94
-
84.80
1.06
85.74
1.06
5 Other
Administrative
Service
Training
2070
4059
11.02
1.20
13.98
-
25.00
1.20
11.02
1.20
14.68
-
25.70
1.20
11.13
1.10
15.06
-
26.19
1.10
6 Other items
(CVC and
PESB)
2070 - 5.09 5.09 - 4.42 4.42 - 4.82 4.82
7 Construction of
Houses for IAS
Officers in NE
4216 - 1.00 1.00 - 1.00 1.00 - 1.00 1.00
8 Loan to States
for HBA to AIS
Officers
7601 - 8.00 8.00 - 8.00 8.00 - 8.00 8.00
 TOTAL  14.50 160.00 174.50 14.50 159.06 173.56 15.00 169.53 184.53
 BUDGETARY PROVISION
10. From the perusal of the table given above, the total budgetary provision has increased from Rs.174.5 crores in
BE(1998-99) to Rs.184.53 crores in BE (1999-2000). This indicates an increase of about Rs.10 crores in BE (1999-
2000), which is 6.25% over BE (1998-99) . The major portion of the budgetary provision amounting to Rs.85.74 crores
is earmarked for CBI, which is 51% of the total Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry.
11. According to the Ministry, nearly 55% of the budget is spent on the payment of salaries to officers and staff of the
Ministry and its attached and other offices. Another 19% goes to office expenses and travel expenses. 6% of the Budget
is earmarked for the payment of professional services. The provision of loan to State Government for payment of HBA
to IAS officers forms 5% of the Budget. The remaining items like grants-in-aid, rent, rates and fares etc. account for the
balance of 15%.
12. As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the reasons for higher provision made in BE (1999-2000) over the
BE (1998-99) are mainly due to the reasons given below :
I. PLAN BUDGET
In BE (1999-2000), an amount of Rs.15.00 crores has been earmarked under the plan item of Demand No 62 of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, as against the amount of Rs.14.50 crores in BE (1998-99). The
increase of amount of Rs 0.50 crores will be avaiable to the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances for the scheme of "Modernisation of Government offices".
II. NON-PLAN BUDGET
The BE (1999-2000), under Demand No.62, stands at 169.53 crores as against Rs.160 crore in BE (1998-99). The
increase of 9.53 crores is mainly due to :-
(i) Normal increase in salaries of officers and staff due to payment of additional instalment of DA (rupees 3
crores approximately);
(ii) Normal increase in office expenses (Rupees 4 crores) The half of increase in office expenses pertains to
CBI and Interpol (2.71 crores) which is as under :
(a) setting up of new office in CGO Complex for the Interpol (Rs.0.40 crores);

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
(b) Provision of Computer Scanner (Rs.0.55 crores); and
(c) Photocopying user of AHD Scam cases at Dhanbad, Ranchi and Patna (Rs 1.50 crores).
(iii) Payment of grant-in-aid to the newly set up Civil Services Officers Institute towards the cost of
development of land and construction of building for the Institute (Rupees 2.5 crores approximately).
13. Demand No. 97 pertains to the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). The Union Public Service Commission
is a constitutional body, created under Article 315 of the Constitution. The Commission's charter of duties is given in
Article 320 and 321 of the Constitution. In brief, it is the duty of the Commission to conduct examinations for
appointment to services of the Union and to advise Government on all matters relating to framing of recruitment rules,
method of recruitment and the principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers from one service to another.
The Commission is also required to be consulted in respect of disciplinary matters affecting a civil servant including
appeals and memorials filed by individual Government servants. The Commission's advice is also sought regarding any
claim for reimbursement of legal proceedings instituted against him for acts done in the execution of his duties and on
the question of award of pension for injury sustained by a Government servant in a civil capacity. By virtue of the
provisions made in the relevant Acts, the Commission is required to be consulted in respect of appointments to certain
categories of posts under the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the employees' State Insurance Corporation and the
employees' Provident Fund Organisation. 
  
 
14. Article 322 of the Constitution envisages inter-alia that the expenses of the UPSC including salaries, allowances and
pension payable to members and staff of the Commission shall be`charged' on the Consolidated Fund of India. A
statement indicating the BE & RE (1998-99) and BE (1999-2000) in respect of Demand No. 97 is given below:-
(Rs. in crores)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Major Head BE RE BE
1998-99 1998-99 1999-2000
___________________________________________________________________________
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"2051"
UPSC
Revenue - 32.88 - 36.19 - 37.46
Capital - - - - - -
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total: - 32.88 - 36.19 - 37.46
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Break up of
the provision

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
Administrative
Expenses - 22.15 - 23.1363 - 23.26
Examination
&
Selection - 10.73 - 13.0537 - 14.20
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total: - 32.88 - 36.19 - 37.46
----------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
 
15. It is observed from the above table that the administrative expenditure of the Commission has gone up from
Rs.22.15 crores in BE 1998-99 to 23.26 crores in BE 1999-2000, while the expenses on examinations have increased
from Rs.10.73 crores in BE 1998-99 to Rs. 14.20 crores in 1999-2000. The small increase of Rs.1.11 crores which
works out to about 5% over BE 1998-99, in administrative expenses is mainly under salaries, travelling expenses and
office expenses, which is quite normal. The increase of about Rs.3.47 crores under the head "Expenditure on
Examinations and Selections" is mainly on account of enhancement of remuneration to Supervisors/Investigators for the
conduct of various examinations and the increase in travel expenses of officers/interview Board Members in connection
with the conduct of various examinations/selections.
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS
16. Responsive and responsible administration is the need of the hour especially in the Age of Information.
Transperancy and accountability in the machinery of Government is bladly needed for ensuring the basic objective of
clean and citizen friendly administration. Transperacy could be effected only after sharing information with the public.
FREEDOM TO INFORMATION
17. The Committee lauds the endeavour of the Government for drafting a Bill on Freedom of Information in pursuance
of recommendation of "Working Group on Right to Information and Promotion of Open & Transparent
Government" under the Chairmanship of Shri H.D. Shourie. But the Committee at the same time, note that the
Ministry has not taken any measures with regard to amendments in Official Secrets Act, 1923, Indian Evidence Act,
1972, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Criminal Procedure Act, 1973, CSS Rules, 1964 and the Manual of Departmental
Security Instructions relating to classification of Information, as recommended by the above working group.
18. Further, the Action Plan prepared for the conference of Chief Ministers held on 24th May, 1997 also inter-alia
emphasised the `Right to Information'. The Committee in its 44
th Report had recommended for the explicit
provision of "Right to Information", which would enable the citizenry to ensure accountability in administration.
The Committee again reiterates its stand taken earlier on the matter and suggests that access to information
must be accorded the status of Fundamental Right.
 INFORMATION FACILITATION COUNTERS
19. Information Facilitation Counters (IFCs) are set up outside the security zone of each office with a view to
facilitating the dissemination of information pertaining to schemes and procedures of the concerned organisation and
regarding acknowledgement and status report of individual application. In brief, IFCs are the visible faces of Citizen
Charters formulated by the concerned Ministries/Department.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
20. Citizen Charters contain the commitments of the concerned organisation alongwith expected standards of service
delivery, grievance system etc. The Ministry had intimated that, of late, 55 Ministries/Departments/Offices have framed
their Charters.
21. The Committee was informed that the opening up of IFCs in Ministries/Departments/Offices having large public
interface were taken up in the phased manner. It is learnt from the Annual Report of the Ministry that 45 Ministries in
coordination with NIC have set up their IFCs but, in the replies to the Questionnaire, the Ministry had submitted list of
31 IFCs only.
22. Further, the Ministry elsewhere had intimated the Committee that two Departments had decided not to open IFCs on
the plea that their Directors (Public Grievances) are accessible to the public. The Committee has been informed that the
Departments of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances does not maintain the work done by IFCs of individual
Ministries/Departments.
23. The Committee notes with dismay that the approach of the Ministry towards the monitoring of concepts
(IFCs and Citizen Charters) evolved by it is non-committal. The Committee recommends that IFCs should be
opened up in all Ministries/Departments/Offices with corresponding Citizen's Charters. The Ministry being
nodal agency, would monitor the progress report of individual Ministries/Departments for giving effect to such
concepts. The two different figures of IFCs given by the Ministry may be rectified. Most importantly, the
behavioural reform alongwith procedural and structural reform must be taken up vigorously through
appropriate training and supervision.
LAW OF ADMINISTRATION
24. While examining the Demands for Grants (1997-98 and 1998-99) of the Ministry, the Committee in its 38th & 44th
Reports had emphasised the need to evolve law of administration. The Ministry in its ATN on 44th Report of the
Committee had expressed its inability to codify varied extant rules and regulations into a comprehensive legislation.
25. In this regard, the Committee has also been informed that the Commission for Review of Administrative Laws
under the Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in its final Report submitted on 30th September, 1998 has inter-alia
recommended the following points:-
(a) All the Ministries/Departments should compile up-to-date information about rules, regulations, orders
and procedures under different Central Law administered by them including manuals in respect of areas
which are important from the point of view of the general public.
(b) There is a need also for unification and harmonisation of statutes, laws and regulations with reference to
the perspective of domestic and foreign investors, trade and industry, consumers, builders, expoerters and
importers.
(c) Repeal of over 1300 Central Laws of different categories out of about 2500 Laws in force, on the
ground that these laws have become either irrelevant or dysfunctional. The break-up of laws recommended
for repeal are as given below :
(i) 166 Central Acts (including 11 Pre- Nationalisation Acts and 20 Validation Acts).
(ii) 315 Amendment Acts.
(iii) 11 British Statutes still in force.
(iv) 114 Central Acts relating to state subjects.
(v) Approximately 700 Appropriation Act (approximately) passed by Parliament.
(d) Expansion of the system of alternate disputes resolution and more effective utilisation of the Arbitration

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
and Conciliation Act. The Commission have also recommended entrustment of pending cases of
subordinate courts to the "Lok Adalats".
26. The Committee has also been informed that copies of the report of the Commission have been sent to all
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India and Chief Secretaries of all States/Union Territories in November
1998 for examining these recommendations and devising suitable action plan for implementation of the
recommendations.
27. The Committee sincerely appreciates the recommendations given by the Commission on Review of
Administrative Laws. The micro-level reforms recommended by the Commission should be implemented without
any hindrance within a given time frame.
MODERNISATION OF GOVERNMENT OFFICES
28. The Scheme of Modernisation of Government offices is linked to the contemplated piece of legislation on 'Right to
Information' as a well equipped office with up-dated information could be in a position to part with that information to
public. In the current phase of liberalisation, the need for boosting the productivity of Government offices is badly felt,
which could be achieved by augmenting the efficiency of the officials through the scheme of mordernisation of offices
and appropriate training. The Committee queried about the slow pace of mordernisation process in Government offices.
It has also observed that most of the Offices have not used fully the amount earmarked for mordernisation scheme. It is
also learnt that the amount earmarked under the Scheme 'Support to State Government for development of
computerised net-work' remained unutilised due to the fact that the scheme could not be materialised.
29. The Ministry has stated that there is a provision of supply of certain equipments like office machines, risographs,
photocopiers and over-head projectors under the Scheme of Modernisation of Government Offices. The provision of
computers both hardware as well as software is, however, not provided under the scheme.The Ministries/Departments
are expected to seek assistance from within their own resources. The Ministries/Departments have been requested to
implement a time bound programme for converting into electronic form all the non-classified rules, regulations,
procedures and circulars etc. They have also been requested to make Five year plans as well as Annual plans for
increasing use of the Information Technology. They have also been permitted by the Planning Commission to allocate
2-3% of their Plan Budget for programmes/schemes relating to Information Technology. A High Powered Committee
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary has also recommended the increasing use of Information Technology for
more effective and efficient performance of the Government. The Ministry is monitoring the process. As far as non-
materialisation of scheme of "support to State Government for development of computerised network' the Ministry has
informed that the details of "Electronic Government Project" have not been supplied to the Union Government.
30. The Committee lauds the objective of modernisation scheme but at the same time is not happy with the slow
pace of modernisation work in Ministries/Offices, the Committee recommends that the drive for modernising
offices taken in 8O's should be completed before the on set of this new millenium. The Ministry being a nodal
agency for co-ordinating O&M activities of the Ministry has to take a lead role and direct all Ministries to gear
up their respective machinery for putting all rules, regulations, procedures etc. in electronic form. The
Committee also emphasises progressive use of information technology in the place of traditional machine aid to
official work. The Government has to take care for creating appropriate training methods for making use of
information technology in the Government offices. Necessary consultation may be undertaken with the State
Governments to use information technology in their official work also.
31. The Committee in its 44th Report had observed that a set of Administrative Courts may be set up to look into and
adjudicate upon the acts of omission and Commission of the administrative officials. The Ministry in its ATN to the said
Report of the Committee had merely enumerated the existence of Civil Courts, CAT, Consumer Fora for dispensing
justice without mentioning any action taken by it to implement the above recommendation. In this context, the Ministry
feels the need to strengthen/reform Administrative Tribunals to bring greater speed in the disposal of cases relating to
service matters and strengthen Internal Grievance Redressal Machinery (IGRM) of all Ministries/Departments. The
Ministry is also considering on the recommendation of the Commission on Review of Administrative Law in this
regard. The Commission had recommended more effective use of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act and greater use

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
of mediation procedure, while emphasising the need to expand the system of alternate dispute resolution such as Lok
Adalats, Nyaya Panchayats etc., which may be replicated in other Departments.
32. The Committee has been apprised of the pendency of 49,521 cases in CAT as on 31.12.98, with Allahabad
Bench having pendency of 7539 cases followed by Principal Bench having pendency of 6477 cases. The
Committee while taking into account the backlog of cases in CAT, feels that the inadequacy is inherent in dispute
resolving mechanism of the CAT. Further, the Joint Consultative Machinery (JCM) and Board of Arbitration
(BOA), which are in existence for last 30 odd years have not been functioning effectively. Moreover, the
Committee again reiterates its stand taken on Administrative Court in its 44th Report. For reducing litigation in
service matters, the Ministry has to bring transparancy in the matter of personnel policy immediately.
PUBLIC GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL
33. The facilitating role of the Government as compared to its regulatory role has not improved considerably as a result
of which large public dissatisfaction against the Public Grievance Redressal machinery is found. The Committee has
taken serious note of the fact that the letters of Members of Parliament are not attended to promptly nor even are these
appropriately accorded the Warrants of Precedence. The Ministry in its reply has stated that circular in this regard has
been issued on 4.2.99, which reiterates the stipulation of earlier circulars issued in 1974 and 1979 for acknowledging the
letters of MPs/MLAs promptly and disposing them expeditiously at appropriate level.
34. The Committee in its 44th Report had suggested the Ministry to ensure that the policy of decentralisation of public
grievances redressal is yielding desirable result. The Ministry in its Annual Report (1998-99) has stated that it is making
efforts to vitalise and strengthen the extant Internal Grievance Redress Machinery (IGRM) in all
Ministries/Departments so as to make it more responsive to the public , enforce time limits and to ensure quick disposal
of their grievances. A separate budget, in accordance with the recommendation of this Committee, for Public
Grievances Division has been earmarked to focus on items relating to Public Grievances Redress.
35. The Committee has also been apprised of the fact that `Wednesday' is being observed as a meetingless day in the
Ministries/Departments. During three hours (10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m.) of the said day, all officers of the rank of Deputy
Secretary and above remains available in their offices to hear and receive public grievances. Further, instructions have
been issued to all Ministries/Departments to display names, designation, room number, telephone number of Director of
Grievances at the reception and a convenient places and place a locked complaint box at reception. A directory of
Director of Grievances of various Ministries/Departments has been prepared and circulated by the Department of
AR&PG. The Department has created a uniform software including a revised grievance code and circulated it to all
Ministries/Departments. This will help on-line availability of various kinds of information including grievance action
status.
36. The Ministry is also reviewing the disposal of grievances by all Ministries on quarterly basis. The Ministry has
submitted information regarding disposal of grievances pertaining to 34 Ministries/Departments from April to
September, 1998. Out of the total 2, 90, 965, cases 1, 97, 084 grievances have been disposed of during the period under
review. It is evident from the table given in the Annual Report of the Ministry a large number of grievances pertain to
service matters.
37. The Committee understands that the backlog of large number of cases relating to grievances in Ministries is a
pointer to the fact that the extant decentralised grievance mechanism is not producing desirable result. The
Committee recommends that this mechanism may be restructured in such a manner that existing loopholes
therein could be plugged effectively resulting in the disposal of all grievances pertaining to that Ministry, which
could lessen the burden on CAT.
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
38. Pursuant to the provision of Article 323A of the Indian Constitution, the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 was
enacted by Parliament to set up Administrative Tribunal for adjudication of disputes and complaints with regard to
recruitment and condition of services of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of
the Union and the States.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
39. Administrative adjudication, which is quasi-judicial in nature, is the main function of Administrative Tribunals. The
basic objective of enacting the Administrative Tribunal Act was :
(i) to relieve congestion in the ordinary set of courts; and
(ii) to provide for speedy disposal of disputes relating to service matters.
In brief, the objective of the Administrative Tribunal is to provide for speedy and inexpensive justice to the litigants for
which the procedure followed by Tribunal is made flexible and technically free from the ordinary courts.
40. As on date (1.1.99) it has 17 regular benches, 15 of which operate at the principal seats of High Courts and the
remaining two at Jaipur and Lucknow. The present sanctioned strength of the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Members
of the CAT is as given below:
Chairman - 1
Vice-Chairmen - 16
Members - 49
The CAT had jurisdiction over the civilian employees of the Central Government and nine Societies/Corporations. As
per information submitted by the Ministry, twenty nine more organisations have been brought under the purview of the
CAT w.e.f. 1.1.99.
41. The Committee is extremely concerned over the pendency of large number of cases in the different benches of the
CAT. The Ministry has submitted that since its inception 2, 97, 346 cases have been instituted upto 31.12.98, out of
which 2, 47, 825 cases have been disposed of leaving a balance of 49, 521 cases. The break up of bench wise pendency
of cases in the CAT is at Appendix A. The inordinate delay in disposal of cases by the CAT has defeated the very
objective for which it was brought into existence in 1985. The reason given by the Ministry for such delay is that
addition of 29 organisations under the purview of the CAT has led to increase in institution of cases and consequent
pendency of cases.
42. The Committee feels that the reason attributed by the Ministry for the pendency of cases is misleading. The
statement relating to the pendency of cases (49, 521) is before the enlistment of 29 organisations under the purview of
the CAT, which took place w.e.f. 1.1.99. It seems that the aforesaid pending cases pertain to the organisations other than
the 29 newly enlisted organisations. Further, the statement shows an increasing trend from 1.11.1985 to 31.12.1999
barring only four years (1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994) where the trend remained somehow constant. The increase of cases
between 1.11.85 and 31.12.1998 is an increase of 1588 % over the pendency in the year of 1985.
43. The Committee notes with dismay that the Ministry is not maintaining Ministry-wise pending cases in the CAT as in
several cases two or more than two Ministries are involved. The Ministry being the nodal agency for modernisation
of Government offices has not upgraded its Departments especially in the present age of internet. The Committee
suggests that the pendency of cases (Ministry wise) should be compiled by the Ministry and put the same on the
internet.
44. The Committee has been apprised that ten posts of the Members of the CAT and one post of Vice-Chairman
are lying vacant. The Committee recommends that the necessary steps to fill up the present vacancies may be
taken immediately and initiative should be undertaken well in advance to fill up expected vacancies.
45. Besides Central Administrative Tribunal, State Administrative Tribunals have been set up by the Government of the
following States under the Administrative Tribunal Act :
1. Andhra Pradesh 2. Himachal Pradesh 3. Orissa 4. Karnataka 5. Madhya Pradesh 6. Maharashtra

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
7. Tamil Nadu and
8. West Bengal
The President of India in consultation with the Chief Justice of India appoints the Chairman and Vice-Chairman and
judicial and administrative members of State Administrative Tribunals also.
46. The Committee feels that the establishment of State Administrative Tribunals in the remaining States may
obviate the pressure considerably on the High Courts of the concerned States. The Ministry should co-ordinate
with the remaining States for establishing SATs.
SENIOR APPOINTMENTS AND PERSONNEL POLICY AND CADRE MANAGEMENT
47. The Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) is charged with the responsibility of senior appointments and
personnel policies in the Government of India. This Department is also responsible for cadre management in respect of
the Indian Administrative Services (IAS) and the Central Secretariat Service (CSS). The Establishment Officer and the
Additional Secretary (EO) in the Department is the nodal officer who oversees the aforesaid functions. The
Establishment Officer also serves as Secretary to the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC). All proposals for
appointments under the Government of India which require approval of the ACC under the Government of India
(Transaction of Business) Rules, 1961, are processed through the Secretary to the ACC.
48. The Committee has been making from time to time various recommendations with regard to the appointment of
Officers belonging to Group `A’ and CSS to man the senior positions at the Centre. The Committee had also in its
earlier reports made recommendations in respect of promotion and posting of CSS officers at the level of Under
Secretary and Deputy Secretary. The Committee in its 44
th Report had made certain recommendations in paras 46
to 51 in this respect.. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has not commented on paras 46 and 47. In respect of
para 48 of the 44
th Report, the Department of Personnel inter alia gives details of the minimum service required
for promotion of CSS officers to different levels. The Committee has taken note of this. Actual position, however,
appears to be quite opposite to this. The experience has shown that it takes much longer for officers to get
empanelled and the actual placement takes much longer, particularly in respect of senior positions from Director
to Joint Secretary and Joint Secretary to Additional Secretary level. In this connection, the Committee would like
to point out that during the calendar year 1998, although several CSS officers working at Joint Secretary level
were eligible for promotion to next level, that is, Additional Secretary, but no panel was prepared. Even during
the current year till the writing of this report, the Government has not prepared the panel for promotion of
Group ‘A’ and CSS officers from the level of Joint Secretary to Additional Secretary. Therefore, it would not be
wrong to conclude that the minimum service required for promotion from one level to other as detailed in the
Action Taken Note of the Ministry is only a paper provision and is seldom put to practice. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department of Personnel should have a fixed schedule for bringing out the
panels of CSS Officers for promotion one level to another.
CENTRAL SECRETARIAT SERVICE RULES
49. The Committee in its 44
th Report (para 52) had commented that the Central Secretariat Service Rules, 1962, had
become quite old and felt that there was an urgent need to review these rules. It had, therefore, recommended that
necessary amendments in these rules in the light of their operation during the last 36 years be carried out on priority
basis. The Committee had also recommended that the amendments of rules should include inclusion of Director, Joint
Secretary and Additional Secretary level posts within the purview of these rules as Officers of this service have been
holding post at these levels during the last so many years.
50. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has mentioned that the CSS Rules, 1962, and regulations issued thereunder
are reviewed in the light of the general policy, guidelines and the matter of recruitment, promotion, etc. issued by the
Establishment Division of that Department from time to time and necessary amendments are carried out, as and when
necessary. It further states that certain proposals for amendment have been finalised recently and those are likely to be
notified shortly, after vetting by the Ministry of Law (Legislative Department).

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
51. As regards the Committee’s recommendations for inclusion of the post of Director, Joint Secretary and Additional
Secretary within the purview of the CSS Rules are concerned, it may be stated that the post of the level of Under
Secretary and above under the Central Staffing Scheme are to be filled by taking officers of All India Services who have
a specified central deputation reserve and to that extent the State Governments recruit officers in excess of their actual
requirement and Group `A’ organized services on deputation. Officers of the CSS are also appointed to the posts under
the Central Staffing Scheme. Hence the very nature and spirit of the Central Staffing Scheme does not allow posts at the
Central Secretariat to be specially earmarked for any particular service cadre. The Department, therefore, stated that it
may, therefore, not be feasible to bring the post of Director, Joint Secretary and Additional Secretary within the purview
of CSS Rules.
52. The Committee is not in agreement with the stand taken by the Ministry for not amending the CSS Rules so
as to include the post of Director, Joint Secretary and Additional Secretary in the CSS cadre. The Department’s
stand is that the CSS is a service that starts in Group `B’. The Committee is fully aware of this fact. However, an
important point which the Department has all along been ignoring is the fact that the directly recruited Section
Officers come through the common competitive Civil Services Examination conducted by the UPSC. In a
competitive examination there are no qualifying marks. One may qualify in a competitive examination and yet
may not make the grade so as to enter the service as the number of vacancies for different services vary each
year. Therefore, it would be not only unfair but also against the principles of natural justice to continue archaic
rules which were made nearly four decades ago. Further, it has been brought to the Committee’s notice that in
earlier days before the Second Pay Commission’s recommendations, there used to be two grades for Section
Officers. After couple of years of service, directly recruited Section Officers used to be promoted to Grade-I and
were class one officers.
53. The Committee regrets that the Ministry in its Action Taken Note has not given details of the proposals which
are under consideration for amendment to CSS Rules, 1962. The Committee would have appreciated if the
Department had given details of the proposed amendments in the rules.
54. The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendations contained in para 42 of its 38
th Report
wherein it had recommended that keeping at par with the eligibility criteria regarding length of service
prescribed for Grade-I, Selection Grade, Director and Joint Secretary of the CSS, the eligibility criteria
regarding length of service for CSS officers for emplanelment to hold post at the level of Additional Secretary
should also be reckoned with effect from 1
st July of the relevant year in which a CSS Joint Secretary is included
in the Joint Secretary’s suitability list irrespective of the actual date of appointment as Joint Secretary In this
connection, Ministry in its Action Taken Note had inter-alia mentioned, that if the recommendations of the
Committee were to be accepted and CSS officers for the post of Director and above such posts would become
cadre posts for the service. Any such provision in CSS Rules will lead to similar demands form other services for
earmarking post for them. In this connection, it is important to bear in mind that it is not relevant to compare
CSS with any other Group ‘A’ services. CSS has been created to man the various posts in the Central Secretariat
alone whereas the Group ‘A’ services have their respective cadres. Their cadre prospects are exclusively in their
respective services, where officers belonging to other services do not compete. Therefore, comparing CSS with
other Group `A’ services is neither relevant nor justifiable.
55. Another reason which warrants immediate amendment of the rules so as to bring the posts of Director, Joint
Secretary and Additional Secretary within the cadre of CSS, is the fact that a number of officers have now
become eligible to hold these middle and senior level posts. Already four officers of the CSS are holding posts at
Additional Secretary level. The amendment of rules will not open the flood gates for the CSS officers nor the CSS
officers are going to grab unusually large number of these posts as only officers those who have joined the
services direct recruit at S.O. level will be in a position to reach to these levels. Number of such officers is quite
small. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations for amendment of CSS Rules so as to bring the
post of Director, Joint Secretary and Additional Secretary in the CSS cadre and also to reckon officers for
empanelment to hold post at the level of Additional Secretary should be recommended with effect from 1
st July
of the relevant year in which a CSS Joint Secretary is included in the Joint Secretary’s suitability list irrespective
of actual date of appointment as Joint Secretary.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
56. It is in this background, the Committee has been recommending that the CSS Rules, 1962, should be
amended on priority basis so as to give justice to the CSS officers which has been eluding them thus far and
reiterates that appropriate action be taken.
57. Promotion refers to the movement of an employee from one position to another having a higher grade and pay in the
hierarchy. The Committee came to know that there is stagnation in the Central Secretariat Service even within the
promotion zone. The vertical promotion in Central Secretariat Service could not be effected within requirement of
minimum service period. The Ministry in its ATN had supplied the following information with regard to promotion of
CSS Officers :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Promotion
Minimum Service required----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
From To
Section Officer Under Secretary 8 years
(i.e. Group B to Group A) Under Secretary Deputy Secretary 5 years
Deputy Secretary Director 5 years
Director Joint Secretary 3 years
Joint Secretary Addl. Secretary 3 years service as
Joint Secretary and
minimum 2 years
service left for
retirement. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 58. The career
graph indicated in the ATN to the 44th Report in respect of CSS officers give the very rosy picture which is not
supported by the details furnished by the Ministry in its replies.It is unfortunate that CSS officers, who are
considered the backbone of the Central Secretariat has to wait for 27 years or more for being appointed as Joint
Secretary and that to after waiting in the panel for a period ranging from 3 to 4 years.59. As a cadre controlling
authority of this service, the efforts made by DOPT in ensuring in career advancement of CSS officers are
dismal. Out of 20 officers in the panel of Joint Secretary, 13 names have not been circulated even once in the past
three years. The Department needs to put in greater efforts in a time bound manner and ensure placement of
these officers within a period of six months. It has come on record that DOPT has already taken a decision that
CSS officers empanelled for Joint Secretary will be given mandatory posting if they have two years of service
before superannuation or if they have been in the panel for three years.60. One of the names mentioned in the list
enclosed with the written reply is that of Smt. Neena Garg which appears at Sr.No.3 of the suitability list of CSS
Joint Secretary level officers who are yet to be appointed. Against her name it has inter-alia been stated that
officer has finally been selected. The Committee presumed that all necessary formalities which are required to be
followed for appointment of an officer including approval of the ACC have been completed. Either the formal
orders of her appointment are to be issued or officer has to formally take over her new assignment as Joint
Secretary. It appears that this position is perhaps factually not correct. The Committee would, therefore, like
that DOP&T should examine this matter and furnish it in their note with regard to the process of final
selection/appointment.
61. Since most of the Officers indicated in the list will soon be completing three years of their empanelment.
Immediate steps be taken to issue their posting orders. The Committee suggests that the Department of
Personnel and Training should follow a sound promotion policy. The Committee recommends to implement
dynamic Assured Career Progression (ACP) Scheme which could provide financial upgradation of the next post
in the hierarchy without having functional mobility to the higher post.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
CENTRAL STAFFING SCHEME
62. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has informed that the Department of
Personnel and Training operates the Central Staffing Scheme (CSS) under which suitable officers from All India
Services and Group A Central Services are selected and placed in posts at level of Deputy Secretary, which has also
been exactly stated in the Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 1998-99. The Committee understands that the said
administrative arrangement is in accordance with the Central Staffing Scheme, as introduced in 1957. The objective of
Central Staffing Scheme, 1957 was extended to provide for systematic arrangements for managing senior administrative
posts at the Centre of and above the rank of Deputy Secretary.
63. The Committee notes that the Central Staffing Scheme which is in operation now is the amended version of Central
Staffing Scheme, 1957. It is mentioned in the amended version that the scope of the Central Staffing Scheme is bound
by the following parameters :
(i) All posts of the rank of Under Secretary and above in the Government of India may be filled
on tenure deputation from the All India Services and the participating Group `A’ services of the
Central Government, excluding such posts of Under Secretary and Deputy Secretary as are
filled by CSS Officers; and
(ii) In so far as the Officers from the Central Secretariat Service (CSS) are oncerned, a
specified number of posts at the level of Under Secretary will be treated as part of their cadre
and posts over and above these will be filled under the Central Staffing Scheme.
64. In the light of above stipulation of Cental Staffing Scheme, 1992, the Committee wanted to know whether Central
Secretariat Service being one of participatory Services participate in the Scheme at Under Secretary level. The
Committee also enquired about the reasons leading to inclusion of the post of Under Secretary in Central Staffing
Scheme. The Ministry in its reply has stated that all 38 participating services except Central Secretariat Service
participate in the Scheme at the level of Under Secretary, whereas Central Secretariat Service which starts at Group `B'
participate at the level of Deputy Secretary after getting elevated to Under Secretary (Group A) in their Cadre. The
Committee was also apprised that due to stagnation in Central Secretariat Services at the level of Section Officer (Group
B, Gazetted), the post of Under Secretary is being filled up by the method of promotion of Section Officers of CSS as
their cadre post. However, only in rare cases, officers of All India Services/Group A services are considered for
appointment at the level of Under Secretary on compassionate grounds/exceptional circumstances. Further, the reason
given by the Ministry for inclusion of the post of Under Secretary in Central Staffing Scheme is quite vague and not in
consonance with the basic objective of the Scheme.
65. The Committee understands that the amended version of Central Staffing Scheme is tilted towards All India
Services and other Group A services as compared to Central Secretariat Service and is discriminatory too.
66. The Committee understands that the post of Under Secretary cannot be considered as senior level
administrative post and the inclusion of such post in Central Staffing Scheme mars the promotional avenue of
Central Secretariat Service as the latter have the career development only in Central Secretariat, it may lead to
frustration amongst Group B Officers of CSS. The scheme violates the ratio of internal promotion to the enternal
recruitment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the post of Under Secretary in Central Secretariat
must be kept for the Central Secretariat Service exclusively by the way of excluding the post from the Central
Staffing Scheme. The basic objective of Central Staffing Scheme could be served if the original version of the
scheme, 1957 is restored.
POSTING
67. The Ministry in its ATN to 44th Report of the Committee has mentioned that the . Central Government had taken a
decision in 1990 not to post woman officer from All India Services to North-East and Jammu & kashmir in view of law
and order situation prevailing therein at that time, which was subsequently reviewed in 1994 keeping in view cadre-gap
in these states, as a result of which the special dispensation given to woman officers had been withdrawn from 1994
batch onward.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
68. In the above context the Committee wanted to know whether cadre-gap still persists in North- Eastern States even
after the review of the decision. The Ministry has furnished the following information :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.N Name of the States Total Strength Officers in Cadre-gap
Position
1. Manipur-Tripura 198 167 (+)31
2. Nagaland 64 45 (+)19
3. Assam-Meghalay 207 208 (-)1
69. It is evident from the above statement, the cadre-gap is still exists in Manipur, Tripura and Nagaland. The
Committee feels that the slow pace of developmental work in these States is linked to cadre-gap in All India
Services . The Committee recommends that the cadre-gap in the aforesaid States may be filled up at the earliest.
TRANSFER
70. Taking into consideration of the rampant arbitrary transfer of Officers from All India Services manning field post,
the Committee had recommended in its 44th Report to establish Civil Services Board in the States to ensure fixed
tenure for them. The Ministry has informed that the States and the Centre have agreed in principle that institutional
arrangements were required to be evolved to ensure stability of tenures of officers serving under the Government in the
conference of Chief Ministers held on 24th May, 1997. But the States of Gujrat, Haryana, Kerala, Meghalaya, Tamil
Nadu and West Bengal have expressed that they do not feel the need for setting up such Board.
71. The Committee suggests that for ensuring administrative continuity and stability to the incumbents, frequent
transfers should be discouraged and a minimum tenure three to four years) for each officer should be pre-
determined. The Committee recommends that the DOPT may prepare a comprehensive transfer policy to reduce
arbitrariness in transfer and check pre-mature and frequent transfers.
PENSION
72. The Committee in its Thirty-eighth Report on the Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry had dealt with the
issue of counting of past services for pensionary benefits on mobility of employees from Central Government
Departments to Autonomous Bodies and vice-versa. The Committee had also recommended that the benefit of counting
of past services for pension be countinued to be allowed to employees who had joined Union Government services after
putting in services in Nationalised Banks/L.I.C etc. and vice-versa. It may also be mentioned that the Ministry in its
Action Taken Notes on the Thirty-eigth Report of the Committee had stated that the matter was being reconsidered.
73. The Ministry in its reply has stated that the issue in also a subject matter of Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
who have also made similar recommendations. The Ministry has further stated that Central Government employees,
who move to State or Central Autonomous organisations, get the benefit of counting the past services for pensionary
benefits and vice-versa as per the existing orders. In case of banks, PSUs, LIC, RBI etc. pro-rata pensionary benefits is
paid in lump-sum to Central Government employees who move over to these organisations. Similarly, persons from
these organisations, if they come to Central Government are free to get pro-rata pensionary benefits from these
organisations at the time of joining Central Government. The question of counting the past service is now under
examination in consultation with the Banking and Insurance Division who are consulting their constituent units. Apart
from this, the present rule regarding extension of benefit is as follows :-
"Central autonomous body" means body which is finance wholly or substantially from cess of Central
Government grants. "Substantially" means that more than 50 percent of the expenditure of the autonomous

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
body is met through cess or Central Government grants. Autonomous body includes a Central statutory
body or a Central University but does not include a public undertaking.
74. The Ministry has informed that this also covers PSUs, banks, LIC etc. where Government has its investment. This
issue has been referred to the Attorney General of India for his opinion which is still awaited. On receipt of the advice of
the Attorney General and views of Banking and Insurance Division, the issue of counting of past services for pension in
case of employees of nationalised banks, LIC etc. will be decided.
75. The Committee notes that the recommendations of Committee has not been implemented even after the lapse
of two years. The Committee again reiterates its stand taken in 38th Report and suggests that appropriate action
may be initiated to implement the same within a given time frame.
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES SELECTION BOARD
76. The Public Enterprises Selection Board is a recommendatory body vested with the responsibilty of recommending
persons for appointment to Board level posts in the Public Sector Undertakings. The Committee learnt that the panel
recommended by the PESB had been scapped by the Government very often. The Committee wanted to know the
reason behind such move. The Ministry in its ATN to 44th Report had submitted the reasons, which varied from non-
avialability of vigilance clearance to unsuitability of candidate to such post. The Committee enquired how a person not
being cleared from vigilance angle was recommended by the PESB. The Ministry in its reply has delineated the
selection procedure effective from 31.12.1997 which inter-alia states that the PESB while sending its recommendations
to the Administrative Ministry shall endorse a copy to the Central Vigilance Commission so that the latter can initiate
advance action for obtaining vigilance clearance. The CVC is expected to give its clearance within a period of one
month. Further, the Ministry has stated that no criteria has been laid down for declaring a candidate unsuitable once
recommended by the PESB. It varies from case to case in the face of the interest and investment in the particular PSUs.
77. The Committee feels that the existing selection procedure of the PESB should be modified in the way that the
vigilance clearance in respect of the candidate must be obtained by the Board before recommending his name for
the post in PSUs. the Committee reiterates that the ratio between Generalist and Specialist should be maintained
in the PESB itself.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
78. The Ministry could not submit Annual Report of the UPSC for examination and consideration of the Demand No.97
pertaining to the UPSC for the year 1999-2000. The Committee has been apprised of the fact that 48th Report of the
UPSC for the year (1997-98) have been received from the UPSC and the Ministry is preparing Explanatory
Memorandum in respect of non-acceptance of the Commission advice. Soon after the finalisation of Memorandum, the
copies of the report will be submitted to the Committee and also laid before the Parliament.
79. The Committee takes strong exception of the delay in the submission of the report. The Committee suggests
that the UPSC, should present the Report to the President well in advance so that the Ministry could be able to
prepare Explanatory Memorandum and present the same before Parliament during presentation of Demands for
Grants of the Ministry.
80. The Committee wanted to know whether Question papers of all examinations conducted by the UPSC were prepared
bilingually (English and Hindi). The Secretary informed that on the basis of recommendation of Satish Chandra
Committee, the preparation of bilingual question papers are extened to the specified examination. It has not be done in
all examinations conducted by it keeping in view the secrecy and impartiality of examination procedure.
81. The Committee is not satisfied with the answer. The Committee desires that the UPSC may be urged to give
opinion on the fact that why can not the facility of answering question paper be extended to all examinations
conducted by it. Committee suggests that all examinations conducted by the UPSC should be conducted
bilinguially (English and Hindi).
82. The Committee is of the view that a candidate who opts for English as the medium for the written

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/55_rep.html[30-06-2016 17:34:26]
examination should also have the option to take the interview either in English or in any Indian language of his
choice. This is because a candidate may be good in written English but may not be so in verbal expression and
may like to take his interview in any of the Indian Languages of his choice in which he is able to express more
easily and conveniently.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
83. The Committee enquired why the Annual Report for the year 1997 is not available for the examination of the
Committee. The Committee is informed that in pursuance of Supreme Court direction in Vineet Narain case, the Annual
Report of the Central Vigilance Commission shall henceforth contain a separate para on the functioning of the CBI. The
Committee has since presented its 51st Report on the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998 and desires that a copy
of the Annual Report of the CVC may be supplied to the Committee.
84. The Committee took serious note of the frequent change of the Director, CBI. The Secretary has informed
that CBI Director enjoys tenure of two years. The Committee suggest that the Director of CBI, who is a very
important officer in the Indian investigating hierarchy, should be given full freedom for working, which could be
ensured under the superision of CVC.
.*********