74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
 
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26th APRIL, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE LOK SABHA ON 26th APRIL, 2001)
 
REPORT
            The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000 (See Annexure-I) seeks to amend altogether six Articles of the
Constitution (55, 81, 82, 170, 330 and 332) to remove the distortions and disparities caused due to uneven growth of
population/electorate in territorial constituencies for Lok Sabha/Legislative Assemblies, while sustaining the measure to boost
family planning norms.
1.1              To achieve the foresaid objective, the Bill has the following enabling provisions:-
(i)                  extending the constitutional embargo on undertaking fresh delimitation of constituencies from the year 2000 to
2026;
(ii)                readjustment and rationalization of Parliamentary constituencies in the States without altering the number of seats
allotted to each State in the House of People, including the Schedule Caste and the Scheduled Tribe constituencies,
on the basis of 1991 population census;
(iii)               readjustment and rationalization of Assembly constituencies in the States without altering the number of seats
allotted to each State in their Legislative Assemblies, including the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe
constituencies, on the basis of 1991 population census; and
(iv)              refixing the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the basis of 1991 population census.
2.0       The amendment to the aforesaid seven Articles has been necessitated mainly due to the following two facts:-
(i)                  the constitutional embargo on the delimitation of territorial constituencies (both Parliamentary and Assembly),
imposed by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, will expire after the publication of first census
after the year 2000 AD, the process of which has already been set in motion; and
(ii)
                the growth of population is not uniform in the country.  The unbalanced and uneven growth of population as well
as continuous migration of people from one place to another, especially from rural to urban areas have resulted in
strikingly different sizes of electoral constituencies even within the State.  The most glaring example is outer Delhi
Parliamentary constituency, which had approximately 29.3 lakhs population whereas the Chandni Chowk
Parliamentary Constituency had a population of 3.7 lakhs (both 1998 figures).
2.1       The last delimitation of territorial constituencies was done on the basis of decennial population census of 1971 by the
Delimitation Commission, constituted for the purpose by the Delimitation Act, 1972 (See Annexure-II).  The Commission took
roughly four years to complete the delimitation work on that occasion, after which the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 1976 came into force. 
2.1.1    The ban on the delimitation was imposed by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)Act, 1976 with a specific aim to
boost family planning norms.  It was thought at that time that the States which did not control their population should not get
rewarded through the delimitation process and that by the year, 2000, the progress of implementation of family planning would,
more or less be uniform throughout the country.
2.1.2    But it is found that the population growth since 1971 census is quite haphazard and uneven.  The said uneven growth is

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
attributed mainly to the fact that some States have gone slow in arresting population explosion whereas some States especially
those in the South have achieved  comparative success in the implementation of family planning programme.
2.1.3    Delimitation on the basis of 2001 population census, in effect, would mean that States which are successful in arresting
population growth to a large extent, would be in disadvantageous position vis-à-vis the States which have gone slow in the
implementation of family planning programme, in the inter-State allocation of seats in the House of the People.
2.2.0    Keeping in view the rationale narrated in the previous para, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has recommended
(See Annexure-III) extending the current freeze up to the year 2026  as by that time the replacement level of fertility would be
expected to be achieved at national level.  In other words, the population growth in the country would be comparatively even by
the year 2026.
2.2.1    The Government as a part of the National Population Policy, 2000 strategy have also decided to extend the current freeze
on undertaking fresh delimitation upto the year 2026 AD as a motivational measure to enable State Governments to pursue the
agenda for population stabilization fearlessly.
2.2.2    The Law Commission of India in its Report on Reform of Electoral Laws has inter-alia recommended (See Annexure-IV)
extending the freeze on the delimitation till the year 2025.
2.2.3    Similar suggestions have also been received from the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
3.0       In spite of constitutional embargo till 2000, demands for taking up fresh delimitation of constituencies have been raised in
both the Houses of Parliament from time to time.  The issue have also been discussed in the meetings with major political parties
by the Government on 23 July, 1996 and 22 May, 1998 (See Annexure-V for the minutes of the meetings).
3.1.0    The provisions in the proposed legislation owe their origin to the Dinesh Goswami Committee Report on Electoral Reforms
and host of previous legislative attempts by the Government to give effect to some recommendations of the Goswami Committee.
3.1.1    The Goswami Committee (in May, 1990) had inter-alia recommended for:
(i)
                  fresh delimitation on the basis of 1981 census; and
(ii)                rotation of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes but the manner of  achieving the object of rotation of seats
should be left to the Delimitation Commission and the Parliamentary Law to be made for the purpose.
3.1.2    On the basis of above recommendations of Goswami Committee Report, the Constitution (Seventy-first Amendment) Bill,
1990 (See Annexure-VI) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 30 May, 1990 to facilitate delimitation on the basis of 1981 census
without increasing the total number of seats allocated to various States on the basis of 1971 population census.  The Bill had also
enabling provision for rotation of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes on the basis of their population in the constituencies. 
The Bill was referred to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha (See Annexure-VII  for the Report of the Select Committee) after being
passed by the Rajya Sabha on 29 April, 1992.  However, the Bill was withdrawn in June, 1994, while it was awaiting its
consideration and passage by the Lok Sabha.
3.1.3    Again, another Bill i.e. the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Bill, 1996 (See Annexure-VIII ), containing provision for
fresh delimitation of Parliamentary as well as Assembly constituencies on the basis of 1991 population census without affecting
the existing number of seats allocated to various States, was introduced in Lok Sabha on 25 July, 1996.  But the same  lapsed upon
the dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
3.1.4    A comparison of the three legislative proposals including the present one shows that the Constitution (Seventy-first
Amendment) Bill, 1990 had explicit provision for the introduction of the scheme of rotation for the constituency reserved for the
Scheduled Castes only, as Clause 5 of that Bill intended to amend Article 327 of Constitution.  But the scheme of rotation was/is
omitted in the other two Bills. 
3.1.5    Another striking difference between the Bill introduced in 1990 and 1996 on the one hand and the present Bill on the other,
is that there was no need to extend the freeze on undertaking delimitation of seats  in the former Bills since freeze was in force till
2000 under the proviso to clause (3) of Articles 81 and 170 of Constitution.  But the present legislation has a provision to extend
the freeze till 2026 as  it may become necessary to increase the number of seats in the Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies on the
basis of 2001 census figures, which are  expected by the end of the year 2002.
3.2       The Election Commission had interactions with major political parties on 29 April and 13 May, 2000 on the issue. 
Although, there is convergent view amongst political parties on the issue of extending the constitutional embargo, divergent views
were expressed  on other issues pertaining to the proposed legislation.
4.0       The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on the Bill under consideration  had briefly outlined  the salient
features of the Bill.  He had stated that under clause (2) of Article 368 of the Constitution, the amendments proposed by the Bill
would require ratification by not less than one-half of the State Legislatures before the same is presented to the President for his
assent. The Secretary further informed the Committee that after the Bill is enacted a new Delimitation Commission would have to
be established to give effect to the proposals contained therein i.e. readjustment/rationalization of Parliamentary and Assembly
constituencies as well as refixation of number of the Schedule Caste and the Scheduled Tribe constituencies on the basis of 1991
population census within the overall limit of seats.  In this connection the Secretary stated that  the number of the Scheduled Caste
and the Scheduled Tribe seats might undergo change.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
5.0       In that context, the Committee noted that although the size of the electorate differed from one constituency to another, the
election expenditure ceiling for a candidate and the amount provided under  MPLAD scheme for an M.P. remained uniform.  Thus
the Committee was of the view that readjustment/rationalization of territorial constituencies was the need of hour.
5.1.0    A view was also expressed in the Committee that since the process of decennial census of 2001 had been set in motion, it
would be better if the Government consider to rationalize/readjust constituencies on the basis of 2001 population census which is
expected by the end of the year 2002.
5.1.1    The Ministry in its written submission has stated that, going by past experience associated with the process of delimitation
of territorial constituencies on the basis of 1971 population census, the process of delimitation is expected to be completed by
2005, if the figure of 2001 population census are to be relied upon. In the meantime, if any contingency arises for any elections, the
proposed rationalization of constituencies would not be completed if the figure of the current census are to be relied upon.
Therefore, the present Bill would be helpful in rationalizing the constituencies on the basis of the figures of 1991 census instead of
waiting for new census figures.
  5.2     A point was also raised that the proposed refixation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as mentioned in
paragraph 4 of Statement of Objects and Reasons is not explicitly mentioned in the clauses of the Bill.  However, it was clarified to
the Committee that rationalization/readjustment of seats would entail refixation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes on the basis of the proportion of their population to the total population under Articles 330 and 332 of Constitution.
5.3       Apprehension was raised in the Committee that refixation of seats as mentioned in  paragraph 4 of the Statement of Objects
and Reasons may affect the number of general seats, which was endorsed by the Ministry in the written responses submitted to it.
5.4       Another point was raised whether refixation  amounted  to rotation.  The Ministry had replied  in the negative  yet another
point was raised  whether the existing  seats reserved  for the Scheduled Castes would continue to be reserved.  The Ministry in the
written submission  had stated  that in the present  Bill, the Government  has not proposed any specific  provision for a change in
the present  status of reserved seats  unless  demographic  changes so warrant.
5.5       Attention of the Committee was drawn to Section 9 (1) (c ) and (d) of the Delimitation Act, 1976 wherein the basis of the
reservation of constituencies for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have been  spelt.  As per the said provision of the
Act, the constituencies are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes if the proportion of their population to the
total are ‘comparatively large’ and ‘largest’, respectively. In that context, it was pointed out that the Scheduled Tribe seats are
located where their concentration is highest ( i.e.tribal belt of the State).  As such, the Committee feels that the scheme of
refixation envisaged  in the Bill would hardly change the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes within the overall limit of
the total number of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.  The Committee also anticipates that it would be difficult to rotate
those seats, in case the scheme of rotation is introduced at a later stage.
5.6       In the context of the above, some Members of the Committee expressed a view that the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes may be  rotated instead of  being refixed, which would also give a chance to the general candidates to contest election in the
constituencies  which are reserved since 1950 and that it would not affect the number of general seats.
6.0       The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on 10 April 2001 wherein the
Secretary, Legislative Department and representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs were present.
Clause – 2
6.1.0    The clause intends to substitute the  year 2000 by 2026 in the proviso to the Explanation in Article 55 in order to extend the
constitutional embargo on undertaking fresh delimitation till 2026.
6.1.1
        The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause – 3
6.2.0    The clause substitutes the year 2000 by 2026 in the proviso to Article 81 and makes provision for
readjustment/rationalization of Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991 population census without increasing the total
number of seats allotted to States in the House of  the People which is on the basis of 1971 population census.
6.2.1    The Committee pointed out that division of each State into Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991   population
census may affect the general seats as the increase/decrease of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes population to the
total, would have to be reflected in the allocation of seats to the States in the House of People in accordance with the provisions
enshrined in Article 330 of the Constitution.  The Secretary, Legislative Department, while endorsing  the above view of the
Committee, observed that on the basis of  comparative  figures available with the Ministry,  the seats  reserved for the Scheduled
Castes in certain States   would  go  up thereby     affecting the  general seats.  He also opined that in some States the Scheduled
Caste population had gone down.  He further stated that the details of increase/decrease of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes would   be decided by the Delimitation Commission.
6.2.2    In that context, a view was expressed that Articles 330 and 332 needed to be amended so as to do away with the refixing of
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as categorically  indicated in paragraph  4 of the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons of the Bill.  However, after some deliberation, it was agreed not to press the point further.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
6.2.3        The clause was, accordingly, adopted without any change.
Clause – 4
6.3.0    The clause seeks to amend Article 82 which is about readjustment of allocation of seats  to the House of the People and
division of each State into territorial constituencies upon the completion of each  census.  The clause proposes to readjust the
division of States into Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991 population census and maintain status quo in relation to
allocation of seats to the States in the House of the People which is on the basis of 1971 population census.
6.3.1    The Committee again noted the implication of readjustment of territorial constituencies on the basis of 1991 population
census within the existing overall limit of seats for States in the House of the People.
6.3.2        The clause was, however, adopted without any change. 
Clause – 5
6.4.0    This clause is corresponding to clause 4 of the Bill, in respect of Legislative Assemblies.  The clause proposes to readjust
the division of States into Assembly constituencies on the basis of 1991 census without increasing the total number of seats in
State Legislative Assemblies, and   at the same time substitute the year 2000 by 2026 so as to facilitate extending freeze of
delimitation up to the year 2026.
6.4.1
        The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause – 6
6.7              The clause intends to provide due representation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the reservation of
seats in the House of the People on  the basis of 1991 census  which will remain valid till the publication of first census after the
year 2026.
6.5.1
        The clause was adopted without any charge.
Clause – 7
6.6       This clause is corresponding to clause 6 of the Bill in respect of Legislative Assemblies, to provide due reservation to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in State Legislative Assemblies on the basis of 1991 population census which will
remain valid till the publication of first census after the year 2026.
6.6.1        The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause-1, the Enacting  Formula and Title
6.7.1        Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title were adopted without any change.
6.9       The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in the present
form.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
A point was also raised that the proposed refixation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as mentioned in
paragraph 4 of Statement of Objects and Reasons is not explicitly mentioned in the clauses of the Bill.  However, it was clarified to
the Committee that rationalization/readjustment of seats would entail refixation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes on the basis of the proportion of their population to the total population under Articles 330 and 332 of Constitution.
(Para 5.2)
 
·
        Apprehension was raised in the Committee that refixation of seats as mentioned in  paragraph 4 of the Statement of Objects
and Reasons may affect the number of general seats, which was endorsed by the Ministry in the written responses
submitted to it.
(Para 5.3)
 
·        Another point was raised whether refixation  amounted  to rotation.  The Ministry had replied  in the negative  yet another
point was raised  whether the existing  seats reserved  for the Scheduled Castes would continue to be reserved.  The

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
Ministry in the written submission  had stated  that in the present  Bill, the Government  has not proposed any specific 
provision for a change in the present  status of reserved seats  unless  demographic  changes so warrant.
(Para 5.4)
·        Attention of the Committee was drawn to Section 9 (1) (c ) and (d) of the Delimitation Act, 1976 wherein the basis of the
reservation of constituencies for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have been  spelt.  As per the said provision
of the Act, the constituencies are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes if the proportion of their
population to the total are ‘comparatively large’ and ‘largest’, respectively. In that context, it was pointed out that the
Scheduled Tribe seats are located where their concentration is highest ( i.e.tribal belt of the State).  As such, the Committee
feels that the scheme of refixation envisaged  in the Bill would hardly change the number of seats reserved for Scheduled
Tribes within the overall limit of the total number of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.  The Committee also
anticipates that it would be difficult to rotate those seats, in case the scheme of rotation is introduced at a later stage.
(Para 5.5)
·
        In the context of the above, some Members of the Committee expressed a view that the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes may be  rotated instead of  being refixed, which would also give a chance to the general candidates to contest
election in the constituencies  which are reserved since 1950 and that it would not affect the number of general seats.
(Para 5.6)
·
        The Committee pointed out that division of each State into Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991   population
census may affect the general seats as the increase/decrease of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes population to
the total, would have to be reflected in the allocation of seats to the States in the House of People in accordance with the
provisions enshrined in Article 330 of the Constitution.  The Secretary, Legislative Department, while endorsing  the above
view of the Committee, observed that on the basis of  comparative  figures available with the Ministry,  the seats  reserved
for the Scheduled Castes in certain States   would  go  up thereby     affecting the  general seats.  He also opined that in
some States the Scheduled Caste population had gone down.  He further stated that the details of increase/decrease of seats
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes would   be decided by the Delimitation Commission.
(Para 6.2.1)
·
        In that context, a view was expressed that Articles 330 and 332 needed to be amended so as to do away with the refixing of
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as categorically  indicated in paragraph  4 of the
Statement of  Objects and Reasons of the Bill.  However, after some deliberation, it was agreed not to press the point
further.
(Para 6.2.2)
·        The Committee again noted the implication of readjustment of territorial constituencies on the basis of 1991 population
census within the existing overall limit of seats for States in the House of the People.
(Para 6.3.1)
Clause-1, the Enacting  Formula and Title
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title were adopted without any change.
The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in the present form.
(Paras 6.8.2 & 6.9)
MINUTES
 
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 29 March 2001 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ¾ Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
2.         Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.         Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
6.         Shri K.M. Saifullah
7.         Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8.         Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
            LOK SABHA
 
9.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
10.       Shri M.O.H. Farook
11.       Shri Vijay Goel
12.       Shri Suresh Ramrao Jadhav
13.       Shri Arun Kumar
14.       Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
15.       Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
16.       Shri Anadi Sahu
17.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18.       Shri Manabendra Shah
19.       Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
20.       Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
21.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
22.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
23.       Shri Harin Pathak
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
           
WITNESSES
 
            Dr. S.C. Jain, Secretary, Legislative Department
            Smt. Aruna Makhan, AS & FA (Law)
            Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
            Shri Sunder Lal, JS & LC (Hindi)
            Shri S. C. Pani, Deputy Election Commissioner
            Shri Sayan Chatterjee, Deputy Election Commissioner
 
2.         The Chairman while welcoming the Secretary, Legislative Department and his colleagues requested him to make
presentation on the Demands of his Department and give an overview of the functioning of the Department highlighting   the
important   initiatives or policy formulations undertaken by the Department during the last one year.  The Chairman also pointed
out to the Secretary that after considering the Demands  for Grants , the Committee would like to take up the Constitution (Ninety-
first Amendment ) Bill, 2000 and requested him to make a presentation on the Bill also.
3.         *                                              *                                              *
3.1       *                                              *                                              *         
3.2.      *                                              *                                              *
4.         *                                              *                                              *
(The meeting adjourned at 1.25 P.M.  and reassembled at 3.00 P.M.)
5.         On the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000, the Secretary informed the Committee that the Bill had three
components; firstly, freeze on the allocation of seats to States in Lok Sabha till 2026; secondly, readjustmentof territorial
constituencies on the basis of figures of 1991 census and thirdly, refixation of number of SC/ST seats on the basis of 1991 census.
5.1       Further, the Secretary stated that the Bill proposed to extend the constitutional embargo on undertaking delimitation of
territorial constituencies  from 2000 to 2026.  However, a proposal had been made for refixing the number of seats reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies.  In other words, the overall number of seats for
Lok Sabha and State Assemblies would remain unchanged but the number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe seats might

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
undergo change within the overall limit of seats, as these will be fixed on the basis of figures of the 1991 census. 
6.         The members were by and large in agreement with the proposed freeze on undertaking delimitation of territorial
constituencies from 2000 to 2026, but expressed their viewpoints  over the proposed increase/decrease of the number of seats of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes on the basis of 1991 census, while keeping the total number of seats frozen.  Members
were of the view that refixation of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe seats would entail reduction of general seats.  They were of
the opinion that since the Scheduled Tribe constituencies were based on ‘largest’ population parameter, it may not be feasible to
rotate them, but Scheduled Caste constituencies could be changed by rotation as these seats were based on ‘larger’ population
concept.  A view was also expressed that since an embargo had put on the total number of seats in Lok Sabha and Legislative
Assemblies, there should likewise be an embargo in respect of the seats reserved for the Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes.
_________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
7.         The Chairman directed the Secretary (Legislative) to send written responses to the queries of the members.
8.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.29 P.M.  to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30 March 2001.
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 10 April 2001 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee ¾ Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
           
2.
                  Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3.                  Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
4.                  Dr. L.M. Singhvi
5.                  Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6.                  Shri Drupad Borgohain
7.                  Shri Kuldip Nayyar
8.                  Dr.(Smt.) Joyasree Goswami Mahanta
9.                  Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya
 
            LOK SABHA
 
10.
           Shri S.K.Bwiswmuthiary
11.              Shri Samar Choudhury
12.              Shri Arun Kumar
13.              Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
14.              Shri Subodh Ray
15.              Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
16.              Shri Anadi Sahu
17.              Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18.              Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
19.              Dr.Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
20.              Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
21.              Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
 


74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
 
1.
                  Dr. S.C. Jain, Secretary, Legislative Department
2.                  Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
3.                  Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & LC, Legislative Department
 
            At the outset, the Chairman extended welcome to the Members and the representatives of Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs.  He also informed the Members of the urgency associated with the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill,
2000 and requested them to confine their observations to the clause-wise consideration of the Bill.  He mentioned that with the
passage of the Bill altogether six Articles (55,81,82, 107, 330 and 332) would be amended which would enable the Government to
extend the constitutional embargo on undertaking fresh delimitation of territorial constituencies from the year 2000 to 2026 and
readjust/rationalize Parliamentary as well as Assembly constituencies on the basis of the population census of 1991.
2.0       The Committee  then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000.
Clause – 2
2.1.0    The clause intends to substitute the  year 2000 by 2026 in the proviso to the Explanation in Article 55 in order to extend the
constitutional embargo on undertaking fresh delimitation till 2026.
2.1.1    The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause – 3
2.2.0    The clause substitutes the year 2000 by 2026 in the proviso to Article 81 and makes provision for
readjustment/rationalization of Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991 population census without increasing the total
number of seats allotted to States in the House of  the People which is on the basis of 1971 population census.
2.2.1    The Committee pointed out that division of each State into Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991   population
census may affect the general seats as the increase/decrease of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes population to the
total, would have to be reflected in the allocation of seats to the States in the House of People in accordance with the provisions
enshrined in Article 330 of the Constitution.  The Secretary, Legislative Department, while endorsing the above view of the
Committee, observed that on the basis of comparative figures available with the Ministry, the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes in certain States   would go up thereby     affecting the general seats.  He also opined that in some States the Scheduled
Caste population had gone down.  He further stated that the details of increase/decrease of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes would   be decided by the Delimitation Commission.
2.2.2    In that context, a view was expressed that Articles 330 and 332 needed to be amended so as to do away with the refixing of
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as categorically indicated in paragraph 4 of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Bill.  However, after some deliberation, it was agreed not to press the point further.
2.2.3    The clause was, accordingly, adopted without any change.
Clause – 4
2.3.0    The clause seeks to amend Article 82 which is about readjustment of allocation of seats  to the House of the People and
division of each State into territorial constituencies upon the completion of each  census.  The clause proposes to readjust the
division of States into Parliamentary constituencies on the basis of 1991 population census and maintain status quo in relation to
allocation of seats to the States in the House of the People which is on the basis of 1971 population census.
2.3.1    The Committee again noted the implication of readjustment of territorial constituencies on the basis of 1991 population
census within the existing overall limit of seats for States in the House of the People.
2.3.2
        The clause was, however, adopted without any change. 
Clause – 5
2.4.0    This clause is corresponding to clause 4 of the Bill, in respect of Legislative Assemblies.  The clause proposes to readjust
the division of States into Assembly constituencies on the basis of 1991 census without increasing the total number of seats in
State Legislative Assemblies, and   at the same time substitute the year 2000 by 2026 so as to facilitate extending freeze of
delimitation up to the year 2026.
2.4.1
        The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause – 6

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
2.5.0    The clause intends to provide due representation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the reservation of
seats in the House of the People on  the basis of 1991 census  which will remain valid till the publication of first census after the
year 2026.
2.5.1        The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause – 7
2.6.0    This clause is corresponding to clause 6 of the Bill in respect of Legislative Assemblies, to provide due reservation to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in State Legislative Assemblies on the basis of 1991 population census which will
remain valid till the publication of first census after the year 2026.
2.6.1    The clause was adopted without any change.
Clause-1, the Enacting  Formula and Title
2.7       Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title were adopted with some changes which are of consequential or drafting in nature,
namely,  ‘2000’ and ‘Fifty-first’ to be substituted  by ‘2001’ and ‘Fifty-second’, respectively.
3.0       A member while drew the attention of the Committee to that priviledges given to  Autonomous districts of Assam should
be extended to Kokrajhar Parliamentary constituency while rationalizing territorial constituencies.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4.0       *                                              *                                              *
4.1       *                                              *                                              *
4.2       *                                              *                                              *
(The Committee adjourned at 1.00 P.M. and reassembled  at 3.00 P.M.)
5.         *                                              *                                              *
6.         *                                              *                                              *
7.         *                                              *                                              *
8.         *                                              *                                              *
9.         *                                              *                                              *
10.       *                                              *                                              *
11.       *                                              *                                              *
12.0     *                                              *                                              *
12.1     *                                              *                                              *
12.2     *                                              *                                              *         
12.3     *                                              *                                              *
13.       *                                              *                                              *
14.       *                                              *                                              *
15.       *                                              *                                              *
16.       A verbatim record of  proceedings was kept.
17.       The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned at 5:27 P.M.
____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 25 April, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Pranab Mukherjee¾Chairman
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Hiphei
3.         Shri Surendra Kumar Singh
4.         Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5.         Dr. L.M. Singhvi
6.         Shri Jayant Bhattacharya
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
8.         Shri Vinay Katiyar
9.         Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10.       Shri Subodh Ray
11.       Shri Anadi Sahu
12.       Shri Manabendra Shah
13.       Shri Vishnu Datta Sharma
14.       Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
15.       Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Tapan  Chatterjee, Director
            Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
            Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000.
2.1       A Member drew the attention of the Committee to the provisions contained in Section 22(2)(b) of the Uttar Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000 relating to delimitation of constituencies in the Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal which stipulated
that all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas and in delimiting them, regard shall be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and conveniences to the public.  In that
context he stated that from the perusal of the Bill, it appeared that the sole criterian for readjustment of territorial constituencies is
on the basis of 1991 population census. A question was, therefore, posed whether the criteria laid down in the aforesaid provision
of the Act would be made applicable at the time of undertaking readjustment of constituencies in the newly created state of
Uttaranchal  as it had its unique geographical features, culture etc. which needed to be preserved.
2.2       With reference to the point raised by the Member, the Chairman observed that certain temporary arrangements relating to
delimitation of territorial constituencies in the newly created States of Uttaranchal, Jharkhand and Chhatisgarh should be merged
with the general arrangement as proposed in the Bill under consideration of the Committee because each State had its unique geo-
political history, culture, ethos and the sacrifices made by the people  of the respective regions for attaining statehood.
2.3       The Committee then decided that a suitable para may be added in the Report recommending to Government to ensure that
the criteria mentioned in the Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Acts, 2000 for delimitation of
constituencies, should be taken into consideration while undertaking readjustment of territorial constituencies in the newly created
States.
2.4       With regard to rotation of constituencies, the Committee was of the view that the Government should be clear in its mind as
to whether it would like to introduce the scheme of rotation at a later stage and if so, the same should be specifically mentioned in
the terms of reference of the Delimitation Commission.  The Committee, accordingly, decided that this aspect may be suitably
incorporated in the Report.
2.5       The Report was, accordingly, adopted with the aforesaid modifications/additions.  The Committee decided to present the
Report in both the Houses on Thursday, 26
th March, 2001.  It also decided to lay the Evidence recorded on the Bill on the Table of
both the Houses along with the Report.
3.1       The Chairman then proposed the names of Shri Hiphei and Shri Surendra Kumar Singh to present/lay the Report and
Evidence in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anadi Sahu and Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari to lay the Report and Evidence in the Lok Sabha on
the same day.  The Committee endorsed the proposal of the Chairman.
4.0       The Chairman then stated that the Hon’ble Chairman in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, had on 5
th February, 2001
referred the Registration and other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000,as introduced and pending in the Lok Sabha, to the
Committee, for examination and with instructions to report during the current Budget Session.  He added that the Committee had
not been able to complete the examination of the Bill mainly because of its pre-occupation with the examination of the Demands
for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministries/Departments under its jurisdiction and also consideration of the Constitution Ninety-first

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
Amendment 
of article 82.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of article
 4. In article 82 of the Constitution, in the third proviso to, -
               (i) for the figures "2000", the figures "2026" shall be substituted;
             (ii) for the words "readjust the allocation of seats in the House of the People   to the States and
the division of each  State     into   territorial constituencies under this article",   the following   shall be
substituted, namely:-
                   "readjust-
 
                           (i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to  the                            
                     States  as readjusted on the basis of the 1971  census; and
                           (ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as
                     may be readjusted on the basis of the 1991 census,                               
                       
 under this article.".
 
5. In article 170 of the Constitution,-
            (a) in clause (2), in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figures"2000" and 1971 ", the figures
"2026" and " 1991 " shall  respectively be substituted;
            (b) in the third proviso to clause (3),-                                            
 
                     (i) for the figures "2000", the figures "2026" shall be substituted;
(Amendment) Bill, 2001 which was to be reported during the Session.
4.1       *                                              *                                              *
4.2       *                                              *                                              *
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
ANNEXURE
ANNEXURE –I
As Introduced in Lok Sabha
(See page1, para 1 of the Report)
Bill No. 172 of 2000
THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of lndia.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2000.  
2. In article 55 of the Constitution, in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figures   "2000", the
figures "2026" shall be substituted.  
 
    3. In article 81of the Constitution, in the proviso to clause (3),-
(i)  for the figures "2000", the figures "2026" shall be substituted;
(ii)  for the words and figures "be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.",   the following
shall be substituted, namely:-
 "be construed,-
            (i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause, as a reference
to the 1971 census; and
 
           (ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of the clause (2) as a reference to the 1991 census.".
 
 
Short title.
 
Amendment
of article 55.
                                    
 
Amendment
of article 8 1.
 
 
 
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
170.                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment  
of article 330
 
Amendment     
of article   
332.                        
     
                     (ii) for    the words "readjust  the total number of seats in the  
             Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of such State into   
             territorial constituencies under this clause.", the following  shall be   
             substituted, namely--
 
                         "readjust-        
                   
                                (i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of
                           each State as readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
                                (ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies
                          as may be readjusted on the basis of the 1991 census,
             under this clause."
  
6. In article 330 of the Constitution, in the proviso to the Explanation, for the
 figures    "2000"      and " 1971 ",    the figures "2026" and " 1991 " shall  respectively be substituted.
 
 7. in article 332 of the Constitution,-
             (a) in clause (3A), for the figures "2000", the figures "2026" shall be
                  substituted;
             (b) in clause (3B), for the figures "2000", the figures "2026" shall be 
                  substituted.                                                        
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
Provisos to articles 82 and 170 (3) of the Constitution provide that no fresh readjustment of constituencies can be undertaken until
the figures of the first census taken after the year 2000 are published. These provisos were inserted by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976 as a measure to boost family planning norms. Since the first census to be taken after the year 2000 has already
begun, the constitutional embargo on undertaking fresh delimitation will lapse as soon as the figures of this census are published.
2. There have been consistent demands, both for and against undertaking the exercise of fresh delimitation. Keeping in view the
progress of family planning programmes in different parts of the country, the Government, as part of the National Population Policy
strategy, recently decided to extend the current freeze on undertaking fresh delimitation up to the year 2026 as a motivational measure to
enable the State Governments to pursue the agenda for population stabilisation.
3. Government has also decided to undertake readjustment and rationalisation of territorial constituencies in the States, without
altering the number of seats allotted to each State in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States, including the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes constituencies, on the basis of the population ascertained at the census for the year 1991, so as
to remove the imbalance caused due to uneven growth of population/electorate in different constituencies.
4. It is also proposed to refix the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the basis of the population ascertained at the census for the year 1991.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
New Delhi;                                                                
The 8th November, 2000
ARUN JAITLEY.
 
ANNEXURE
Extracts From The Constitution Of India
*  *  *  *  *
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55. (1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of  the
different States at the election of the President.
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se as well as parity
between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes which each elected member
of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election
Manner of
election of    
President
 
 
 
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shall be determined in the following manner:-
     (a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have as many votes
as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of
the State by the total number of the elected members of the Assembly;
    (b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is not less than five
hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased
by one;
    (c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes as
may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the
Legislative Assemblies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and (b) by the total number of the
elected members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as
one and other fractions being disregarded.
    (3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be
by secret ballot.
    Explanation .-In this article, the expression "population" means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been   published:
   Provided that the reference in this  Explanation  to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
          *                     *                       *                      *                    *
81.(1)*                      *                       *                     *                    *
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published :
    Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding
 
census of which the relevant, figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for
the first census taken after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to
the 1971 census.
82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to
the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
   Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People
until the dissolution of the then existing House:
  Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may,
by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may be
held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
   Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2000
have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the allocation of seats in the House
of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies under
this article.
            *                       *                     *                     *                    *
170. (1)*                      *                     *                      *                   *
(2) For the purposes of -clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial  constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency  and the number of
seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
    Explanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
    Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall
be readjusted by such authority  and in such manner as Parliament may by law
determine:                                             
    Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative Assembly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition
of the House
of the  People.
 
 
 
 
 
Readjustment
after each   
census.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition of the
Legislative
Assemblies
.
until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
  Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may,
by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the Legislative
Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such
readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year  2000 have
been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of such State into territorial constituencies under this
clause.
       *                   *                     *                    *                     *.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for-   
          (a)  the Scheduled Castes;
          (b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the
      autonomous districts of Assam; and
          (c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of
Assam.
   (2) The number of seats reserved in any State or
Union territory for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of seats allotted to that State or Union-
territory in the House of the People as the population
of the Scheduled Castes in the State or Union
territory or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or
Union territory or part of the State or Union territory,
as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so
reserved, bears to the total population of the State or
Union territory.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(2), the number of seats reserved in the House of
the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the
autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the
total number of seats allotted to that State a
proportion not less than the population of the
Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous districts
bears to the total population of the State.
Explanation.-In this article and in article 332, the
expression "population" means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published:    
Provided that the reference in this
Explanation to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until
the relevant figures for the first census taken after
the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a
reference to the 1971 census.
            *                     *                      *                    
*                    *
332. (1)*                    *                      *                     *                     *
            
3(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), until the taking effect, under census legislation
article 170, of the readjustment, on the basis of the
Reservation
of seats for                                                                                       Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes
in                                                                                                                                             
the House
 of the People.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reservation
of seats for
Scheduled
Tribes in the
 Tribes in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
  
           (a) if all seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in existence on date of coming into
force of the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act 1987 (hereafter    in this clause referred to
as the existing Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one;
         (b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a  proportion
not less than the number (as on the said date) of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the
existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing Assembly.
        (3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the readjustment, under article 170,
takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2000, of the number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of
seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the Constitution
(Seventy-second Amendment) Act 1992, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that
Assembly.
        *                      *                      *                      *                        *
 
first census after the year 2000, of the number of
seats in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and
Nagaland, the seats which shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any
such State shall be,-
.           
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
____
A
BILL
 
further to amend the Constitution of India
______
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister for Law, Justice and Company Affairs)
 
ANNEXURE-II
(See page 1, para  2.1 of the Report)
THE DELIMITATION ACT, 1972
(76 of  1972)
[30th December, 1972]
            An Act to provide for the readjustment of the allocation  of seats in the House of the People  of the States, the total number of seats
in the Legislative  Assembly of each State, the division of each State and each Union territory having    a  Legislative Assembly and the
Union territory of Delhi into territorial  constituencies  for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States 
and Union Territories and Metropolitan  Council of Delhi and for matters connected therewith.
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-Third Year of the Republic of India as follows:–
            1.         Short title – This Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 1972.
4.                   Definitions –  In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires,-
(a)    “article” means an article of the Constitution;
(b)    “associate member” means a member nominated under section 5;
(c)    “Commission” means the Delimitation Commission constituted under section 3;

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
(d)    “Legislative Assembly” includes the Metropolitan Council of Delhi;
(e)    “latest census figures” means the census figures as ascertained at the census held in 1971;
(f)     “member” means a member   of the Commission and includes the Chairman;
(g)    “State” includes a Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly but does not include  the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
3.         Constitution of Delimitation Commission- (1)  As  soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central
Government shall constitute  a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission which shall consist of three members  as follows:-
(h)    two members, each of whom shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, to
be appointed by the Central Government; and
(i)      the Chief Election Commissioner, ex  officio.
4.         Duties of the Commission- It shall be the  duty of the Commission to readjust on the basis  of the latest census  figures the
allocation of seats in the House of the People to the several States, the total number of seats in the  Legislative Assembly of each State and
the division of each State into territorial constituencies  for the purpose of elections to the House of the People and to the State Legislative
Assembly:
Provided that where  on such readjustment only one seat is allocated in the House of the People   to a State, the whole of that State
shall form one territorial  constituency for the purpose of elections to the House of the People from that State:
Provided further that it shall not be necessary for the Commission to readjust the allocation of seats in the House of the People to
any Union  Territory or the total number of seats, in the Legislative Assembly of any of the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu,
Pondicherry and Mizoram or the total number of seats in the Metropolitan Council  of the Union Territory of Delhi.
5.         Associate members - (1)  The Commission shall associate with itself for the purpose of assisting it in its duties in respect of
each  State, ten persons five of whom   shall be members of the House of the People representing that State and five shall be members of the
Legislative Assembly of that State:
            Provided that where the number  of members of the House of the People  representing any State is five or less, then all such
members shall be the associate  members  for that  State and in the letter case the total number of associate members shall be less than ten
by such number as by which the total number of members of the House of the People representing that State is less than five.
            (2)        The persons to be so associated from each State shall be nominated, in the case of members of the House of the People, by
the Speaker of that House, and in the case of members of a Legislative Assembly, by the Speaker of that  Assembly, having due regard to
the composition of the House or, as the case may be, of the Assembly.
            (3)        The first nomination to be made under the sub-section (2) –
(a)
     shall be made by the Speakers of the several Legislative Assemblies within one month, and by the Speaker of the
House of the People within two months, of the commencement of this Act, and
(b)     shall be communicated to the Chief Election Commissioner, and where the nominations  are made by the Speaker of a
Legislative Assembly, also to the Speaker  of the House of the Peoples.
(4)        None Of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sigh any  decision of the  Commission.
                                               
6.         Casual Vacancies  – If  owing to death or resignation the office of the Chairman or of a member or of an associate member
falls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the Central Government or the Speaker concerned under and in accordance
with the provisions of Section 3, or, as the case may be, of Section 5.
 
7.         Procedure and powers of the Commission – (1) - The   Commission  shall determine its own procedure and shall  in the
performance of its functions have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in
respect of the following matters, namely:-                    
 
(a)
                summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b)                 requiring the production of any document; and
(c)                requisitioning any public record from any court or office.
 
 
(2)        The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish  any information on such points or matters as in the
opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission.
 
(3)        The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise any of the powers conferred on it by clauses (a) to (c) of
sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), and any order made or act done in exercise of any of those powers by the member authorised by the
Commission in that behalf shall be deemed to be the order or act, as the case may be, of the Commission.
 
(4)        If there is a difference of  opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, and acts and orders of the
Commission shall be expressed in terms of the views of the majority.
 
(5)        The Commission as well as any group of associate members shall  have power to act notwithstanding the temporary

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
absence of a member or associate member or the existence of a vacancy in the Commission or in that or any other group of associate
members; and no act or proceeding of the Commission or of any group of associate members shall be invalid or called in question on the
ground merely of such temporary absence or of the existence of such vacancy.
 
(6)        The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of Sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).
 
Explanation. – For the Purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission
shall be the limits of the territory of India.                                                              
 
8.     Readjustment of number of seats.--The Commission shall, on the basis of the latest census figures and having regard to the
provisions of articles 81, 170, 330 and 332, and also, in relation to the State of Nagaland clause (2) (h) of article 371A and sub-section (1)
of section 11 of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), in relation to the Union Territories except Delhi sections 3 and 39 of the
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963) and in relation to the Union Territory of Delhi section 3 and sub-section (1) of
Section 4 of the Delhi Administration Act, 1966 (19 of 1966), by order determine –
 
(a)        the number of seats in the House of the People to be allocated to each State and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State; and
(b)        the total number of seats to be assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each State and the number of seats, if any, to be
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State:
Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (b) shall be an integral
multiple of the number of seats in the House of the People allocated to that State under clause (a).
 
9.         Delimitation of constituencies . – (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, then distribute the seats in the
House of the People allocated to each State and the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each State to single member territorial
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census figures, having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and the
provisions of the Acts specified in section 8 and also to the following provisions, namely –
 
(a)        all constituencies shall as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and public convenience;
 
(b)        every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly within one parliamentary constituency;
 
(c)        constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in different parts of the State and
located, as far as practicable, in those areas where the proportion of their population to the total is comparatively large; and
 
(d)
                constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where
the proportion of their population to the total is the largest.
 
(2)        The Commission shall –
 
(a)        publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together which the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate
member who desires publication thereof, in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of all the States concerned and
also in such other manner as it thinks fit;
 
(b)        specify a date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it;
 
(c)        consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so specified, and for the purpose
of such consideration, hold one or more public sittings at such place or places in each State as it thinks fit; and
 
(d)        thereafter by one or more orders determine –
 
(i)         the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies, and
(ii)        the delimitation of assembly constituencies,
 
of each State.
 
10.        Publication of orders and their date of operation. – (1) The Commission shall cause each of its orders made under Section
8 or Section 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned.
 
(2)        Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order shall have the force of law and shall not be called in question in
any court.
 
(3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid before the House of the People and the Legislative
Assemblies of the States concerned.
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
(4)        Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of representation of the several territorial constituencies in the
House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State and the delimitation of those constituencies provided for in any such order
shall apply in relation to every election to the House or to the Assembly, as the case may be, held after the publication in the Gazette of
India of that order and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating to such representation and delimitation contained in the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966, and
any final orders of the Election Commission relating to  the   delimitation of parliamentary constituencies or, as the case may be, of
assembly constituencies of any State made in pursuance of the provisions of any other Acts.
 
(5)        Nothing in  section shall affect the representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until
the dissolution of the House or of the Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the final
order or orders of the Commission relating to the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies or, as the case my be, of the assembly
constituencies of that State and any bye-election to fill any vacancy in such House or in any such Assembly shall be held on the basis of the
provisions of the laws and orders superseded by sub-section (4) as if the said provisions had not been superseded.
 
11.        Power to maintain delimitation orders up-to-date. –  (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the
Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned,-
 
(a)
            correct any printing mistake in any of the orders made by the Delimitation Commission under section 9 or any error arising
therein from an inadvertent slip or emission; and
 
(b)     where the boundaries or name of any district or any territorial division mentioned in any of the said orders are or is altered, make
such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the orders up-to-date, so however, that the boundaries
or areas or extent of any constituency shall not be changed by any such notification.
 
(2)     Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the House of the People and the
Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
 
ANNEXURE-III
 
(See page 2, para 2.2.0 of the Report)
No.N.23011/54/97-Ply
Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Department of Family Welfare
 
Nirman
 Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
Dated 9 June 1998.
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
 
Sub:            Freezing  of seats in Lok Sabha on the basis of 1971  Census.
 
      The undersigned  is directed to refer Legislative Department O.M.No.7(4)/98-Leg.II dated 12 th May, 1998, and to convey that  the
Department of  Family Welfare  recommends the freezing  of the  present 1971  Census based inter-State allocation of seats in Lok
Sabha upto the year 2026 A.D.   The rationale for this recommendation is that the weakness of any State in achievement  of population
stabilisation should not lead to the increase in the entitlement of that  State to seats in Lok Sabha.  Allowing such States to increase their
entitlement to Lok Sabha seats would encourage  other States to go slow on population stabilisation.
 
      The above recommendation has the approval of Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare (Independent Charge).
 
            The year 2026 A.D. is the year in which the replacement  level of fertility is expected to be achieved at national level.  A Statement
showing the likely year of achievement of the replacement level of fertility in respect of India and major States  is attached.  Another
Statement showing the State-wise population at 5 year intervals  from 1991 to 2016, upto  which year State wise projections are available, is
also attached.
 
                                                                                                                               Sd/-
(INDRAJIT PAL)
DIRECTOR (P)
Ministry of Law and Justice,
Legislative Department,
(Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary),
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110001.
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
ANNEXURE- IV
(See page 2, para 2.2.2 of the Report)
EXTRACT OF 170TH REPORT OF LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
 
9.7.       Part IV-A of the Act, containing section 29A shall be deleted.  (The substance of section 29A has been incorporated in section
11A).
(Paragraph 3.1.4)
9.8.       The Law Commission is of the opinion that the list system should be introduced as: suggested by it in the working paper, for the
reasons stated in Chapter II of Part III but subject  to the following modifications.
 
(a)        The Commission decided to drop its proposal with respect to territorial units which  means that the entire country will be
one unit for the purpose of the List System.
(b)        If the votes received by a candidate of a RPP do not exceed one-sixth of the valid votes polled by all the candidates in a
given constituency, these shall be excluded from consideration for the purpose of sections 78D to 78F.
Accordingly, it is recommended that a new part, Part V-B, containing sections 78D, 78E and section 78F, as indicated in Annexure-
A, be enacted.
(Paragraph 3.2.15)
9.9        Though we are dropping the proposal with respect to territorial units, we do hereby affirm that the distribution of seats in Lok
Sabha among the States, as set out in the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, should be frozen for another 25
years.  For this purpose, it would be necessary to amend the proviso to clause (3) of Article 81 of the Constitution by substituting the figure
“2025” for the figure “2000”.
(Paragraph 3.2.15.1.)
ANNEXURE -V
(See page 2, para 3.0 of the Report)
PROPOSALS  ON WHICH THERE IS A GENERAL  CONSENSUS AMONGST POLITICAL PARTIES  (FOR THE MEETING HELD
ON 23.7.1996)
            There is consensus amongst political parties in respect of proposals listed at following serial numbers of the Tabular Statement:
S.No.   Title of the Proposal
1.         Fresh Delimitation
1.
                   Enhancement of punishment for breach of official duty.
2.                   Disqualification
3.                  Observers
4.                   Reduction in campaign period
5.                   Restriction on nomination
6.                   Increase in security deposit
7.                   Arrangement of names of candidates of recognised political parties above the names or independents
8.                   Non-countermanding of election
9.                   Empowering Election Commission to countermand the poll
10.               Statutory backing to certain provisions (Part VII) of Model Code of Conduct
11.               Amplification of the provision relating to prohibition on public meetings
12.               Enhancement of punishment for disturbance at public meetings
13.               Enhancement of punishment for offence of illegal hiring or procuring of conveyance at elections and making it cognizable
14.               Prohibition of going armed to or near a polling station by making it an offence
15.               Amplification of the provision which makes removal of ballot papers from polling station an offence
16.               Amplification of the punishment for the offence of  booth capturing
17.               (i) Grant of paid holiday to employees on poll day
(ii)Ban on sale/distribution of liquor on poll day
18.               Holding of bye-election within a period of six months
19.               Enhancement of required minimum of votes polled to save security deposit from 'one-sixth' to 'one-fourth'.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
PROPOSALS FOR ELECTORAL REFORMS
 
(Which were on the Agenda of the all  party meeting held on 23.7.1996)
 
 
Sr.No.
 
Gist of the proposal
Recommended by Whether
contained  in
any earlier  Bill
Recommendations of
Standing Committee*
or Select Committee
Remarks
Dinesh Goswami
Committee*
Election
Commission of
India$
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1. Fresh Delimitation
Fresh delimitation of
Parliamentary and
Assembly constituencies on
the basis of 1991 census
without affecting the
existing number of seats
allocated to various States
on the basis of 1971
census. 
Fresh delimitation
on the basis of 1981
census without
affecting the
existing number of
seats allocated on
the basis of 1971
census.
Yes
 
The Constitution
(84th
Amendment)
Bill, 1994 vide
clauses 2 to 4.
 
 The Constitution (71 st
Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide  clause 3)
provides for
delimitation of
constituencies on the
basis of 1981 census
without affecting the
existing number of
seats allocated to
various States.
2. Rotation of seats reserved
for Scheduled Castes
Whether seats reserved for
Scheduled Castes be
rotated?
Yes Yes
 
The Constitution
(71st
Amendment)
Bill, 1990
There is no need for
providing a specific
provision for rotation of
seats as Parliament under
Article 327 would be
competent to make such
a provision.
–
3. Mode of Appointment of
CEC and ECs
The  Chief election
Commissioner should be
appointed by the President
in consultation with 
Chairman of the Council of
States, the Speaker of the
House of the People and 
Leader of Opposition in the
House of the People and in
the appointment of Election
Commissioners, the Chief
Election Commissioner
should also be consulted.
The CEC should be
appointed by the
President in
consultation with
the Chief Justice of
India, Leader of
Opposition and in
case of appointment
of Election
Commissioners the
CEC should also be
consulted.
No specific
comment has
been made by
EC.
 
The Constitution
(70th
Amendment)
Bill, 1990 (vide
clause(2)].
 
 
– –
______________________________________________________________________________
* Report submitted in May, 1990.
$ Main proposals received in February, 1992.
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
4. Independent Secretariat for
Election  Commission
(i) Whether a Constitutional
amendment may be made to
provide for Independent
Secretariat for Election
Commission?
(ii)  Whether the expenses of
the Election Commission
should be "charged" on
Consolidated Fund of India.
 
Yes
 
 
 
Yes
Was in favour of
maintaining the
Status-quo
Yes The Constitution (70 th
Amendment) Bill,
1990 [vide  clause 2
(b)].
 
 
The Election
Commission
(changing of Expenses
on the Consolidated
Fund of India) Bill,
1994 (vide
 Clause 2)
 
 
 
 
Did not favour
the proposal
 
5. Anti-defection law
Whether an appellate authority
should be provided to hear
appeals from the decisions of
the Presiding Officers?
    The proposal was mooted in
a Conference of the
Presiding Officers of various
State Legislatures which was
presided over by the Speaker
to discuss implications of the
Judgement of Supreme Court
in anti-defection case.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
6. Identity cards
(i) Empowering the Central
Government to make rules in
respect of the manner of
issuance of Identity Cards.
(ii) Empowering the Election
Commission of India to direct,
with the prior approval of
Central Government the
issuance of Identity Cards in
certain constituencies or parts
thereof.
  The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide clause2).
 
The R.P. (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (Vide
 Clause 3)
 
*Yes
 
 
 
*Yes
The proposal was mooted to
regulate the manner of
issuance of Identity cards by
the Central Government. 
The proposal has since lost
its relevance.
- do -
7. Enhancement of punishment
for breach of official duty
Enhancement of punishment
for breach of official duty in
preparation of electoral rolls.
(Relevent section:  32 of the
RP.  Act, 1950 Existing
penalty: Fine up Rs. five
hundred Proposed penalty:
imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three
months but which may extend
to two years and with fine)
Yes – The R P (Second
Amendment)  Bill,
1994 (vide  clause  4)
& The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 2).
*Yes –
8. Disqualification
Disqualification of a person
convicted for an offence under
Prevention of Insults to
National Honour Act, 1971
 
Yes Yes The R P (Second
Amendment)  Bill,
1994 (vide  clause  5)
 & The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 5).
*Prevention of
Insults to
National Honour
Act, 1971 should
be amended to
include therein
'Vande Mataram'
also.
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
9. Observers
Statutory backing to observers
appointed by Election Commission
and empowering them to stop
counting of votes/declaration of
results in the event of  booth
capturing. 
Yes Yes The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide clause 6)
& The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 6).
*Yes
 
10. Registration/Deregistration of
Political parties
(i) No registration of an association
or body bearing a religious name or
whose memorandum or rules and
regulations do not conform to sub-
section (5) of section 29A of
Representation of the People Act,
1951 (Sub-section (5) requires that
rules of association shall contain a
specific provision that it shall bear
true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution and to the principles of
socialism, secularism and
democracy and would uphold the
sovereignity, unity and integrity of
India).
(ii) De-registration of political party
bearing religious names etc., or if it
promotes feelings of enmity etc., on
ground of religion.
Section 29A
should be
deleted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 29A
should be
deleted.
 
Yes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caste, creed, sex
and language
alongwith religion
should be included
in the proposed
amendment.  The
party may also be
deregistered if it is
found not working
according to its
constitution.
The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1993 as reported by
the Joint Committee
& The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide clause 7).
 
 
 
 
 
The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1993 as reported by
the Joint Committee
(vide clause 3).
 
*Yes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*(i) Race, caste, creed
sect, community,
language or place of
birth should be
included in the
proposed amendment.
(ii) The word 'religion' 
needs to be amplified
by way of an
explanation under
clause 7 or under
definition clause of the
R P Act, 1951.
The R P
(Amendment)
Bill, 1990
provided for
deletion of
section 29A. (vide
clause 7).
 
11. Reduction in Campaign period
Reduction in Campaign period from
21 days to 14 days
– Yes The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide clause 9).
 
*Yes –
12. Restriction on nomination Yes A candidate not to The R P (Second * Nomination of a The R P

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
Restriction on nomination of a
candidate for election in more than
two constituencies of the same class.
 
be permitted to
contest for
elections in more
than one
constituency of the
same class.
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide  clause
10).
person as a candidate
for election should be
restricted to only one
constituency of the
same class.
(Amendment)
Bill, 1990
restricted it to
only one
constituency 
(vide clause 8).
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
13. Increase in Security deposit
In crease in the existing
amount of security deposit for
election from a Parliamentary
Constituency or assembly
Constituency, etc. 
(Relevant Section: 34
Existing Security deposit: (i) In
case of a Parliamentary
Constituency - Rs.500 or
Rs.250 where candidate
belongs to Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe
(ii) In case of Assembly
Constituency - Rs.250 or
Rs.125 where candidate
belongs to Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe.
Proposed security deposit: (i)
In case of a Parliamentary
Constituency - (a) In case
of               by recognized
parties Rs.1000 or  Rs.500 in
case of a reserved candidate.
(b) In case others - Rs.5000 or
Rs.2500 in case of reserved
candidate, (ii) In case of
Assembly Constituency : Half
the amount proposed for
Parliamentary Constituency in
each case.
Yes Yes
However,
increase should
be uniform for
all candidates.
The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide clause
11) & The R P
(Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 9).
*Yes Proposal seeks
to discourage
non-serious
candidates by
increasing
deposit in their
case by 10
times.
 
14. Arrangement of names of
candidates of recognised
political parties above the
names of independents.
To provide for arrangement of
names of contesting candidates
of recognised  political parties
above the names of
independent candidates in the
ballot paper.
 
 
Yes
 
 
Yes
 
 
The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide  clause
12).
 
 
 
–
 
 
–
15. Non-countermanding of
election
Non-countermanding of
election on death of any
candidate before poll. 
recognised political parties to
be allowed to substitute the
dead candidate with a new
candidate within 7 days of
death of its candidate.
 
Non-
countermanding in
case of death of an
independent
candidate.
Yes The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill,
1994 (vide  clause
13).
The time limit of 7  days
for substituting the ‘dead’
candidate  should be
reckoned  from the date 
when  the Election
Commission calls  upon a
recognised political party
to nominate another
candidate  after the death 
of the  earlier  candidate
and not within seven days
of  the death  of the
candidate.
* A definition of
“recognized political
party” should be provided
in the definition clause of
the Representation of the
People Act, 1951.
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
16. Empowering Election Commission to
countermand the poll
Yes Yes The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
*Yes  

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
Empowering Election Commission to
countermand the poll even without a report
from the Returning Officer in case of booth
capturing.
(Relevant Section: 58A of R.P. Act, 1951
Existing Position: Election Commission can
do so only on receipt of a report from the
Returning Officer)
(vide clause 14) & The R.P.
(Amendment) Bill, 1990
(vide clause 14).
 
17. Statutory backing to certain provisions of
(Part VII) of Model Code of Conduct)
Statutory backing to certain provisions of
(Part VII) of Model Code of Conduct relating
to party in powers by making breach of these
as illegal practice which would be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may
extend up to two years.
In addition, there
should be a provision to
make use of
Government vehicle
etc. an illegal practice.
 
Yes.  In addition resort
to illegal practices
should result in
disqualification of the
candidates.
The R P (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 15) in addition
The R.P. (Amendment)
Bill, 1990 contained a
provision also to make use
of Govt. transport an illegal
practice (vide clause 15).
Yes. Regarding
provision of use of
Government vehicles
etc. Government may
take a decision after
examining its
implications.
 
18. Amplification of the provision relating to
prohibition on public meetings
Amplification of the provision relating to
prohibition on public meetings during period
of 48 hours ending with hour fixed for
conclusion of poll to prohibit other forms of
electioneering also.
Yes Yes The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 16) and The
RP (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 16).
*Sub-section (3) of
section 126 which
explains the expression
“election matters” may 
be put as an explanation
under sub-section (2).
–
19. Enhancement of punishment for
disturbance  at public meetings
Enhancement of punishment for disturbance 
at public meetings and making it cognizable,
(Existing section: 127 of RP Act 1951
Existing penalty: Imprisonment upto three
months or fine upto Rs. one thousand).
Proposed penalty: Imprisonment upto six
months or fine up Rs. two thousand).
Yes Yes The RP (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 17) and The
RP (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 17).
*Yes –
20. Enhancement of punishment for offence of
illegal hiring or procuring of conveyance
at elections and making it cognizable
(Existing section: 133 of RP Act, 1951
Existing penalty: fine upto Rs. one thousand.
Proposed penalty: Imprisonment upto three
months and fine).
Yes Yes The R.P. (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 18) and the
R.P. (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 18).
*Yes –
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
21. Prohibition of going armed to or near a polling
station by making it an offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years or with fine or with both
Yes Yes The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 19) and The
RP (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide  clause 19).
*Yes –
22. Amplification of the provision which makes
removal of ballot papers from polling station an
offence by substituting  for the word
"frauduiently" in section 135 the word
"unauthorisedy".
Yes Yes The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 20) and RP 
(Amendment) Bill, 1990
(vide clause 20).
*Yes –
23. Amplification of the punishment for the offence
of booth capturing in case the off order is a
Government servant and making it a cognizable
offence as also to amplify its scope by changing
certain expressions in the Explanation to section
135A which specifies the offence of "Booth
Capturing".
(Relevant section: 135A
Existing Penalty:
In case of a person other than a Government
servant:  Imprisonment for a term of not less than
six months but
which may extend upto two years and fine.
For Government servant penalty is Imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend upto three years and fine.
For Government servants penalty is proposed to
be not less than three years but which may
extend upto five years and fine).
Yes Yes The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994
(vide clause 21) and RP
(Amendment) Bill, 1990
(vide clause 21).
*Yes –

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
24. (i) Grant of paid holiday to employees on poll
day (non-compliance proposed to be punishable
with fine upto Rs. five hundred)
 
 
 
 
(ii) Ban  on sale/distribution of liquor on poll
day.  (non-compliance proposed to be  
punishable with imprisonment upto six months
or fine upto   Rs. two thousand).
 
Yes
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes
Yes
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes
The RP (Second
Amendment) Bill,  1994
(vide clause 22) & The RP 
(Amendment) Bill, 1990
(vide clause 22).
 
 
 
 
-do-
*(i) The punishment for non-
compliance  should be imprisonment
upto three months or fine upto Rs.
5000/- or both as against a fine of Rs.
500/- which is presently proposed.
(ii) A suitable mechanism should be
evolved to see that electors  belonging 
to essential services are not deprived of
‘right to vote’.
The ban  on sale, distribution, etc. of
spirituous, fermented or intoxicating 
liquors should be  made applicable in a
polling  area during the period  of 48
hours ending  with the hour fixed for the
conclusion of the poll as against for the
day of poll as is proposed.
–
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
25. Holding of  bye-election within a period of six months. Yes Yes The R.P. (Second
Amendment) Bill 1994 (vide
clause 23) & The RP
(Amendment) Bill, 1990 (vide
clause 23).
*Yes –
26. Enhancement of required minimum  of votes polled  to
save security deposit from ‘one-sixth’ to ‘one-fourth’.
Yes Yes The R.P. (Second
Amendment) Bill, 1994 (vide
clause 24)
*Yes The RP (Amendment)
1990 did not make 
provision to this
effect.
27. State Funding of elections to candidates of recognised
political parties
(i) The candidates of recognised political parties may be
supplied free of cost such number of copies of electoral
rolls, such quantity of petrol, such number of vehicles as
may be laid  down in the rules to be made by the Central
Government.  The Government  may also pay to the
candidates of recognised political  parties  such amount
of hire charge for such number of microphones as may be
specified in the rules.
(ii) Supply of identity slips of voters to all recognised
political parties.  Proportionate reduction of amount of
maximum permissible expenditure by candidates to be
provided with State funding.
Yes
 
 
 
 
Yes
No specific
comment has been
made by the 
Commission.
 
 
 
No specific
comment has been
made by the
Election
Commission.
The R.P. (Amendment) Bill,
1990  (vide clause 13).
 
 
 
 
The R.P. (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 13).
–
 
 
 
 
 
–
–
 
 
 
 
 
–
28. The expenditure incurred by a  political party to be
treated as part of election expenditure of a candidate.
The expenditure  incurred by a political party or by any
other association or body of persons or by any individual
shall be deemed to be election expenditure of a
candidate.  Also the expenditure incurred  from the date
of publication of the notification calling for election is to
be included in the election expenditure
Yes Yes The RP (Amendment)  Bill,
1990 (vide clause 12).
– The proposal is to
restore the provisions
to its pre-1974
position.
29. Empowering the Election Commission to issue
instructions, etc.
Empowering the Election commission to issue
instructions to any officer in connection with conduct of
elections and to make certain recommendations for
referring any matter for investigation to any agency
specified by it for prosecution of any person who has
committed any electoral offence and for appointment of
any special court for the train of any offence under the
Act.
Yes Yes The R.P. (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide clause 24)
– –
30. Change in title of the RP Act, 1951.
The title of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 be
changed as the Election to Parliament and State
Legislatures Act, 1951.
Yes – The RP (Amendment) Bill,
1990 (vide  clause 3).
– –
 
IMPORTANT PROPOSALS OF ELECTION COMMISSION NOT COVERED
 IN PRECEDING PROPOSALS
 
SI.No. GIST OF THE PROPOSAL REMARKS

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
31. Every registered political party should publish its accounts
annually and these accounts should be audited by agencies
specified by the Commission.
Under the Income Tax Act, a political  party is  required  to maintain its  accounts
in case  it  wants  to claim certain exemptions as provided in the said Act.
32. The Election Commission should have power to take
disciplinary action against Government servants deputed for
election duties.
 
The issue is sub-judice and is pending before the Supreme Court.           
                                               
33. Election Commission should have power to make rules under
the two Representation of the People Acts.
 
                                                                                                               
                               
34. Automatic disqualification of a person found guilty of a
corrupt practice. (At present the question is decided by
President/Government on the basis of advise received from
the Election Commission)
 
               
35. Automatic disqualification on conviction for any electoral
offences.
               
 
36. The Chief Electoral Officer should exclusively be given the
work of election and should be under  the control of  Election
Commission.
Goswami Committee had recommended that the Chief Electoral Officer should
exclusively do election work.  The issue is sub-judice and is pending before the
Supreme Court.
37. Chief Electoral Officer/District Election Officers and
Returning Officers should statutorily be required to be
consulted and empowered to have a say in the police
arrangements being made in connection with elections.
 
 
38. The violations of the provisions of the Model Code of
Conduct should result in the election being declared void.
  
 
 
 
MINUTES  OF THE MEETING OF POLITICAL PARTIES HELD
ON 22ND MAY, 1998 TO DISCUSS ADDITIONAL PROPOSALS ON
.ELECTORAL REFORMS
 
A meeting of leaders of various political parties was held in the main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe on 22 nd May,
1998 to discuss additional proposals on electoral reforms.  The meeting was chaired by the Hon’ble  Home Minister.  The Minister for Law,
Justice and Company Affairs and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs were also present.    The list of participants of the meeting is at
Appendix.
2.         In the meeting, out of the 24 additional proposals on electoral reforms identified  by the Government  for discussion with political
parties, the first 17 proposals alongwith the proposal for readjustment of parliamentary and assembly  constituencies were discussed.
3.1        After welcome address of the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, the Home Minister initiated  the discussion.  He pointed out that
in the last meeting of political parties there was consensus on readjustment of the extent of parliamentary and assembly constituencies
without altering their numbers and he requested the participants to express their views  on the  proposal  that while undertaking
readjustment of parliamentary and assembly constituencies, the number of seats should be increased by 10 per cent on pro rata basis.
3.2        Some of the members who expressed their views initially, favoured readjustment of parliamentary and assembly constituencies but
the proposal was opposed by Shri Nitish Kumar (Samata Party)  and Shri  Laloo Prasad Yadav (RJD)  on the ground  that readjustment of
the extent of constituencies would change their community composition and may disturb the basis on which seats were reserved.  They
were also of the view that since delimitation as per Constitutional provisions would be due in the near future after publication  of the figures
of the first  census taken after the year 2000, no useful purpose would be achieved by undertaking the exercise at this point of time.
3.3        After further discussion on the subject, it was  decided that as per article 82 of the Constitution, fresh delimitation would be
mandatory after publication of the figures of the first census taken after the year 2000 and as the year 2000 was close by, there was no need
to amend the Constitution for the purpose of enabling fresh readjustment of constituencies at present  and the existing position may
continue till fresh delimitation became due as per existing Constitutional provisions.
4.         On the proposal for lowering the age for contesting elections to Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies from the existing 25 years to
21 years and in case of elections to Legislative Councils and Council of States from 30 years to 25 years, Shri Rajesh Pilot (Congress I) had
some reservation initially  and was of the view that the status quo be maintained  for some more time.  However, after further discussions,
all political parties, including Congress I, agreed that the age for contesting elections be lowered as proposed.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
5.         As regard the proposal that no candidate should be allowed to contest elections from more than one constituency, BJP was inclined
to accept the proposal.  Shri Murasoli Maran (DMK), Shri Rajesh Pilot (Congress I) and Shri Laloo Prasad  Yadav (RJD)  were, however,
for maintaining the status quo.  After discussions, the political parties by consensus decided that status quo may continue in the matter.
6.         With regard  to the proposal for automatic disqualification of a person  found guilty of corrupt practice,  CPM was in favour of
courts being empowered to determine the question of disqualification as also the period thereof.  The Home Minister pointed out  that  the
proposal basically sought to restore the position that existed prior to 1975.  The proposal was discussed further but it was decided to 
maintain status quo at present.
7.         The proposal for enhancing the minimum number of votes polled to save security deposit from one-sixth  to one-fourth was
discussed by the political parties and it was decided to maintain status quo in the matter.
8.1        The political parties agreed, in principle, to move  in the direction of public funding of elections and for the purpose  a seven-
member committee under the Chairmanship of Shri  Indrajit Gupta (CPI)  was constituted.  The other members of the Committee are (1)
Shri Somnath Chatterjee {CPI (M)},  (2)  Dr. Manmohan Singh (INC), (3)  Shri V.K. Malhotra (BJP), (4)Shri Digvijay Singh (Samata
Party), (5) Shri Madhukar Sarpotdar (SS) and (6) Shri R. Muthiah (AIADMK).  The Committee would examine the pattern of State funding
in other countries where  State funding is in vogue and suggest  concrete proposals  for providing State funding to recognised political
parties.   The Committee  would submit its report by the end of August, 1998.   The Law Ministry would provide secretarial  assistance to
the Committee but accommodation facility for the office of the Committee would be arranged by the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs.
8.2        It was decided that the   Committee would also consider the related proposals  pertaining  to maintenance of accounts by  political 
parties and audit thereof, ban on donation by companies to political parties  inclusion of expenses of political parties in the election
expenses  of candidates  for the purposes of ceiling on election expenses  and empowering of Election Commission to fix ceiling on election
expenses before every general election.
9.         On the question of rotation  of seats  reserved for Scheduled Castes and for rotation of general seats in certain North-Eastern  States,
a decision was taken in the meeting that the proposal  should  be thoroughly discussed by the political parties especially amongst their
Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes members and thereafter the matter may be discussed in the next meeting.
10.        Leaders of some political parties narrated difficulties being experienced by them in the conduct of smooth election campaign by
enforcement of certain   provisions of the Model Code of Conduct.  It was accordingly decided that the Government would request the
Election Commission of India to review and reformulated  the Model Code of Conduct in consultation with political parties  and the
Government would consider giving statutory backing to the Model Code of Conduct so formulated.
11.        In the meeting it was also decided that the Election Commission would be requested to review its order relating to Reservation and
Allotment of Symbols in consultation with political  parties.
12.        The political parties did not favour the proposal for making voting compulsory.  The proposal for changing the present electoral
system was deferred.
13.        With regard to the proposal relating to amendments to the anti-defection law, it was felt that the ambit of amendments  should
extend beyond the recommendations made by Dinesh Goswami Committee and it was accordingly decided  that various proposals in this
regard would be considered in the next meeting of the political parties.
14.        The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the chair.
              ANNEXURE - VI
 
(See page 2, para 3.1.2 of the Report)
 
As Introduced in the Rajya Sabha
 
 
30 May, 1990
 
Bill No. XXVII of 1990
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
 
 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Seventy-first Amendment) Act, 1990. Short
title and
commencement.
 (2)   It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette appoint
 2.  In article 81 of the Constitution. in the proviso to clause  (3)  for the words and figures “be construed
as a reference to the 1971  census”, the following shall be substituted,  namely:-
Amend-ment of article
81.
 “be construed,-
 
(i)                  for the purposes of sub-clause (a)  of clause (2) and the  proviso to that clause, as a
reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii)                for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2), as a reference  to the 1981 census”.
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 3.  In article 82 of the Constitution, in the third proviso, for the words “readjust the allocation of seats in
the House of the People to the  States and the division of  each State into  territorial constituencies under
this article,” the following shall be substituted, namely:-
Amendment of article
82
 “readjust-
 
(i)                  the allocation of seats  in the House of the People to the  States as readjusted on the basis of
the 1971  census; and
(ii)                the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of
the 1981 census,
 
   under this article”.
 
 
 
 4.  In article 170 of the Constitution,-
 
     (a)  in clause  (2), in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figures “1971”, the figures  “1981”, shall
be substituted;
 
 
 
 (b)  in the third proviso  to clause (3), for the words “readjust the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of such State into territorial constituencies under  this clause,” the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
 
 
 
   “readjust-
 
(i)                  the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted on the basis of the
1971  census;
(ii)                the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of the 1981
census,
 
   under this clause”.
 
5.  In article 327 of the Constitution,  after the words “ delimitation of constituencies”, the words “including
rotation  of constituencies  reserved  for the Scheduled Castes” shall be inserted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
            The Members in both the Houses had been raising from time to time, a demand for the delimitation of
constituencies.  The Government have also been receiving representations and suggestions for such delimitation from
various other quarters.  Hence, the matter was referred to the Committee appointed by the Central Government to go deep
into the matter of Electoral Reforms.  The  Committee has examined the question of increasing the total number of seats in
the House of the People and the legislative Assemblies of the States, the rotation of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes and delimitation of constituencies.  After a careful study and discussion, they have recommended that
a fresh delimitation, on the basis of 1981 census may be undertaken, but such delimitation should not affect the total
number of seats allotted to various States on the basis of 1971 census.  They have also recommended that seats reserved for
Scheduled Castes may also be rotated on the basis of their population in the constituencies.  These recommendations
required amendments to the Constitution as at present there is a Constitutional bar not only in regard to the increase in the
total number of seats but also with regard to delimitation of constituencies.  The Government having accepted the
recommendation of the Committee now propose to amend the relevant articles of the Constitution.
           
Hence this Bill.
 
DINESH GOSWAMI
N
EW DELHI;
The 28th May, 1990.
 
ANNEXURE
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*                      *                      *                      *                      *
81. (1)             *                                   *                      *                      *         
           
 (3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
 
       Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the relevant
figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
 
Composition of
the House of the
People

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the
States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
 
       Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People
until the dissolution of the then existing House:
      Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President
may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may
be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
 
      Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2000
have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the allocation of seats in the House of
the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies under this
article.
          *              *                        *                        *                       *
170. (1)                        *                      *                      *                       *
Readjustment
after each census
 (2)  For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats
allotted to it shall so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
 
        Explanation --In this clause, the expression "population" means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
 
        Provided that the reference in this Explanation  to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
 
Composition of
the Legislative
Assemblies
 
 (3)     Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies
shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as parliament may by law
determine:
 
         Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the legislative
Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
 
        Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the
President may, by order specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election
to the Legislative assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies
existing before such readjustment:
 
       Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year
2000 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the total number of seats
in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of such State into territorial
constituencies under this clause.
*                      *                      *                      *                      *
 
Power of
Parliament to 
make provision
with  respect  to
elections to
Legislat-
ures.
 
327.   Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from time to time
by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with
elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State including the preparation of electoral             rolls, the
delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due
constitution of such House or Houses.
 
          *                             *                                *                             *
P
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
________
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
A
 
BILL
 
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 
_______
 
(Shri Dinesh Goswami, Minister of Law and Justice)
 
ANNEXURE – VII
 
 
(See page 2, para 3.1.2 of the Report)
CB - II No. 376
 
 
LOK  SABHA
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
 
(Amendment of Articles 81, 82, 170 and 327)
 
 
REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
 
[Presented on 18 December, 1992]
 
 
 
S
E
A
L
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
December, 1992/Agrahayana, 1914(Saka)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
                          
 
2.         REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE                                       
 
3.         MINUTE OF DISSENT
          
                                                           
4.         BILL AS REPORTED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
APPENDIX  I              Motion in Lok Sabha for reference of the Bill to the Select Committee.
 
APPENDIX  II            List of Association/Organisations, Individualsetc. from whom Memoranda were
                  
                                    received by the Select Committee.
 
APPENDIX  III           List of witnesses who tendered oral evidence before the Select Committee
.
 
APPENDIX  IV           Minutes of the sittings of the Select Committee

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIRST AMENDMENT)BILL, 1990
(AMENDMENT OF
ARTICLES 81, 82, 170 AND 327)
 
AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 1.        Shri P.R. Kumaramangalam ¾ Chairman
 
MEMBERS
 
 2.        Shri Raghunandan Lal Bhatia
 3.        Shri Buta Singh
 4.        Shri Chandubhai Deshmukh
 5.        Shri Jaswant Singh
 6.        Shri Ramkrishna Kusmaria
 7.        Prof. (Shrimati) Savithiri Lakshmanan
 8.        Shri Suraj Mandal
 9.        Shri Arvind Netam
10.       Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
11.       Shri K. Pradhani
12.       Shri S.S.R. Rajendrakumar
13.       Dr. Lal Bahadur Rawal
14.       Shri Sudarsan Ray Chaudhuri
15.       Shri M.Baga Reddy
16.       Shri Vishwa Nath Shastri
17.       Shri Sukh Ram
18.       Shri Syed Shahabuddin
19.       Shrimati Chandra Prabha Urs
20.       Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri G.L. Batra,            Additional Secretary
            Shri S.C. Gupta, Joint Secretary
            Shri R.K. Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Ram Kumar, Under Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS (LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT)
 
1.                  Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretary
2.                  Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary
3.                  Shri B.S. Saluja, Joint Secretary
4.                  Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary
5.                  Shri B.L. Mathuria, Consultant
6.                  Dr. D.B. Singh, Under Secretary
REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
I, the Chairman of the Select Committee to which the Bill* further to amend the Constitution of India viz., the Constitution
(Seventy-first Amendment) Bill, 1990 (Amendment of Articles 81, 82, 170 and 327), as passed by the Rajya Sabha, was referred,
having been uthorized to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Report.
 
1.                  The motion for reference of the Bill to a Select Committee was moved in Lok Sabha by Shri R. Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy,
the then Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, on 7 May, 1992 and was adopted (Appendix – I).
 
3.         The Committee held 8 sittings in all.
 
4.         The first sitting of the Committee was held on 26 May, 1992 to consider their future programme of work. At this sitting, the
Committee decided that press communique inviting memoranda on the provisions of the Bill from public bodies, bar councils, bar
associations organisations, associations and individuals etc. by 20 June, 1992, might be issued.  The Committee also decided that a
circular letter to all the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and other experts inviting their comments/suggestions

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
on the Bill might also be sent.
 
5.         Accordingly, a press communique   inviting   memoranda  and requests for oral evidence before the Committee was issued
on 29 May, 1992.  The Director-General, All India Radio and Director-General, Doordarshan, New  Delhi were also requested to
broadcast the contents of the press communique from all stations of All India Radio/telecast it if from all Doordarshan Kendras on
three successive days in English and Hindi and in other regional languages.
 
6.         As per decision taken by the Committee, a circular letter inviting memoranda containing suggestions/comments on the
provisions of the Bill was also issued to the Chief Secretaries of all the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and
individuals whose names were furnished by the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
 
7.         24 Memoranda containing comments/suggestions on  the provisions of the Bill were received by the Committee from
various Associations/Organisations etc. (Appendix - II).
 
8.         At their sitting held on 23 June and 14 July, 1992 the Committee took oral evidence of Shri S.L. Shakdhar, for Chief
Election Commissioner of India and the representative of the Election Commission of India, the Registrar-General and Census
Commissioner of India and the Director-General the National Informatics  Centre (Appendix - III).
 
9.         The Report of the Committee was to be presented the House by the last day of the first week in Monsoon Session 1992. 
The Committee were granted an extension of time up last day of  the Winter Session, 1992.  Necessary motion to this effect was
adopted in Lok Sabha on 9 July, 1992.
 
10.       The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at their sittings held on 8 and 19 October and 11 November,
1992.
____________________________________________________________________________
*The Bill was published in the Gazette of India:
 Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated 30 May, 1990.
 
11.       At their sitting held on 19 November, 1992, the Committee decided that (i) the evidence tendered before the Committee
might be laid on the Table of the House; and (ii) two copies each of memoranda received by the Committee might be placed in the
Parliament Library, after the report had been presented, for reference by the Members of Parliament.
 
12.       The Committee considered and adopted the  Report at their sitting held on 19 November, 1992.
 
13.       The observations of the Committee with regard to the various provisions of the Bill are detailed in the successive
paragraphs.
 
Clauses 2,3 & 4
 
14.       The Committee considered the matters relating to (i) Composition of the House of the People; (ii) Readjustment of
constituencies after each Census; (iii) Composition of the Legislative Assemblies; and (iv) Power of Parliament to make provisions
with respect to elections to Legislatures.
 
15.       The Committee note that the population of the country has increased enormously after the 1971 Census.  As per the 1981
Census population figures, the average population in each Parliamentary Constituency in major States is about 12 lacs as against
8.9 lacs on the basis of 1961 Census figures and 10.5 lacs as per 1971 Census figures.  The average is estimated to be around 14
lacs after the decennial Census of 1991 which means roughly as hundred per cent increase of average over the 1951 Census figures
per constituency.  The growth of population has not been uniform in all areas and, therefore, the size of electorate differs widely
from constituency to constituency.
 
16.       The Committee further note the following problems pointed out by the Election Commission:-
 
(a)
                Existence of certain villages  geographically found as enclaves have been included in certain Assembly
constituencies due to inadvertence at the time of last delimitation.
(b)               Exclusion or inclusion of certain areas without any rationale in or from certain Assembly constituencies causing
hardship to the local people.
(c)                The total number of electors overtaking in many cases the total population on the basis of which constituencies
were carved out thus disturbing the earlier co-relation between population and electors in a constituency or in a
State.
(d)               Large scale migration of population from one area to another on various grounds especially in the metropolitan
cities and industrial belts creating disparity in the number of electors among the various constituencies.
(e)                Certain Scheduled Tribes notified as such in earlier Census not found at subsequent census in the same area but
still the necessity of allocating seats as per their figures in the earlier Census.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
(f)                 Many of the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes in particular have been continuing as such for the last 13 to 20
years causing feelings of frustration not only among the general public in that constituency but also the Scheduled
Castes of other constituencies whose claim for reservation has not been met.
 
17.       The Constitution also lays down that the number of seats as allocated and the territorial extent of constituencies as
determined on the basis of 1971 Census are unalterable until the publication of population figures of the census following the year
2000.  Thus, after 1971 and till 2000 as things stand at present, there can be no fresh delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
constituencies in the State and Union Territories.
 
The Committee after examination of all these issues are of the opinion that there is a great need for fresh delimitation of
constituencies on the basis of 1991 Census.  They also feel the  avowed object of the existing constitutional embargo could be fully
achieved if the embargo is put only   on the total number of Lok Sabha seats allocated to each State and the total number of seats in
various State Legislative Assemblies and readjustment of territorial extent of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies having
regard to the fixed number of the seats be allowed and as such delimitation of constituencies may be done on priority basis.
 
18.       The Committee, therefore, feel that Clauses 2,3 and 4 need not be amended.
 
Clause 5
 
19.       Closely related to the delimitation of constituencies is the important question of rotation of seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes.  The Committee on Electoral Reforms appointed by the Government have also recommended that seats reserved for the
Scheduled Castes may also be rotated on the basis of their population in the constituencies.  The Committee are of the view that
even under the existing provisions of the Constitution, Parliament has legislative competence to make law for allocation of
reserved seats among the various constituencies within a State/Union Territory and as such there is no need to insert specifically
such provisions in the Constitution Amendment Bill.
 
20.       The Ministry of  Law, Justice and Company Affairs who were asked to tender their opinion in writing, in a written note,
however, communicated as follows:-
 
Constitutional provisions requiring reservation of seats in favour of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in the
House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of every State are contained in Articles 330 and 332.  The number of
seats to be reserved in any State or Union Territory is determined in accordance with the norms laid down in Clause (2) of
Article 330 and Clause (3) of Article 332.  The Constitution does not contain any explicit provision regulating the
allocation of reserved seats among the Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies within a State.  However, by virtue of
the provisions of Articles 330 and 332 read with Article 246(1) and Entry 72 of List - I Union List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution, Parliament has legislative competence to make law for allocation of reserved seats among the various
constituencies within a State/Union Territory.
           
Section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 1972, inter alia,
  provides that constituencies in which seats are reserved for
Scheduled Castes shall be distributed and located, as far as practicable, in areas where the proportion of their population to
the total population is comparatively large.  Similarly, the constituencies in which  the seats are to be reserved for
Scheduled Tribes shall be located, as far as practicable, in areas where the proportion of their population to the total
population is the largest.
           
 
It would thus be seen that, as at present, the allocation of reserved seats is made on the basis of larger or largest
population as the case may be, under the Parliamentary law.  However, in view of the provisions of Article 330 (1) and
332(1) read with Article 246(1) and Entry 72 of the Union List, Parliament would have power to provide for allocation of
reserved seats by way of rotation.
           
However, since there is no explicit constitutional provision enabling Parliament to provide for reservation of seats
by way of rotation, schemes of Articles 330 and 332 envisage rotation of reserved seats, and also having regard to the
provisions in the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Bill, and the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Bill
relating to rotation of reserved seats/Chairpersons in Panchayats and Municipalities, it would be advisable to retain Clause
(5) of the Bill and nothing should be left to any doubt.
 
21.       The Committee, as mentioned in Paragraph 19 above, are of the view that Clause 5  should be omitted since the opinion of
the Ministry  of Law is that even without amendment of Article 327, Parliament has powers to enact a law to provide for allocation
of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes by way of rotation, under the existing provisions of the Constitution.  However, the Law
Ministry have also mentioned that since there is not explicit constitutional provision enabling Parliament to provide for reservation
of seats by way of rotation, it would be advisable to retain Clause 5 of the Bill and nothing should be left to any doubt.  The
Committee, therefore, leave it to the wisdom of Parliament to decide whether Article 327 needs to be amended as per Clause 5 of
the Bill.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
Subject to the above observations, the Committee have decided that Clause 5 be omitted.
 
Clause 1 and Enacting Formula
 
22.       Clause 1 and Enacting Formula have been adopted without any amendment.
 
23.       The Select Committee recommend that the Bill as approved by the Committee be passed.
                                                                                     
NEW DELHI
19 November, 1992
28 Kartika, 1914 (Saka)
P.R. KUMARAMANGALAM,
Chairman,
 Select Committee on the Constitution
(Seventy-first Amendment) Bill, 1990
MINUTE OF DISSENT
 
The Select Committee report states the following:
 
" 18. The Committee, therefore, feel that Clauses 2, 3 and 4 need not be amended." and
"21....... Subject to the above observations the Committee decided that Clause 5 be omitted."
 
2.         It is my considered view that the Select Committee has lost a valuable opportunity to examine in depth and clarify the
principles of composition of Lok Sabha and the State legislatures, of delimitation of constituencies and of reservation in
favour of SCs and STs and place them on a sound constitutional and legal foundation.
 
3.         It goes without saying that the strength of the Lok Sabha itself has no logical rationale and that growing population makes a
mockery of the principle of democratic representation.  It is also admitted that there is a wide variation in the
population/electorate among the Lok Sabha constituencies from one part of the country to another and some times within
the same part.  This disparity has risen primarily because of the conceptually questionable practices of relating the Lok
Sabha constituencies to States/Union Territories and its natural consequences.  This is also partly due to inadequate
directive in the Constitution on the principle of delimitation so as to ensure equality among the people in respect of
representation in the legislatures.  One may argue that these questions are outside the scope of the Bill before the
Committee.  But these questions which are inter-related and provide the framework within which the scheme of
representation, reservation and rotation must function, can not be brushed aside.
 
4.         It is my view that the total number of seats in the Lok Sabha should be revised every 20 years keeping in view the principle
of effective representation, and the constituencies should be delimited on the basis of the latest the total number of Seats to
be reserved in Census that favour of the SC or ST should also be decided every 10 years on the basis of the latest Census
and that the constituencies selected for reservation should be decided on the basis of the principle of equity and fairness so
as to ensure, as far as possible, that the largest possible segment of SC/ST population enjoys the benefit of reserved
constituencies. One such principle could be that all constituencies in which the percentage of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe population exceeds the average national percentage must be reserved in order of concentration and, for the balance, if
necessary the constituencies in which the percentage of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe population falls short of the
national average by 1/3 should be rotated in alphabetical order. I admit that there could be other formulations, but the
objective must be the same as stated above.
 
5.         Secondly, I generally endorse the view of the Ministry of Law & Justice that Clause 5 should be retained so that nothing is
left to doubt.  However, I dare say that the language of Clause 5 is susceptible of improvement.  For example, it is
imprecise to speak in terms of "rotation of constituencies reserved for the SC"; it would be more precise to speak of
"rotation of reservation among the constituencies with a high concentration of the Scheduled Caste".
 
6.         It would also be fair and equitable to exclude such constituencies from the scheme of rotational reservation which have
high concentration of a religious minority.  In the existing circumstances, generally speaking, a member of a religious
minority (which does not enjoy either reservation or separate electorate) has a reasonable choice to win only from such a
constituency which has  a demographic concentration of, say, above 25 per cent.  The fact remains that the largest minority
in the country has been consistently under-represented in the Lok Sabha and in most State Assemblies.
 
I would request that this Minute of Dissent  may kindly be placed on record and included in the report of the Committee.
 
NEW
DELHI;                                                                                              
26 November 1992.
SYED SHAHABUDDIN

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
APPENDIX  - I
 
(Vide para 2 of the Report)
 
MOTION IN LOK SABHA FOR REFERENCE OF THE BILL TO THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
"That the Bill further to amend the Constitution of India viz., the Constitution (Seventy-First Amendment) Bill, 1990
(Amendment of articles 81, 82, 170 and 327 ) - as passed by Rajya Sabha be referred to a Select Committee consisting of 20
members, namely:-
.          
 
(1)     Shri Raghunandan Lal Bhatia
(2)     Shri Buta Singh
(3)     Shri Chandubhai Deshmukh
(4)     Shri Jaswant Singh
(5)     Shri P.R. Kumaramangalam
(6)     Shri Ramkrishna Kusmaria
(7)     Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshmanan
(8)     Shri Suraj Mandal
(9)     Shri Arvind Netam
(10)   Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
(11)   Shri K. Pradhani
(12)   Shri S.S.R. Rajendra Kumar
(13)   Dr. Lal Bahadur Rawal
(14)   Shri Sudarsan Ray Chaudhuri
(15)   Shri M. Baga Reddy
(16)   Shri Vishwa Nath Shastri
(17)   Shri Sukh Ram
(18)   Shri Syed Shahabuddin
(19)   Smt. Chandra Prabha Urs; and
(20)   Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik
 
With instructions to report by the last day of the first week of the Monsoon Session, 1992".
 
APPENDIX – II
 
(Vide para - 7 of the Report)
 
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS/ORGANISATIONS/INDIVIDUALS ETC. FROM WHOM MEMORANDA WERE
RECEIVED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
1.
                  The Election Commission of India,
Nirvashan Sadan,
Ashok Road,
New Delhi - 110001
 
2.
                  Shri K. Ganesan,
Former Secretary, Election Commission of India,
29 (Tower III), Supreme Enclave,
Group Housing  Cooperation Society,
Mayur Vihar Phase-I,
Delhi -110091.
 
3.
                  Shri Maniram Yadav,
Social Worker,
Nehru Chowk, Baradwar,
P.O. Baradwar,
Distt. Bilaspur (M.P.)
 
4.
                  Shri A Marriappan,
12, Bharathi Street,
Vilathikulam - 627907,

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
V.O.C. Distt.
 
5.                  Shri Haridwar Singh,
Social Worker,
Village: Bamhaur Pandey,
P,O. Bamhaur Khas,
Via. Mohania, Distt. Rohtas,
Bihar.
 
6.
                  Shri Haridwar Singh,
Social Worker,
Village: Bamhaur Pandey,
P,O. Bamhaur Khas,
Via. Mohania, Distt. Bhabua,,
Bihar.
 
7.
                  Shri Lakhajit Bharai,
Dhemaji Vidhan Sabha Samasti,
Sangrakshan Mukti Dahi Samiti,
Dhemaji - 787057.
(Assam).
 
8.
                  Shri Deepnarayan Gupta,
General Secretary,
Distt. Congress Committee,
Purnia (Bihar)
 
9.
                  Shri Kailash Parmar,
Budhwaravishta,
Distt. Sehor - 466116.
(Madhya Pradesh).
 
10.
              Smt. Sarojani Muthanna, Advocate,
No. 9, Mal
 
11.
              Shri Ajay Kumar,
Village: Sandalpur,
Teh. Khategaon,
Distt. Devas (M.P)
 
12.
              The Secretary (Administration),
Administration of the U.T. of
Lakshadeep (General Section),
Kaurati.
 
13.
              The Government of Pondicherry,
Law and Labour Department,
Pondicherry.
 
14.
              The Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Department of Parliamentary Affairs,
Itanagar.
 
15
                The Government of  Meghalaya,
Law Department,
Shillong.
 
16.
        The Government of Kerala,
Law Department,
Trivandrum.
 
17.
        The Government of Sikkim,
Gangtok.

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
18.        The Administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Silvassa.
 
19.        The Union Territory of Daman & Diu,
Administrator's Secretariat,
Moti Daman - 396220.
 
20.        The Government of Gujarat,
Gandhinagar.
 
21.        The Government of Orissa,
Bhubaneswar.
 
22.
        The Government of Mizoram,
Aizawl.
 
23.        The Government of Nagaland,
Kohima.
 
24.        The Bar Council of West Bengal,
2 & 3, Kiransankar Roy Road,
Kolkata - 700001.
APPENDIX - III
 
(Vide para   8 of the Report)
 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO TENDERED ORAL EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SELECT COMMITTEE
 
1.
                  Shri S.L. Shakdhar,
Former Chief Election Commissioner of India,
2, Palam Marg, Vasant Vihar,
New Delhi.
 
2.
                  Shri K.P.G. Kutty,
Secretary,
Election Commission of India,
New Delhi.
 
3.
                  Shri A.R. Nanda,
Registrar-General and Census Commissioner of India,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi.
 
4.
                  Dr. N. Seshagiri,
Director-General,
National Informatics Centre,
Planning Commission,
New Delhi.
 
ANNEXURE-VIII
 
(See page 2, para 3.1.3  of the Report)
Introduced In Lok Sabha
 
25.7.1996
 
            Bill No. 48 of 1996
 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
THE CONSTITUTION  (EIGHTIETH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1996
 
A
 
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
 
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-seventh Year of the Republic
 of India as follows:-
 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 1996 Short title and
commencement.
        (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 
                
 
Amendment of
article 81.
2.  In article  81 of the Constitution, in the proviso to clause (3), for the words and figures 
“be construed as a reference to the 1971 census”,  the following shall be substituted,
namely:-
     “be construed,–
            (i)     for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and  the  
             proviso to that clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
    (ii)    for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2), as a      
     reference to the 1991 census.”
 
Amendment of
article 82
3.  In article 82 of the Constitution, in the third proviso, for the words “readjust the
allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the division of each State into
territorial constituencies  under this article”, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
      “readjust-
           (i)  the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the   
       States as  readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
           (ii) the division of each State  into territorial constituencies as
        may be readjusted on the basis of the 1991 census,      
       under this article”.                                   
 
 
Amendment of
article 170
4.  In article 170 of the Constitution,-
(a)
    in clause (2), the proviso to Explanation shall be omitted;
(b)   in the third proviso to clause (3), for the words “readjust the total number of seats in
the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of such State into territorial
constituencies under this clause”, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
“readjust-
     (i)  the allocation of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted
on the basis of the 1971 census; and
     (ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on
the basis of the 1991 census,
under this clause”.
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 
            The Members of both the Houses had been raising, from time to time, a demand for the delimitation of constituencies.  The
issue of fresh delimitation of constituencies was gone into by the Committee on Electoral Reforms, which had recommended fresh
delimitation without affecting the total number of constituencies allocated to various States on the basis of 1971 census.   The
Government has decided that fresh delimitation  should be undertaken on the basis of 1991 census without affecting the existing 
number  of seats allocated to various States on the basis of 1971 census.  This requires amendment to the Constitution, as at present
there is a Constitutional bar with regard to delimitation of constituencies.
2.
                  This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object. 

74th Report of Committee on Home Affairs
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/74threport.htm[30-06-2016 17:40:50]
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  
The  24th  July 1996.
       RAMAKANT D. KHALAP.
 
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                                     *                     *                      *                      *                      *
 81.(1)  *              *                        *                        *                        *
(3)  In this article, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census  of which the relevant figures have been published:
     Provided that the reference in this  clause to the last preceding census of which  the relevant
figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken  after the
year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
Composition of
the House of the
People
 82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to
the States and the division of each State  into  territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.
     Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People
until the dissolution of the then  existing House:
     Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President
may,  by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may
be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
     Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census  taken after the year 2000 
have been   published,  it shall not be necessary to readjust the allocation of seats in the House
of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies under
this article.
 *                     *                      *                      *                      *
Readjustment
after each census.
 170.(1)   *         *                        *                         *                        *
(2)  For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of
seats allotted to it shall,  so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
  Explanation-In this clause, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained
at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
  Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.
(3)  Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly
of each  State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies  shall be readjusted
by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Composition of
the Legislative
Assemblies
 
LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
______
(Shri Ramakant D. Khalap, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Law and Justice)
 
 