Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
193
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2015)
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Eighty Third Report on the Problems
Being faced by Refugees and Displaced Persons in J&K
ONE HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT
December, 2015/Pausa, 1937 (Saka)

W ebsite : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Eighty Third Report on the Problems Being Faced
by Refugees and Displaced Persons in J&K.
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December , 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December , 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Pausa, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.)-378

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-24
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ....................................................................................... 2-5
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not
desire to pursue the matter in view of the Government’s Reply ............ 6-7
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee......................... 8-22
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply
of the Government have not been received ............................................ 23-24
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 25-29
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 31-34

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya   —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Dr. V. Maitreyan
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
12. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
13. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
*16. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
17. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
18. Shrimati Kirron Kher
19. Shri Kaushal Kishore
20. Shri Ashwini Kumar
21. Shri Harish Meena
22. Shri P. Nagarajan
23. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
24. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
25. Shri Dilip Patel
26. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
27. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
28. Shri Bheemarao B. Patil
(i)
* Shri Prataprao, Ganpatrao Jadhav, MP , Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 9th September, 2015 to fill the vacancy caused by shifting of  Shri
Chandrakant Khaire, MP , Lok Sabha  to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 9th September, 2015

29. Shri Bishnupada Ray
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shri B. Sreeramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Ninety Third Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Eighty Third Report on the Problems Being Faced
by Refugees and Displaced Persons in J&K.
2. The One Hundred Eighty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd  December, 2014 and laid
on the Table of the Lok Sabha 22nd  December, 2014.  After presentation of the Report, the copies
thereof were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting them to furnish Action Taken Notes
on the recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report. The Ministry furnished the
Action Taken Notes on the said report to the Committee on 24th June, 2015. The Rajya Sabha
Secretariat vide its communication dated 5th November, 2015 forwarded a questionnaire based on
the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 183rd Report and
subsequently the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its communication dated 4th December, 2015
furnished the replies thereon.
3. The Minister of Home Affairs laid the statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee on the Table of Lok Sabha on
4th August, 2015 and 5th August, 2015 in Rajya Sabha, pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s
Direction dated 24th September, 2004.
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Ninety Third Report and adopted the same
at its meeting held on 18th December, 2015.
5. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
P. BHATTACHARYA
N
EW D ELHI Chairman
18 December , 2015 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  27, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
ALC : Actual Line of Control
CDPRA : Chhamb Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Authority
CGTMSE : Credit Guarantee Fund Trust For Micro and Small Enterprises
DPs : Displaced Persons
DM : Divisional Magistrate
EP : Evacuee Property
GoI : Government of India
ICDS : Integrated Child Development Services
IA Y : Indira Awaas Yojana
J&K : Jammu and Kashmir
LoC : Line of Control
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MGNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MSE : Micro and Small Enterprises
NABARD : National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
PoK : Pakistan occupied Kashmir
PRO : Public Relation Officer
PoJK : Pak occupied Jammu and Kashmir
PRC : Permanent Resident Certificate
SC/ST/OBC : Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Backward Class
SGRY : Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
TSC : Total Sanitation Campaign
SLBC : State Level Bankers Committee
WPR : West Pakistani Refugees
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Eighty Third Report on the Problems being Faced
by Refugees and Displaced Persons in J&K. The said Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha
on 22nd December, 2014 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2014.
2. Action Taken Notes were received from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report on 24th June, 2015 whereupon Rajya Sabha Secretariat
vide its communication dated 5th November, 2015 forwarded a detailed questionnaire to the
Ministry of Home Affairs which in turn furnished the replies thereof on 4th December, 2015.  The
Committee considered the Action Taken Notes and the said replies of the Ministry and the same
have been categorized as under:
Chapter-I: The Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 3.2.4.3, 3.2.5.4, 3.2.6.3, 3.2.15.3, 3.2.16.3, 3.3.4.3, 3.3.5.3 and 3.3.6.3
(of One Hundred and Seventy Third Report)  Total Recommendations - 8
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter-II: The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 3.2.7.3, 3.2.12.3, 3.2.13.3, 3.2.11.2
and 3.3.3.3 (ibid) Total Recommendations - 5
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and,
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.
Chapter-III: The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee is not
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry: Para Nos. 3.1.1.6, 3.1.2.3, 3.1.3.3, 3.1.3.4,
3.1.4.2, 3.1.5.3, 3.1.6.3, 3.1.7.3, 3.2.1.4, 3.2.2.3, 3.2.3.3, 3.2.3.4, 3.2.5.5, 3.2.8.3,
3.2.16.4, 3.2.17.3, 3.2.18.3, 3.2.19.3, 3.3.1.3, 3.3.2.3, 3.3.7.3, 3.3.8.3 and 3.3.9.3
(ibid) Total Recommendations - 23
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of its
recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should
furnish convincing explanations in respect of those recommendations.
Chapter-IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
have not been received: Para Nos. 3.2.9.3, 3.2.10.3 and 3.2.14.7 (ibid)  Total
Recommendations - 3
In respect of three recommendations in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
interim reply or couched its response in vague terms. Therefore, the Committee
desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in
respect of the recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in keeping with the spirit
of the recommendations.
3. The details of the A TRs have been analyzed in various Chapters in the succeeding chapters.

CHAPTE-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
1.1 ONE TIME COMPENSATION
1.1.1 The Committee desires that one time compensation of ` 30 Lakh may be included in the
package and Ministry may ensure that the package is finalized.
                                                 (Para 3.2.4.3 of the 183 rd Report)
Action Taken
1.1.2 The Government of J&K has sent a proposal for one time settlement of displaced Persons
from PoJK, 1947 and Chhamb Displaced Persons of 1965 and 1971 wars to this Ministry. The
Ministry vide its letter dated 21.11.2014 has requested the State Government of J&K to send
certain more information with regard to the DPs of PoJK and DPs of Chhamb 1965 and 1971.
This Ministry has also requested the State Government to send one time proposal in respect of
WPRs also.
1.1.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that the required information
has not been furnished by the Government of J&K.  However, they have been again requested vide
letter dated 10.11.2015 to furnish the requisite information.
Further Observation
1.1.4 The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs for
seeking proposals for one time settlement of DPs from PoJK 1947 and Chhamb DPs of 1965
and 1971 as well WPRs and desires that all necessary action must be taken within a set
time frame, as all these affected persons continue to lead their lives under depression due
to extreme suffering. Any positive action on the part of the Government would be of great
satisfaction to them.
Recommendation
1.2 SLOW DISBURSAL OF COMPENSATION
1.2.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern that the payment of compensation in respect
of fund/package sanctioned in 2008 is being implemented at snail pace affecting the lives
of PoJK DPs. The process should have been completed much earlier. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Union Government must pursue the matter with the State Government
to expedite the implementation of the package without further delay. (Para 3.2.5.4)
Action Taken
1.2.2 For expediting disbursal of compensation to the beneficiaries, meeting with State
Government Officers is being held on monthly basis. A committee under the Chairmanship of
Divisional Commissioner Jammu is in place for monitoring the progress of implementation of the
2

3
scheme. During 12-14 February, 2015, the Officers of this Ministry visited Jammu and had meeting
with the State Government Officers in which 47 land deficiency claims and 14 applications for
cash in lieu  of urban plots have been approved.
1.2.3 In response to a question as to the status of approved 47 land deficiency claims and 14
applicants for cash in lieu  of urban plots, the Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee
that the Government of J&K has reported that about 10 cases of compensation in lieu  of urban
plots and 10 cases of compensation in lieu   of deficiency of land are in all respects complete but
are pending  for want of transfer of fund from State Headquarter to field office.   In other cases,
it has been reported that the list of approved cases was published through print media. However,
the responses from the claimant are not adequate.
Further Observation
1.2.4 The Committee hopes that all approved 47 land deficiency claims and 14 applicants
for cash in lieu  of urban plots are settled in a dedicated time frame.  Central Government
may pursue the matter with the State Government.
Recommendation
1.3 INCLUSION OF POJK DPS IN DIALOGUE ON J&K
1.3.1 The Committee is of the view that this demand needs to be examined cautiously.
The Committee feels that concerns of the displaced persons of PoJK should be taken into
consideration before addressing their grievances for redressal.  The channel for discussion
with the representatives should be kept open so that they may have no feeling of being
neglected. (Para 3.2.6.3)
Action Taken
1.3.2 The Government has encouraged policies to ensure sustained peace process and to provide
adequate opportunities to all sections of the people in the State who eschew violence to effectively
represent their view points and to redress their genuine grievances.  Regarding the concerns of the
displaced persons of PoJK who migrate/ came to J&K in 1947 being taken into consideration,
channels for discussions with the representatives is open, so that they have no feeling of being
neglected.
Recommendation
1.4 OPENING OF JAMMU – SIALKOT ROAD
1.4.1 The Committee is in agreement with the view of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs.
Efforts may be made to open Jammu-Sialkot road for trade and other activities through the
diplomatic channels. (Para 3.2.15.3)
Action Taken
1.4.2 The Task Force on National Security (TFNS) had recommended for opening of 9 additional
routes including the Jammu- Sialkot for cross LoC Trade and Travels as per the recommendation
of the Joint Working Group II. Comments/ Views were called for from the State Government but

4
the same is still awaited.  The issue regarding opening of additional routes for cross LoC Trade
and Travel was also considered in the meeting held on 26.06.2014 under the Chairmanship of
Financial Commissioner, Industries and Commerce, Government of J&K and again in the meeting
dated 05.01.2015 held under the chairmanship of JS(J&K). It was decided that the State
Government of J&K should send a proposal with detailed justification in this regard to MHA. The
proposal is still awaited from the State Government of J&K.  Further, the recommendation of the
Task Force on National Security (TFNS) for opening of 9 additional routes including the Jammu-
Sialkot for cross LoC Trade and Travels as recommended by the Joint Working Group-II has also
been taken up with MEA requesting them to take up the matter at appropriate level.
Recommendation
1.5 ACTUAL LINE OF CONTROL CERTIFICATES
1.5.1 The Committee feels that the need of issuance of ALC Certificate to DP families of
1947 staying in the vicinity of border areas in Jammu may be taken up due to the fact that
such certificate would enable the DPs to avail the benefits of reservation by proving that
they are the residents of areas falling under ALC.  Mere notification might not be sufficient
for proof.  Government should arrange for issuance of ALC Certificates to DP families of
1947. (Para 3.2.16.3)
Action Taken
1.5.2 The benefit of reservation is being provided to such persons who settled along the ALC by
the State Government. The areas falling under ALC have already been notified by the State
Government of J&K. The State Government has been requested that arrangement should be made
for issuance of ALC Certificates to the DP families of 1947.
Recommendation
1.6 RESERV ATION IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND EMPLOYMENT
1.6.1 The Committee recommends that wards of displaced persons of 1965 and 1971 may
be given preference for getting admission in educational institutions as a level – playing
mechanism. The Government may consider the request of DPs of 1965 and 1971 for
reservation for employment in Government jobs to ensure guaranteed means of livelihood.
Employment drive for the youths belonging to PoJK DPs should also be conducted. Since the
State Government has agreed to consider request for reservation to DPs living within
notified backward areas, the Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken
in the matter. (Para 3.3.4.3)
Action Taken
1.6.2 The benefit of reservation is being provided by the State Government to such persons who
have settled along the ALC. The areas falling under ALC have already been notified.
Recommendation
1.7 ISSUANCE OF ALC CERTIFICATES
1.7.1 The Committee feels that due to lack of awareness and low level of education, the

5
DPs may be finding difficult to follow procedure in getting ALC Certificates. The Procedure
for getting ALC certificates could be cumbersome, and if it is so, the procedure may be
simplified and a drive may be undertaken to encourage eligible DPs for procuring ALC
certificates. (Para 3.3.5.3)
Action Taken
1.7.2 The benefit of reservation is being provided by the State Government to such persons who
have settled along the ALC. The areas falling under ALC have already been notified.
Recommendation
1.8 CONSTITUTION OF DEVELOPMENT BOARD-
1.8.1 The Committee is of the view that plethora of institutional arrangement  is not going
to ameliorate the conditions of DPs as the same would complicate the system causing delay
in seeking justice. Therefore, an institutional structure should be created to address all the
issues of DPs at a single window. (Para 3.3.6.3)
Action Taken
1.8.2 The State Government has informed that there is a separate organization, headed by the
Provincial Rehabilitation Officer, Jammu for extending the benefits of rehabilitation of PoJK DPs,
which is under the charge of Custodian, Evacuee Property in the State of J&K.

CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE THE MATTER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation
2.1 CONSTITUTION OF WELFARE AND RELIEF COMMISSION/ DEVELOPMENT BOARD:
2.1.1 The Committee understands that the demands of the representatives of PoJK DP of
1947 for constitution of a Welfare and Relief Commission/ Board for DPs of PoJK, 1947 can
be attributed to the reason that the existing office meant for addressing their problems is not
functioning effectively. The committee, therefore, recommends that a Welfare and Relief
Commission/ Development Board with adequate infrastructure may be constituted in view of
the large number of people involved and number of issues to be addressed. (Para 3.2.7.3)
Action Taken
2.1.2 The State Government has informed that at present there is no proposal for constitution of
Development Board.
Recommendation
2.2 GRANTING STATE SUBJECT TO POJK REFUGEES LIVING OUTSIDE THE STATE
2.2.1 The Committee desires that the matter may be discussed with the representatives of
PoJK DPs for solution. The Committee also desires that one nodal officer may be appointed
in Delhi for granting Permanent Resident Certificates status to PoJK DPs living outside the
State of J&K as being done for Kashmiri migrants.  A campaign may be initiated to attract
more and more PoJK DPs living in other parts of the country by issuing advertisements in
national dailies and the rules for applying the Permanent Resident Certificate may be
simplified. (Para 3.2.12.3)
Action Taken
2.2.2 The State subjects are being issued as per the J&K Permanent Residence Certificate Act
(PRC).  Any person who has been or who is resident of State and fulfils the criteria of the Act
can obtain the PRC. The PRCs are required either for purchasing of property within the State or
seeking employment within the State and there is no other use for such PRC’s outside J&K.
Recommendation
2.3 REFUGEE STATUS TO POJK DPS
2.3.1 The Committee agrees that since PoJK DPs are the citizens of India and also
permanent residents of the State, their mere displacement cannot make them refugees as
such.  Government may, however, consider the benefits and other packages as admissible
6

7
under the law. (Para 3.2.13.3)
Action Taken
2.3.2 The PoJK DPs are the citizens of India and also the permanent residents of the State of
J&K. Hence, they are not treated as refugees.
Recommendation
2.4 MONTHLY CASH, RATION MONEY, EXEMPTION FROM INCOME TAX
2.4.1 As mentioned earlier, the Committee is of the view that the rehabilitation
assistances have been awfully insufficient with very poor track record of implementation.
In view of the pathetic conditions of the displaced persons, the Committee feels that the
Government may consider these demands in the package meant for PoJK DPs, keeping in
view rising inflation and consequent impact on cost of living. (Para 3.2.11.2)
Action Taken
2.4.2 The DPs of PoJK are the citizens of India and also the permanent residents of the State
of J&K. They are enjoying benefits of the State Government schemes and also the centrally
sponsored schemes like any other citizen of the country. The Government of India, from time to
time, have provided relief and rehabilitation assistance/compensation in lieu of land deficiency to
these displaced persons.
Recommendation
2.5 LAND DEFICIENCY COMPENSATION AND EQUAL TREATMENT
2.5.1 The Committee is of the view that  since cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency
is being given to DPs of 1947, on the similar line, cash compensation must also be given
to DPs of 1965 and 1971 in lieu of land deficiency. The Committee fails to understand as
to why State Government is delaying formulation of the proposal and forwarding the same
to Central Government for consideration. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommends
that Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon the State Government to formulate the
proposal without any further loss of time and send the same to the Ministry of Home
Affairs for approval. (Para 3.3.3.3)
Action Taken
2.5.2 The DPs of 1965 and 1971 were sanctioned compensation @ upto ` 5000/- per kannal in
lieu of land deficiency in 1990 by the Government of India whereas the DPs of 1947 were
sanctioned compensation @ ` 5000/- per kannal in 2000 which was enhanced to ` 25000/- per
kannal in 2008. As such, the cash compensation to these categories cannot be equated.

CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
3.1 WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES (WPRS)
3.1.1 The Committee expresses its serious concern that the West Pakistani Refugees, who
are very much citizens of India and eligible for voting in Parliamentary elections do not
possess right to vote in the State legislature Assembly elections on the pretext that they
are not permanent residents of the State in terms of the J&K constitution. The Committee
feels that through they are living there for more than 60 years, they are not leading the
life of free citizens despite having voting rights for Parliament. This right has not earned
them any special benefits.  The Committee strongly recommends that the Central
Government must impress upon the State Government to consider, as a one time measure,
the demand of West Pakistani Refugees to grant them the status of permanent residents
of the State sympathetically so that they can live as state subject in a dignified way, with
all legal rights including right to vote in State Legislative Assembly. (Para 3.1.1.6)
Action Taken
3.1.2 The Government of India, on a number of occasions had taken up the issues relating to
the West Pakistani Refugees, including the conferment of Permanent Resident Status. The Union
Home Secretary vide his D.O. letter dated 07.11.2014 addressed to the Chief Secretary to the
Government of J&K has again requested for conferment of Permanent Resident Status to West
Pakistani Refugees settled in the State.
Further Recommendation
3.1.3 The Committee is aware that WPRs are not considered permanent residents of the
State of J&K in terms of the Constitution on the ground that WPRs does not  have
ownership of land i.e. sahib-e-jaidad of J&K in the year 1944, a pre-condition to acquire
a Permanent Residency Rights  but the fact that WPRs are living there since 1947
running from pillar to post in search of permanent source of livelihood.  Moreover, WPRs
arrived there even before enforcement of Article 370. The Committee observes that WPRs
are very much citizens of India having voting rights in Parliamentary elections, therefore,
there is no reason as to why WPRs should not be given voting rights for State Assembly
elections particularly when the ruling establishment at the centre and State Government
at the time of partition advised WPRs to stay at border villages and made assurance to
them for a decent life.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that there should
8

9
not be any hitch in proposing amendment to the constitution of J&K in favour of WPRs
conferring Permanent Residence Certificate and voting rights for State Legislative
Assembly election in J&K. The Ministry of Home Affairs must pursue the matter with the
State Government.
Recommendation
3.2 PROVISION OF STATE GOVERNMENT JOBS
3.2.1 The Committee feels that once the permanent resident right is granted to West
Pakistani Refugees, all subsidiary benefits would automatically follow enabling them to lead
decent life.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that J&K constitution may be amended
for conferring the status of State Subject on the WPRs at the earliest. These people have
already suffered for more than 60 years and the issue brooks no delay.  The Committee
also recommends that pending final decision in the matter, a temporary waiver may be
made for admission of the children in the professional institutions. (Para 3.1.2.3)
Action Taken
3.2.2 The State Government has been requested that pending conferment of Permanent Resident
Status to the WPRs, a temporary waiver may be made for the admission of the children in the
professional institutions in the State. As already requested vide this Ministry’s letter dated
07.01.2015, the State Government must issue Domicile Certificates to the WPRs
3.2.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its communication dated 4
th December, 2015 apprised the
Committee that State Government of J&K has not yet replied in this regard. They have again been
requested vide this Ministry’s letter dated 29.07.2015 and 10.11.2015 for furnishing action taken
report.
Further Recommendation
3.2.4 The Committee strongly reiterate its recommendation that pending conferment of
Permanent Resident Status to the WPRs, a temporary waiver may be made for admission
of the children in the professional institutions in the State.
Recommendation
3.3 RESERV ATION IN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT JOBS/CENTRAL PROFESSIONAL COLLEGES
3.3.1 The Committee is of the view that since the State Government has agreed, in
principle, to incorporate the provision of reservation for the wards of WPRs in jobs, the State
Government should not delay in processing the matter.  State Government should honour the
suggestion of the Supreme Court for issuing appropriate executive order to make WPRs
eligible for admission in State professional/technical colleges as it is not linked to the
permanent resident status of these persons. The Committee also desires that the matter of
issuance of SC and OBC Certificates to eligible WPRs should be expedited. (Para 3.1.3.3)
Action Taken
3.3.2 W ith regard to admission of children/grand children of West Pakistani Refugees to technical
educational institutions in the State, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Shri Bachan Lal

10
Kalgotra Vs. States & Ors in its judgement dated 20.02.1987 had suggested that appropriate
executive directions could be issued by the State Government. This Ministry vide its D.O. letter
dated 24.07.2012 had requested the State Government to take appropriate action in the matter so
that the grievances of the WPRs are redressed.
3.3.3 In a reply to a question the Ministry of Home Affairs informed that the Committee that State
Government of J&K has not yet replied on the action taken by them in this regard. The State
Government has again been requested vide that the  Ministry’s letter dated 29.07.2015 and
10.11.2015 to take necessary action and to intimate the Ministry of a Home Affairs.
Further Recommendation
3.3.4 The Committee, expresses its deep concern over the apathetic attitude of the  State
Government of J&K  on the issue of giving reservation to wards of WPRs in Central
Government Jobs/Central Professional Colleges and strongly reiterates its recommendation
made in Para 3.1.3.3 of 183rd Report and desires that  the Union Ministry of Home Affairs
may  pursue the matter with the State Government for an early decision in the matter so
that the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of B.L. Kalgotra Vs. States &
Others is complied without  further delay.
Recommendation
3.4 RESERV ATION TO THE WARDS OF WPRs FOR ADMISSION IN ENGINEERING AND
MEDICAL COLLEGES
3.4.1 The Committee also takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary for
admission to the wards of WPRs in engineering and medical colleges in J&K.  The
Committee has already made a separate recommendation to address the issue of permanent
resident certificate so that the children may get admission in engineering and medical
colleges in J&K.  Besides that, as assured by the Home Secretary, a mechanism may be
explored to provide reservation to the wards of WPRs in engineering, medical and other
related institutions of higher education across the country.  The Committee also
recommends that, if necessary, the minimum benchmark required for admission in such
institutions may be relaxed for those wards because of their lower educational standards.
(Para 3.1.3.4)
Action Taken
3.4.2 In this connection, it is stated that this Ministry vide its letter dated 07.01.2015 has already
taken up the issue of providing concession in the matter of admission into the technical/
professional institutions outside the State of J&K with the Deptt. of Higher Education, GOI.  The
Ministry vide its letter dated 07.01.2015 has requested for providing concession to the wards of
WPRs, within the overall limits which has already been provided to the Kashmiri migrants.
3.4.3 Replying to a query sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs, subsequent to receipt of ATN,
the Ministry further informed that Action Taken Report from Ministry of Human Resource
Development is awaited. They have been reminded vide this Ministry’s letter dated 03.03.2015 and
10.11.2015 for taking appropriate action.

11
Further Recommendation
3.4.4 The Committee is anguished to note that the Ministry of Human Resource
Development has not responded to the request of the Ministry for taking a decision in
regard to providing reservation to the wards of WPRs in engineering, medical and other
related institutions of higher education across the country. The Committee, therefore,
strongly reiterates its recommendation that the Department of Higher Education,
Government of India must take early decision with regard to according priority in
admissions to children of WPRs  in engineering, medical and other institutions outside
J&K.  A separate reservation may be provided to them.  The Ministry of Home Affairs may
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Human Resource Development to get the assurance
implemented given by Home Secretary to the Committee on ground level.
Recommendation
3.5 OPENING OF KVS/NVS FOR WPRS
3.5.1 The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary to work
out the best possible mechanism to have an educational system set up for them, either
Kendriya Vidyalaya or Navodaya Vidyalaya The Committee strongly recommends that the
Ministry of Home Affairs may, in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resources
Development; work out some mechanism for opening schools by the Central Government
for the wards of WPRS      This may be done at the earliest so that the next academic session
may start in those schools. (Para 3.1.4.2)
Action Taken
3.5.2 As the children of West Pakistani Refugees settled in J&K are facing difficulties in getting
admission, this Ministry vide its letter dated 07.01.2015 has requested Deptt. of School Education,
Government of India, for according priority to the children of WPRs settled in J&K in admission
to Kendriya Vidyalaya in (children from any other category) both in Defence and Civil sectors in
the State of J&K.
3.5.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its reply dated 4
th December, 2015 informed the
Committee that action taken by the D/o School Education, M/o Human Resource Development is
awaited. They have been again reminded vide  this Ministry’s letter dated 03.03.2015 and
10.11.2015 for taking  appropriate  action in the matter.
Further Recommendation
3.5.4 The Committee takes a strong note of the inaction on the part of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development.  The Committee recommends that the Department of School
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development should take all necessary steps in the
matter. The Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue with Ministry of Human Resource
Development for early implementation of the recommendation.
Recommendation
3.6 ONE TIME PACKAGE, MONTHLY MONETARY ASSISTANCE AND ACCOMMODATION
3.6.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government should impress
upon the State Government for early finalization of one time financial package for

12
settlement of WPRS The Committee is of the considered view that even if West Pakistani
Refugees cannot be equated with the Kashmir Pandits migrants, but they deserve immediate
relief and rehabilitation for sustenance without delay.  One time Compensation of ````` 30
lakhs may be provided within one year and there should not be any delay in the matter.
(Para 3.1.5.3)
Action Taken
3.6.2 The Union Home Secretary vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2014 addressed to the Chief
Secretary, Government of J&K and subsequent letter dated 21.11.2014 has requested the State
Government to send the proposal for one time financial package in respect of the WPRs in the
State to this Ministry for consideration.  The same is awaited from the State Government.
3.6.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has further informed that State Government of J&K has not
yet replied on the action taken by them in this regard. However, the Government of J&K has been
again requested vide this Ministry’s letter dated 29.07.2015 and 10.11.2015 to send the one time
package proposal to this Ministry.
Further Recommendation
3.6.4 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the indifferent attitude
of  the State to the problems of WPRs as State Government of J&K has not furnished
proposal to Union Ministry of Home Affairs to procure one time financial package/
compensation to WPRs who are otherwise in dire need for immediate relief and
rehabilitation for sustenance.
3.6.5 The Committee notes that West Pakistan Refugees are not given adequate assistance
by the J&K State Government and hence they are forced to live in miserable conditions.
As already explained in paragraph 3.1.3 of the report, WPRs are in a peculiar condition,
wherein, though they are the citizens of India and have voting rights for Parliamentary
elections but they are not considered subjects of J&K. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the Central Government may declare a direct special assistance package
for rehabilitation of WPRs through central agencies.
Recommendation
3.7 CREATION OF SEPARATE BATTALION IN STATE POLICE, ARMY AND PARA
MILITARY FORCES
3.7.1 The Committee taking a serious note of the casual reply by the Government
recommends that Union Government should persuade the State Government to initiate action
to implement the announcement made for the creation of separate battalion in State Police,
Army and Para Military Forces from among the youths of the WPRS (Para 3.1.6.3)
Action Taken
3.7.2 In this regard, it is stated that this Ministry in its letter No.45020/14/2000-Pers.II dated
24.04.2000 had allowed recruitment of WPRs settled in J&K without the condition of having a
domicile certificate from the designated authority of the State Government of J&K.  Due to the
problems faced by these refugees in establishing their identity as WPRs, in the absence of any
certificate or proof to that effect, a decision was communicated by this Ministry vide letter dated

13
21.01.2002 to the effect that a copy of the certificate issued by the Sarpanch/Numberdar of
candidate’s village to the effect that the persons belonged to the WPR category accompanied by
a copy of the electoral roll, may be accepted as proof of their being WPRs for recruitment by
CPMFs.  Further, it was also directed, vide the aforesaid letter, that the SC certificates issued by
the State Government stating specifically that the person is not a permanent resident of the State
but is ordinarily residing in the village may be accepted as proof of being a WPR of SC category.
Fresh instructions vide letter dated 09.02.2015 have been issued by this Ministry for recruitment
in CPMFs.  Further, this Ministry vide its letter dated 07.01.2015 has requested the Ministry of
Defence for issuing instructions mutatis mutandis  to those issued by this Ministry as stated above
in the case of recruitment to the Central Para Military Forces for the recruitment of the wards of
the WPRs in the Indian Armed Forces.
3.7.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its reply to a query clarified that as per the Constitution
of J&K, the WPRs are not entitled to get job in State Government services till they are granted
permanent resident status. In view of this, instructions have been issued by this Ministry vide U.O
No.I-45023/5/2015-Pers–II dated 09.02.2015 to CAPFs and AR for strict adherence of instruction
issued with regard to acceptance of domicile certificate for the purpose of recruitment in CAPFs
and AR. Ministry of Defence has also been requested to issue similar instruction to their field units.
However, their reply is awaited.
Further Observation
3.7.4 The Committee notes the various instructions/guidelines issued and request made to
the Ministry of Defence to issue such instruction allowing recruitment of WPRs/Wards of
WPRs settled in J&K to the Central Para Military Forces/CPAFs and in the Indian Armed
Forces without the condition of having a domicile certificate from the designated authority
of the State of Government of J&K, and in lieu of that Sarpanch/Numberdar certificate
accompanied by the electoral roll could be accepted as proof of their being WPRS The
Committee, however, desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs must monitor or undertake
requisite follow-up action in tandem with the State Government to ensure the compliance
of its instruction in the matter.  The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of
Defence must actively consider the request made by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its
letter dated 7
th January, 2015 and 09.02.2015  in regard to recruitment of the wards of WPRs
in the Indian Armed Forces. The Committee may be informed of the find action taken.
Recommendation
3.8 RESERV ATION OF SEATS IN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
3.8.1 The Committee is of the considered view that citizens of India must have the right
to elect and get elected in all representatives bodies to enhance the strength of democracy.
WPRs should get permanent resident status sooner for fostering complete faith in
democracy. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue with
the State Government to examine the issue of reservation of seats in the Legislative
Assembly and Legislative Council of the State for WPR, and if necessary, may move for
necessary amendment to J&K Constitution. (Para 3.1.7.3)
Action Taken
3.8.2 The State Government vide this Ministry’s D.O. letter dated 07.11.2014 addressed to the

14
Chief Secretary and letter dated 14.05.2015 to the Government of J&K. has already been requested
to grant permanent resident status to the WPRs in the State.
3.8.3 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that State
Government of J&K has not yet replied in this regard. However, Government of J&K has again
been requested vide this Ministry’s letter dated 10.11.2015 to take necessary action.
Further Recommendation
3.8.4 The Committee hopes that once the WPRs are granted permanent resident status in
the State of J&K, WPRs would  enjoy all democratic rights including right to elect and get
elected in all representatives bodies.  The Committee further desires that the Union Home
Ministry may apprise the Committee of response of State Government of J&K to its
recommendation regarding reservation of seats in the Legislative Assembly and Legislative
Council of the State for WPRS.
Recommendation
3.9 DISPLACED PERSON FROM PoJK IN 1947
Official registration of DPs of 1947
3.9.1 The Committee takes into account the fact that non-registered families are not given
proper relief and compensation amount.  The Committee is of the view for that purpose, their
fresh enumeration is necessary.  The Committee also feels that in order to understand the
problems being faced by PoJK DPs and to have updated policy guidelines for them, it is
appropriate that their enumeration is done at the earliest.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should take adequate steps immediately to ensure official
registration of Displaced Persons from PoJK in order to ensure that benefits of schemes
meant for refugees and Displaced Persons reach the targeted group. (Para 3.2.1.4)
Action Taken
3.9.2 The formal registration of displaced persons from PoJK of 1947 has already been made
during 1960 to 1962. After lapse of over 50 years, demand for fresh enumeration of DPs will have
practical problems.
3.9.3 The Committee was, however, further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that State
Government vide letter dated 13.11.2015 has been requested to specify  the problems being faced
by them in issuing application for general enumeration of all PoJK, DPs.
Further Recommendation
3.9.4 The Committee is not in agreement with the plea of the Ministry of Home Affairs
that since there would be practical problems in fresh enumeration of Displaced Persons
(DPs), the demand for official registration of DPs of 1947 could not be accepted.  The
Committee is of the view that Government of India and State Government of J&K should
take all pr-emptive measures to address the practical problems they are anticipating and
then issue an advertisement inviting applications for general enumeration of all PoJK, DPs
families so that left over families of DPs are officially registered enabling them for their

15
entitlement of claim for package/compensation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desires
that all necessary action may be undertaken without further delay.
Recommendation
3.10 DEFREEZING OF SEATS IN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBL Y
3.10.1 The Committee considers that the Government of India should take up the matter
of defreezing of 8 seats for PoJK DPs with State Government of J&K keeping in view the
problems being faced by DPs. The Ministry may impress upon the State Government to
make amendments in the State Constitution, if necessary, at the earliest. (Para 3.2.2.3)
Action Taken
3.10.2 The State Government of J&K vide their letter dated 03.09.2013 has stated that at this stage
it is not possible to accept the demand as per constitutional complication.
Further Recommendation
3.10.3 The Committee wishes to pin-point that India is a representative democratic country,
therefore, wider participation of people in democratic process is desirable.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Government of India should persuade the State Government of
J&K to consider the demand of affected/displaced persons for defreezing of 8 seats out of
24 Legislative Assembly seats which are designated for the territorial constituencies of State
that lie in Pakistan occupied Kashmir in favour of PoJK DPs.
Recommendation
3.11 SANCTIONING OF INTERIM PACKAGE
3.11.1 The Committee notes the above comments of the Government but finds non-
seriousness in keeping its words. The Committee notes that under the assistance sanctioned
in 1947-48 for rural settlers, 46 Basties constructed by rural settlers on their own were
regularized under the Slum Improvement Scheme of J&K, however ````` 25 lakh for
improvement of civic amenities in 46 regularized colonies were sanctioned under rehabilitation
package in the year 2000. The Committee further notes that for improvement of civic
amenities in 46 recognized colonies, the State Government has constituted a Committee to
prepare a survey report for improving the civic amenities in the recognized colonies.
However, the survey report has not yet been finalized by the State Government Likewise, 123
urban settlers were given plots under assistance in 1947-48.  Thereafter, after 52 years, in
the year 2000, an amount of ````` 2 crore was sanctioned for the allotment of plots to the
displaced persons who settled in urban areas of J&K and were not allotted plots in the past.
The Committee also takes note of the latest situation wherein the Ministry of Home Affairs
has informed that for making a payment of ````` 2 lakh per family, in lieu of plot, in the year
2008, as per the report received from the State Government, the work is still continuing and
out of 198 applications received by them, 48 applications were found complete.  Out of these,
18 applications were placed before the verification committee, of which 6 applications have
been approved, 2 have been rejected and in 10 cases re-verification is required.  Remaining
30 applications will be placed before the verification committee.  The Committee feels that
this taking unduly a long time and should be completed at the earliest. (Para 3.2.3.3)

16
Action Taken
3.11.2 The State Government of J&K has informed that the colonies where the DPs have been
settled have been regularized and all line departments are taking care for maintenance and creation
of infrastructure in those colonies as is being done by them in other areas. The State Government
has been asked to expedite payment of ex-gratia /compensation to the beneficiaries and complete the
process at the earliest. Regular review meetings with the State Government Officers on monthly
basis are being held in the Ministry to review the progress of Implementation.
3.11.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that State Government of
J&K has not yet replied in this regard. They have been reminded vide this Ministry’s letter dated
10.11.2015 to take necessary action in the matter.
Further Recommendation
3.11.4 The Committee strongly recommends that long pending issues of PoJK DPs must be
resolved within set time-frame and instead of making piece-meal efforts and paying part
rehabilitation assistance to urban and rural settlers, a comprehensive and complete
rehabilitation assistance be paid to the PoJK and DPs as to enable them to lead sustainable
and decent life availing all basic civic amenities. The Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue
the matter with the State Government.
Recommendation
3.12 SURVEY REPORT FOR IMPROVING THE CIVIC AMENITIES
3.12.1 The Committee, without saying furthermore, feels that rehabilitation assistance has
been awfully insufficient with very poor track record of implementation.  The Committee
is of the strong opinion that the assistance being provided to the PoJK DPs of 1947 must
be sufficient for sustenance and therefore the sufficient interim relief be given immediately
till finalization of one time compensation, which, according to the Government, is being
incorporated in the package.  The Committee also takes a serious note of the fact that the
survey report has not been finalized and urges upon the Ministry of Home Affairs to pursue
the State Government to complete it at the earliest. (Para 3.2.3.4 ibid)
Action Taken
3.12.2 The Ministry has received the proposal from Government of J&K for one time settlement
of Displaced Persons from PoJK of 1947 and Chhamb Displaced Persons of 1965 and 1971.
However, some more information have been sought from the State Government which is awaited.
Further Recommendation
3.12.3 The Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs must seek all necessary
information within a fixed time-frame so that proposal for one time settlement of DPs is
considered without further delay and pending that, interim relief must continue to reach the
targeted group. The Committee further desires that the Ministry may impress upon the
State Government to get the survey report for improving the civic amenities in the
recognized colonies by the Committee expedited.

17
Recommendation
3.13 LAND DEFICIENCY CLAIMS
3.13.1 The Committee further recommends that the demands of such DPs for consideration
of additional 1950 land deficiency claims received during the year 2004 and additional 640
applications from urban DPs after the cut-off date for allotment of plots may be examined.
Ministry of Home Affairs may take initiative to get the issue resolve within one year and
pursue the State Government in this regard. (Para 3.2.5.5)
Action Taken
3.13.2 The State Government has already been requested to take a view as to what should be done
with regard to the application received after the cut-off date in the meeting held by this Ministry
on 19.09.2013.
3.13.3 The Committee was further informed that the State Government has not intimated the
decision taken regarding additional claims. They have been again reminded vide letter dated
10.11.2015.
Further Observation
3.13.4 The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Home
Affairs may persuade the State Government of J&K to examine and consider the demands
of DPs for consideration of additional 1950 land deficiency claims received during the year
2004 and additional 640 applications from urban DPs after the cut-off date for allotment of
plots. The Committee may be apprised of the decision taken on all such cases.
Recommendation
3.14 CONSTITUTION OF A COMMITTEE
3.14.1 The Committee feels that though Wadhwa Committee submitted its report in the year
2007, no action has been taken on its recommendations. It is still with Cabinet Sub-Committee.
The report cannot be kept pending indefinitely.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Union Government should take the matter with the State Government expeditiously and
consider to the recommendations of Wadhwa Committee within six months. (Para 3.2.8.3)
Action Taken
3.14.2 This Ministry has already written to the State Government to take a decision regarding
implementation of the Wadhwa Committee Report.
3.14.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further apprised the Committee that Action Taken Report
from the Government of J&K is awaited. However, they have been again reminded vide letter dated
10.11.2015.
Further Observation
3.14.4 The Committee is anguished to note the indifferent approach of the State
Government of J&K to the suffering of DPs as the implementation of recommendations of
Wadhawa Committee Report hangs in limbo since the year 2007.  Therefore, the Committee

18
strongly reiterates its recommendation made in para 3.2.8.3 of its 183 rd Report for
immediate consideration and implementation of recommendations of the said Report.
Recommendation
3.15.1 The Committee also recommends that the issue of providing five marlas of land to
the people living on International border/ALC, in any safe area may be considered
sympathetically and an early decision may be taken.  (Para 3.2.16.4)
ACTION TAKEN
3.15.2 The State Government has been requested to consider allotment of land to DPs living on
International border/ALC. The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee vide its reply to
query that Action Taken Report from the Government of  J&K is awaited. However, they have been
again reminded vide this Ministry’s letter dated 10.11.2015 to provide the requisite information.
Further Observation
3.15.3 The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation made in para 3.2.16.4 of 183
rd
Report with the direction that the Union Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue with the
State Government of J&K for providing five marlas of land to the people living on
International border/ALC, in any safe area.
RECOMMENDATION
3.16 COMPENSATION AGAINST LAND USED FOR MINING/FENCING
3.16.1 In view of the committee rent is different and it cannot be compared with
compensation.  Since the State Government has agreed to consider it, the Committee
recommends that early decision may be taken sympathetically. (Para 3.2.17.3)
Action Taken
3.16.2 The State Government has been requested to consider the issue. The Committee was further
informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that Action Taken Report from the Government of J&K
is awaited. However, they have been again reminded vide this Ministry’s letter dated 10.11.2015 to
apprise this Ministry about action taken by them.
Further Observation
3.16.3 The Committee is surprised to find the apathetic attitude of State Government of
J&K to the demand of DPs for alternate place/cash compensation to the families where
land is falling under border fencing.  The Committee feels that payment of rent in lieu
of said use is not sufficient, therefore, the issue may be pursued with the State
Government.
Recommendation
3.17 EXEMPTION FROM PAYING RENT
3.17.1 When once occupancy/tenancy rights were given to DPs under the Agrarian Reforms
Act and these rights are more or less absolute in the sense that the allottees can transfer
the right of occupancy tenancy by sale, gift or exchange without permission of Government,

19
then the Committee fails to understand as to how the rent is being charged from the DPs
for the houses.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs
in tandem with the State Government should clarify the stand on the issue at the earliest
to clear the apprehension of the allottees. (Para 3.2.18.3)
Action Taken
3.17.2 The State Government has been requested to clarify the stand regarding payment of rent
by the DPs living in evacuees properties. The Ministry of Home Affairs further intimated the
Committee that Action Taken Report from the Government of  J&K is awaited. They have been
reminded again vide letter dated 10.11.2015 to apprise the Ministry about action taken by them.
Further Observation
3.17.3 The Committee is of the considered view that the State Government should not
charge rent from DPs for their houses since occupancy tenancy rights were conferred to
DPs under the Agrarian Reform Act with absolute right of transfer of the right of
occupancy/tenancy by sale/gift or exchange without the permission of Government.  The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue
the matter with State Government vigorously with the purpose of arriving at a decision.
Recommendation
3.18 EQUAL  TREATMENT TO ALL DISPLACED PERSONS
3.18.1 The committee feels that though all may not be treated at par, but, their, problems
need to be addressed properly and suitable solution should be found. (Para 3.2.19.3)
Action Taken
3.18.2 The State Government has been asked to take appropriate action for redressal of the problems
being faced by different DPs/Refugees. The Ministry of Home Affairs further apprised the Committee
that Action Taken Report from the Government of J&K is awaited. However, they have again been
reminded vide letter dated 10.11.2015 to apprise this Ministry about action taken by them.
Further Recommendation
3.18.3 The Committee is of the strong opinion that all the DPs of PoJK should be treated
equally in terms of allotment of land, cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency and
payment of other benefits.  The Committee further desires that the demand of left over
families who came after the crucial period  i.e.  beyond September, 1947 to December, 1950
should be sympathetically considered for registration conferring status of DPs of PoJK as
one time rehabilitation.
Recommendation
3.19 CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS (DPs) OF 1965 AND 1971 (CAMP) & (NON–CAMP)
One time compensation
3.19.1 The Committee is of the considered view that there should not be any more delay
in formulating substantive proposal for one time compensation for DPs of 1965 and 1971

20
(camp) and (non–camp), keeping in view the suffering of displaced persons, for ensuring
them decent and dignified lives. The Committee also desires that their request for monthly
stipend to land less and house less persons/families as being paid to Kashmiri Migrants may
be considered till finalization of the substantive proposal. Issue of allotting plots of suitable
size to homeless and landless DPs may also be looked into. (Para 3.3.1.3)
Action Taken
3.19.2 The State Government has  forwarded one time compensation proposal to this Ministry.
However, details regarding the proposals have been sought from the State Government vide this
Ministry’s letter dated 21.11.2014. The same are awaited.
3.19.3 The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the requisite
action in regard to proposal of State Government on one time compensation is  awaited. They have
again been requested vide this Ministry’s letter dated 09.04.2015 and 10.11.2015 to take action in
the matter.
Further Recommendation
3.19.4 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in response to the action taken
by Government in compliance to its recommendation made in para 3.1.5.3 of its 183
rd
Report.
Recommendation
3.20 OCCUPANCY/TENANCY RIGHTS
3.20.1 The Committee takes note of the fact as narrated by the Ministry of Home Affairs
that the issue of conferring occupancy/ tenancy rights of evacuee land has not yet been
addressed. This right is necessary to eliminate the disparity with DPs of PoK 1947. The
Committee also taken note of the hope expressed by the Government that in the coming
Session, this issue may be resolved. The Committee is disappointed with the latest situation
at hand and feels that nothing has moved at the ground level. The Committee would like to
impress upon the Government that necessary amendment in the Agrarian Reforms Act of
1976 may be brought at the earliest to settle the long pending issue. (Para 3.3.2.3)
Action Taken
3.20.2 The State Government has been requested to make necessary amendment in the Agrarian
Reforms Act, 1976 to eliminate the disparity with DPs of PoK, 1947.
3.20.3 Replying to a pointed question as to why there has been delay in removing the differential
treatment of Government on the issue of conferring occupancy/tenadency right of evacuee land
being conferred to DPs of PoJK of 1947 but denied to Chhamb DPs of 1965 and 1971, the
Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that Action Taken Report from the Government
of J&K is awaited. However, they have been again reminded vide letter dated 10.11.2015 to
apprise the Ministry about action taken by them.
Further Recommendation
3.20.4 The Committee expresses its displeasure on the delay in elimination of differential

21
treatment on the issue of conferring occupancy/tenancy right of evacuee land being
conferred to DPs of PoJK of 1947 but denied to Chhamb DPs of 1965 and 1971. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that necessary amendment in Agrarian Reform
Act, 1976 be made to eliminate the disparity amongst the DPs at the earliest and the
matter may be vigorously pursued with the State Government.
Recommendation
3.21 EXEMPTION FROM PAYING RENT
3.21.1 The Committee feels that payment of even the meager rent may be difficult for DPs.
The committee recommends that this issue may be reconsidered. Repair work and minor
modification may be allowed without permission from any authority but major change may
be done only after seeking permission from appropriate authority. (Para 3.3.7.3)
Action Taken
3.21.2 The State Government has been requested to consider exemption from paying rent in
respect of evacuee properties allotted/ occupied by the displaced persons/refugees. They may also
be allowed to undertake repair work and minor modification without having to take permission
from the Government
3.21.3 The Committee has been further informed that the Government of J&K vide this Ministry’s
letter dated 13.11.2015 has been requested to furnish the views/information in the matter.
Further Observation
3.21.4 The Committee feels that the practice of charging rent in respect of evacuee properties
allotted/occupied by the DPs and existing mandatory provision of seeking permission to
undertake repair work and minor modification in their dwelling units should not be there.
The Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government.
Recommendation
3.22 REGISTRATION OF LEFT OUT DPS
3.22.1 The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs may impress upon the
State Government to take up early decision on the issue of registration of left out Displaced
Persons families of 1965 and 1971. (Para 3.3.8.3)
Action Taken
3.22.2 The fresh registration of DPs will have practical problems. However, the Ministry of Home
Affairs informed the Committee that the Government of J&K vide this Ministry’s letter dated
13.11.2015 has been requested to furnish the views/information in the matter.
Further Observation
3.22.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation as   contained in para 3.2.1.4 of 183
rd
Report that the issue of registration of left out DPs families of 1965 and 1971 must be
resolved immediately.

22
Recommendation
3.23 IMPLEMENTATION OF WADHWA COMMITTEE AND INTERLOCUTORS’ REPORTS
3.23.1 The Committee desires that early decision may be taken for implementing the
recommendations of Wadhwa Committee and Interlocutors’ Report. The Ministry of Home
Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government. (Para 3.3.9.3)
Action Taken
3.23.2 In so far as the report of Wadhwa Committee is concerned, the same was under the
consideration of State Cabinet Sub–Committee. The State Government has been again requested for
taking a decision on implementation of the Wadhwa Committee Report.  As regards Interlocutors’
Report, it is mentioned that most of the recommendations made by Group of Interlocutors on J&K
relate to the State Government. Despite repeated requests, the State Government has not yet
furnished their comments to this Ministry. State Government is being pursued vigorously to offer
their comments on the report.
3.23.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed the Committee that the Government of J&K
vide this Ministry’s letter dated 13.11.2015 has been requested to furnish the views/information in
the matter.
Further Observation
3.23.4 The Committee desires that the Central Government must expedite the
implementation of Wadhwa Committee’s recommendation without further procrastination.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.1 PUBLICITY OF NODAL AGENCY/OFFICER
4.1.1 The Committee is of the view that the Government should post on the internet the
details of the name and telephone numbers of Provincial Rehabilitation Officer, and other
associated agencies/officers for extending benefits of DPs of 1947 of PoJK along with its
jurisdiction and powers as well as the procedure, in simplified way, to be followed for
making claims or redressal of grievances.  This may also given wide publicity particularly
in the areas where PoJK DPs are living and other places. (Para 3.2.9.3)
Action Taken
4.1.2 The State Government has been requested to put the name and telephone number of
Provincial Rehabilitation Officer, and other associated agencies/officers designated for extending
benefits of DPs of 1947 of PoJK on their official website.
4.1.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has further informed the Committee that Action Taken Report
from the Government of J&K is awaited. However, they have been again reminded vide this
Ministry’s letter dated 10.11.2015 to necessary action in the matter.
Recommendation
4.2 RESERV ATION IN TECHNICAL AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL COLLEGES, SPECIAL
PACKAGE FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INTEREST FREE LOANS FOR BUSINESS
4.2.1 The Committee feels that since the concern of PoJK DPs for reservation in technical
and professional colleges has already been accepted by the Government, its implementation
on ground level should, not be delayed. The Committee also desires that the Government may
facilitate interest free/subsidized loans to PoJK DPs to establish their business so that they
can lead a settled life banking on their permanent source of livelihood Employment drive for
5-10 years for the youths belonging to PoJK DPs should also be conducted. (Para 3.2.10.3)
Action Taken
4.2.2 The Displaced Persons of PoJK of 1947 settled in J&K are already enjoying benefits of the
Permanent Resident Status of the State. As such, they can get their children admitted into State
Educational institutions including the professionals and technical institutions. They also avail the
opportunities of applying for jobs in the State Government services.  As regards interest free/
subsidized loans to PoJK DPs the D/o Financial Services has been requested to consider the
recommendation of DPSC.
23

24
Recommendation
4.3 ALLOTMENT OF LAND AND INADEQUATE LAND DEFICIENCY COMPENSATION
4.3.1 The Committee recommends that the amount of compensation for land deficiency
may appropriately be reviewed. All those families that have not received compensation may
be given compensation immediately without any delay. (Para 3.2.14.7)
Action Taken
4.3.2 The rate of compensation announced in 2000 i.e ` 5000/- per kanal in lieu  of land
deficiency to the displaced persons from PoJK of 1947 has already been enhanced in 2008 to
` 25,000/- per kanal subject to the maximum of ` 1.5 lakhs.  State Government has been asked
to expedite the payment of compensation to these DPs.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS – – –  AT A GLANCE
ONE TIME COMPENSATION
1.1.4 The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs for seeking
proposals for one time settlement of DPs from PoJK 1947 and Chhamb DPs of 1965 and 1971 as well
WPRs and desires that all necessary action must be taken within a set time frame, as all these
affected persons continue to lead their lives under depression due to extreme suffering. Any positive
action on the part of the Government would be of great satisfaction to them. (Para 1.1.4)
SLOW DISBURSAL OF COMPENSATION
The Committee hopes that all approved 47 land deficiency claims and 14 applicants for cash
in lieu of urban plots are settled in a dedicated time frame.  Central Government may pursue the
matter with the State Government. (Para 1.2.4)
WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES (WPRs)
The Committee is aware that WPRs are not considered permanent residents of the State of
J&K in terms of the Constitution on the ground that WPRs does not  have ownership of land i.e
sahib-e-jaidad of J&K in the year 1944, a pre-condition to acquire a Permanent Residency Rights
but the fact that WPRs are living there since 1947 running from pillar to post in search of permanent
source of livelihood.  Moreover, WPRs arrived there even before enforcement of Article 370. The
Committee observes that WPRs are very much citizens of India having voting rights in Parliamentary
elections, therefore, there is no reason as to why WPRs should not be given voting rights for State
Assembly elections particularly when the ruling establishment at the centre and State Government
at the time of partition advised WPRs to stay at border villages and made assurance to them for a
decent life.  The Committee feels that there should not be any hitch in proposing amendment to the
constitution of J&K in favour of WPRs conferring Permanent Residence Certificate and voting
rights for State Legislative Assembly election in J&K. The Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue
the matter with the State Government. (Para 3.1.3)
PROVISION OF STATE GOVERNMENT JOBS
The Committee strongly reiterate its recommendation that pending conferment of Permanent
Resident Status to the WPRs, a temporary waiver may be made for admission of the children in the
professional institutions in the State. (Para 3.2.4)
RESERV ATION IN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT JOBS/CENTRAL PROFESSIONAL COLLEGES
The Committee, expresses its deep concern over the apathetic attitude of the State Government
of J&K on the issue of giving reservation to wards of WPRs in Central Government Jobs/Central
Professional Colleges and strongly reiterates its recommendation made in Para 3.1.3.3. of 183rd Report
and desires that  the Union Ministry of Home Affairs may  pursue the matter with the State Government
25

26
for an early decision in the matter so that the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of B.L.
Kalgotra Vs. States & Others is complied without  further delay. (Para 3.3.4)
RESERV ATION TO THE WARDS OF WPRs FOR ADMISSION IN ENGINEERING AND MEDICAL
COLLEGES
The Committee is anguished to note that the Ministry of Human Resource Development
has not responded to the request of the Ministry for taking a decision in regard to providing
reservation to the wards of WPRs in engineering, medical and other related institutions of higher
education across the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation
that the Department of Higher Education, Government of India must take early decision with
regard to according priority in admissions to children of WPRs  in engineering, medical and other
institutions outside J&K.  A separate reservation may be provided to them.  The Ministry of Home
Affairs may pursue the matter with the Ministry of Human Resource Development to get the
assurance implemented given by Home Secretary to the Committee on ground level.
(Para 3.4.4)
OPENING OF KVS/NVS FOR WPRS
The Committee takes a strong note of the inaction on the part of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development.  The Committee recommends that the Department of School Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development should take all necessary steps in the matter.  The
Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue with Ministry of Human Resource Development for early
implementation of the recommendation. (Para 3.5.4)
ONE TIME PACKAGE, MONTHLY MONETARY ASSISTANCE AND ACCOMMODATION
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over the indifferent attitude of  the
State to the problems of WPRs as State Government of J&K has not furnished proposal to Union
Ministry of Home Affairs to procure one time financial package/compensation to WPRs who are
otherwise in dire need for immediate relief and rehabilitation for sustenance. (Para 3.6.4)
Creation of separate battalion in State Police, Army and Para Military Forces
The Committee notes the various instructions/guidelines issued and request made to the
Ministry of Defence to issue such instruction allowing recruitment of WPRs/Wards of WPRs settled
in J&K to the Central Para Military Forces/CPAFs and in the Indian Armed Forces without the
condition of having a domicile certificate from the designated authority of the State of Government
of J&K, and in lieu of that Sarpanch/Numberdar certificate accompanied by the electoral roll could
be accepted as proof of their being WPRs.  The Committee, however, desires that the Ministry of
Home Affairs must monitor or undertake requisite follow-up action in tandem with the State
Government to ensure the compliance of its instruction in the matter.  The Committee strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Defence must actively consider the request made by the Ministry
of Home Affairs vide its letter dated 7
th January, 2015 and 09.02.2015 in regard to recruitment of the
wards of WPRs in the Indian Armed Forces.  The Committee may be informed of the find action
taken. (Para 3.7.4)
RESERVATION OF SEATS IN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
The Committee hopes that once the WPRs are granted permanent resident status in the

27
State of J&K, WPRs would  enjoy all democratic rights including right to elect and get elected in all
representatives bodies.  The Committee further desires that the Union Home Ministry may apprise
the Committee of response of State Government of J&K to its recommendation regarding reservation
of seats in the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of the State for WPRs. (Para 3.8.4)
DISPLACED PERSON FROM PoJK IN 1947
Official registration of DPs of 1947
The Committee is not in agreement with the plea of the Ministry of Home Affairs that since
there would be practical problems in fresh enumeration of Displaced Persons (DPs), the demand for
official registration of DPs of 1947 could not be accepted.  The Committee is of the view that
Government of India and State Government of J&K should take all pr-emptive measures to address
the practical problems they are anticipating and then issue an advertisement inviting applications
for general enumeration of all PoJK, DPs families so that left over families of DPs are officially
registered enabling them for their entitlement of claim for package/compensation.  The Committee,
therefore, strongly desires that all necessary action may be undertaken without further delay.
(Para 3.9.4)
DEFREEZING OF SEATS IN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
The Committee wishes to pin-point that India is a representative democratic country, therefore,
wider participation of people in democratic process is desirable.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government of India should persuade the State Government of J&K to consider
the demand of affected/displaced persons for defreezing of 8 seats out of 24 Legislative Assembly
seats which are designated for the territorial constituencies of State that lie in Pakistan occupied
Kashmir in favour of PoJK DPs. (Para 3.10.3)
SANCTIONING OF INTERIM PACKAGE
The Committee strongly recommends that long pending issues of PoJK DPs must be resolved
within set time frame and instead of making piece-meal efforts and paying part rehabilitation
assistance to urban and rural settlers, a comprehensive and complete rehabilitation assistance be
paid to the PoJK and DPs as to enable them to lead sustainable and decent life availing all basic civic
amenities.  The Ministry of Home Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government.
(Para 3.11.4)
SURVEY REPORT FOR IMPROVING THE CIVIC AMENITIES
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Home Affairs must seek all necessary information
within a fixed time frame so that proposal for one time settlement of DPs is considered without
further delay and pending that, interim relief must continue to reach the targeted group.  The
Committee further desires that the Ministry may impress upon the State Government to get the
survey report for improving the civic amenities in the recognized colonies by the Committee
expedited. (Para 3.12.3)
LAND  DEFICIENCY CLAIMS
The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Home Affairs
may persuade the State Government of J&K to examine and consider the demands of DPs for

28
consideration of additional 1950 land deficiency claims received during the year 2004 and additional
640 applications from urban DPs after the cut-off date for allotment of plots. The Committee may
be apprised of the decision taken on all such cases. (Para 3.13.4)
CONSTITUTION OF A COMMITTEE
The Committee is anguished to note the indifferent approach of the State Government of
J&K to the suffering of DPs as the implementation of recommendations of Wadhawa Committee
Report hangs in limbo since the year 2007.  Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterates its
recommendation made in para 3.2.8.3 of its 183rd Report for immediate consideration and
implementation of recommendations of the said Report. (Para 3.14.4)
COMPENSATION AGAINST LAND USED FOR MINING/FENCING
The Committee is surprised to find the apathetic attitude of State Government of J&K to
the demand of DPs for alternate place/cash compensation to the families where land is falling under
border fencing.  The Committee feels that payment of rent in lieu  of said use is not sufficient,
therefore, the issue may be pursued with the State Government. (Para 3.16.3)
Exemption from paying rent
The Committee is of the considered view that the State Government should not charge rent
from DPs for their houses since occupancy tenancy rights were conferred to DPs under the Agrarian
Reform Act with absolute right of transfer of the right of occupancy/tenancy by sale/gift or exchange
without the permission of Government.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
Ministry of Home Affairs should pursue the matter with State Government vigorously with the
purpose of arriving at a decision. (Para 3.17.3)
Equal  treatment to all Displaced persons
The Committee is of the strong opinion that all the DPs of PoJK should be treated equally
in terms of allotment of land, cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency and payment of other
benefits.  The Committee further desires that the demand of left over families who came after
the crucial period i.e.  beyond September, 1947 to December 1950 should be sympathetically
considered for registration conferring status of DPs of PoJK as one time rehabilitation.
(Para 3.18.3)
CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS (DPS) OF 1965 AND 1971 (CAMP) AND (NON – CAMP)
One time compensation
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in response to the action taken by
Government in compliance to its recommendation made in Para 3.1.5.3 of its 183
rd Report.
(Para 3.19.4)
Occupancy/ tenancy rights
The Committee expresses its displeasure on the delay in elimination of differential treatment on
the issue of conferring occupancy/tenancy right of evacuee land being conferred to DPs of PoJK of
1947 but denied to Chhamb DPs of 1965 and 1971.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends

29
that necessary amendment in Agrarian Reform Act, 1976 be made to eliminate the disparity amongst
the DPs at the earliest and the matter may be vigorously pursued with the State Government.
(Para 3.20.4)
EXEMPTION FROM PAYING RENT
The Committee feels that the practice of charging rent in respect of evacuee properties
allotted/occupied by the DPs and existing mandatory provision of seeking permission to undertake
repair work and minor modification in their dwelling units should not be there.  The Ministry of
Home Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government. (Para 3.21.4)
REGISTRATION OF LEFT OUT DPS
The Committee reiterates its recommendation as   contained in Para 3.2.1.4 of 183
rd Report
that the issue of registration of left out DPs families of 1965 and 1971 must be resolved immediately.
(Para 3.22.3)
IMPLEMENTATION OF WADHWA COMMITTEE AND INTERLOCUTORS’ REPORTS
The Committee desires that the Central Government must expedite the implementation of
Wadhwa Committee’s recommendation without further procrastination. (Para 3.23.4)

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 2015 in Committee Room
“A” Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Bhattacharya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Goel
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
9. Shri Ramen Deka
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore
11. Shri Harish Meena
12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
13. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Deputy Director
5. Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee and brought to
the notice of the Members about the problems being faced by Bengali refugees and grant of Indian citizenship
to those who had faced persecution in the East Pakistan and Bangladesh and were forced to take refuge in
India. The Chairman then informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and adopt
the following draft Reports:-
33

34
*** Relate to other matters.
(i) Draft 193rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-Third Report on the problems being faced by
refugees and displaced persons in J & K.
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
II. CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF DRAFT 193
rd REPORT
3.0 The Committee then took up the draft 193rd Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on
the observations/recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-Third Report on the problems
being faced by refugees and displaced persons in J & K.
3.1 One of the Members gave an alternative suggestion recommending for grant of a financial package
directly by the Central Government for the WPRs. The Committee agreed to this suggestion and after a brief
discussion the report was adopted.
III. * * *
4.0 * * *
IV. * * *
5.0 * * *
5.1 * * *
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors and if
necessary further vetting.
IV. * * *
7. * * *
7.1 * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. A Verbatim record of the Proceeding of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.