77
C.S.(H.A.)-346
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT
Coastal Security Scheme
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  19 th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (vi)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—35
Chapter-I Background ............................................................................................... 1—5
Chapter-II Issues/concerns of Coastal States/UTs regarding Coastal Security 6—27
Chapter-III Other issues ............................................................................................. 28—35
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ..... 36—44
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF M EETINGS OF C OMMITTEE ......................................................... 45—64
7. A NNEXURES ..........................................................................................................................   65— 76
(i) State-wise Components of Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) ...................... 67
(ii) State-wise Physical Component (Phase-II) ......................................................... 68
(iii) Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II) Statement on Release of finds to
Coastal States/UTs ................................................................................................... 69
(iv) List of Reports of Committee on Home Af fairs ............................................... 70—76

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy
†4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
♣5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Javed Akhtar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri Khagen Das
14. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
15. Shri Ramen Deka
16. Shri Lagadapati Raja Gopal
17. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
20. Shri Babulal Marandi
21. Shri Baijayant Panda
22. Shri Lalubhai B. Patel
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Dr. Nilesh N. Rane
#25. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
26. Shri Adhi Sankar
27. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Shri Harsh Vardhan
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
† Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy nominated w.e.f. 4 th July, 2012 vice Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ceased to be Member consequent upon expiration
of term of membership from Rajya Sabha on 2 nd April, 2012.
♣ Shri Satish Chandra Misra nominated w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal who resigned from the membership
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
# Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu nominated w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 vice Shri Bishnu Pada Ray who was nominated to the Committee on
Rural Development w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012.
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
^2. Vacant
†3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
#8. Vacant
♣9. Vacant
%10. Dr. V . Maitreyan
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
*16. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
25. Shri Lalu Prasad
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
^  Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 28th December, 2012 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the appointment
   of Shri K. Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Union Cabinet on 28 th October, 2012 and Shri D. Raja, Member, RS ceased
   to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25th July, 2013
†  Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the resignation
   of Shri Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.
#  Shrimati Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013
♣  Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries on 28 th October, 2012.
%  Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th July, 2013 and
   Dr. V . Maitreyan, MP, Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27th July, 2013.
*  Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7th August, 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due to the  Appointment of
   Shrimati Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2013)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri D. Raja
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul
12. Shri L.K. Advani
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
18. Shri Ramen Deka
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
20. Shri Naveen Jindal
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
♣25. Vacant
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu
30. Shri Ravneet Singh
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
(iii)
♣ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 30 th September, 2013 in
terms of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the Peop le
Act, 1951, he ceases to be a Member of the Committee.

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy-seventh Report on Coastal Security Scheme.
2. The erstwhile Committee, in its sitting held on 11
th May, 2011, identified the subject for
detailed study. The Committee sought written comments of all the concerned coastal State
Governments and UTs in this regard and all the coastal States/UTs except the State of Maharashtra
furnished the same. The comments of the States were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs
for response, which were also considered by the Committee.
2.1 The erstwhile Committee also visited Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh to study Coastal
Security set-up in the States. The Committee held meetings and visited certain marine police
stations which were set up and had discussions with the Coast Guard, the State Police and also
with the District Administration in that regard.
3. The Committee, in its sitting held on 9
th and 29 th October, 2013 heard the Home Secretary
and other representatives of the Ministry along with concerned officials of other Ministries/
Departments. The Home Secretary made a presentation on the main features of Phase-I and
Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme and the experience gained in the implementation of the
Scheme indicating the budgetary provisions and the future requirements.
4. The Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:–
(i) Annual Reports 2012-13 of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Background Note furnished by the Ministry;
(iii) Presentations made by Home Secretary and other officials;
(v) Proceedings of the meetings of the Committee;
(vi) Replies to the queries raised by the Members during the Committee’s meetings;
(vii) Replies to the comments/suggestions made by Governments of Coastal States/UTs as
furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
6. The Committee in its sitting held on 7
th January, 2014 considered and adopted the Report.
7. The observations and conclusions of the Committee have been given at respective narrative
part of the Report in bold letters. However, for the sake of convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been arranged at a glance in chapter-IV .
M. VENKAIAH NAIDU
Chairman,
N
EW D ELHI; Department-related Parliamentary
7th January,  2014 Standing Committee on Home Affairs

ACRONYMS
ACSOCs Area Coastal Security Operation Centers
AIS Automatic Identification System
CPS Coastal Police Stations
CSS Coastal Security Scheme
DGLL Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships
ECIL Electronics Corporation of India Limited
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone
ETA Expected Time of Arrival
FIC Fast Interceptor Crafts
GRSE Garden Reach Shipbuilders Engineers Limited
GRSE Garden Reach Shipping and Engineering Ltd.
GSL Goa Shipyard Ltd.
IMBL International Maritime Border Line
JCP Joint Coastal Patrol
LRIT Long Range Identification and Tracking
MPTI Marine Police Training Institutes
MPOC Marine Police Operational Centers
MSS Mobile Satellite Services
MPS Marine Police Stations
MMD Mercantile Marine Department
MoPN&G Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
NAIS National Automatic Identification System
NMDA National Maritime Domain Awareness
NCSMCS National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security
OJT On Job Training
ODAG Of fshore Defence Advisory Group
(vi)

RIB Rigid Inflatable Boats
RGI Registrar General of India
RFID Radio Frequency Identification Device
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
SMB State Maritime Boards
RCSOC Regional Coastal Security Operation Centers
RFID Radio Frequency Identification Device
SCSOC State Coastal Security Operation Centers
SPM Single Point Moorings
SPB Sagar Prahari Bal
V A TMS Vessel and Air-Traffic Management System
VTMS V essel Traffic Management System
(vii)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
1.0 Background
1.0.1 India has a coastline of 7516.60 km. bordering the mainland and islands with Bay of Bengal
in the East, Indian Ocean on the South and Arabian Sea on the West. There are nine Sates viz.
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and West
Bengal and four Union Territories viz. Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Puducherry and Andaman and
Nicobar Islands situated on the coast. The length of coastline including islands in these States and
UTs is given in the following table:–
Sl. No. State/UT Length (in kms.)
1. Gujarat 1214.70
2. Maharashtra 652.60
3. Goa 101.00
4. Karnataka 208.00
5. Kerala 569.70
6. Tamil Nadu 906.90
7. Andhra Pradesh 973.70
8. Odisha 476.70
9. West Bengal 157.50
10. Daman and Diu 42.50
11. Lakshadweep 132.00
12. Puducherry 47.60
13. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1992.00
T
OTAL 7516.60
1.1 Maritime and Coastal Security set-up
1.1.1 The Ministry in its background note informed the Committee that the jurisdiction of Coastal
Police extends upto 12 nautical miles in the sea (territorial waters) and that of Coast Guard extends
from the baseline to the limits of the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), i.e., from 0 to 200 nautical
miles in the sea. The area beyond 200 nautical miles (High Seas) falls within the jurisdiction of
Indian Navy. A three tier Coastal security ring all along the coast is provided by Marine Police,
Indian Coast Guard and Indian Navy as per the following scheme of arrangement.
● The Indian Navy has been designated as the authority responsible for overall maritime
security, which includes coastal security and offshore security.
1

2
● The Coast Guard has been mandated to secure India’s interests in all its maritime zones
under the Coast Guard Act, 1978. The Indian Coast Guard has also been additionally
designated as the authority responsible for coastal security in territorial waters
including areas to be patrolled by the Coastal Police.
● The Director General Coast Guard has been designated as Commander Coastal
Command and will be responsible for overall coordination between Central and State
agencies in all matters relating to coastal security.
● The Coast Guard has been nominated to function as Lead Intelligence Agency for the
coast to provide institutional arrangements for coordination and sharing of intelligence
among various agencies operating on the Coast.
1.2 Mechanisms for addressing coastal security issues.
1.2.1 National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) against
threats from the sea:
1.2.1.1 W ith a view to ensure timely implementation of various decisions taken by the Government
in respect of coastal security of the country and to ensure effective coordination among various
Central Ministries and agencies and the coastal State Government/UTs, a ‘National Committee for
Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) against threats from the sea’ has been
constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat in the month of August, 2009, under the Chairmanship of
Cabinet Secretary. Eight (8) meetings of the Committee have so far been convened, the last meeting
was held on 6th September, 2013.
1.2.2 Steering Committee Meeting
1.2.2.1 An Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee with members from the coastal States/UTs has
been constituted for review of coastal security in MHA under the Chairmanship of Secretary (BM),
which held its first meeting on 26.09.2013.
1.3 Overall coordination between Central and State Agencies for coastal security
1.3.1 The Ministry has further informed that the Coast Guard has been specifically tasked to
evoke Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in close consultation with all the stakeholders, so as
to develop coordination and assist in unhindered flow of information amongst the agencies.
1.3.2 The coastal security exercises are conducted by the Coast Guard with the coastal States/
UTs biannually and SOPs are validated during the conduct of these exercises. Post-exercises, de-
brief chaired by the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of coastal States/UTs are organized which are
attended by all the stake-holders. Lessons learnt are deliberated and communicated to all stake-
holders. Since 2009, a total of 85 coastal security exercises have been conducted by the Coast
Guard till date.
1.3.3 Joint Coastal Patrol (JCP) with marine police and Customs have been institutionalized and
are being undertaken especially in Gujarat area. Further, based on intelligence inputs, Coastal
Security operations are also being conducted and participated by the Coast Guard. Since 2009, a
total of 87 coastal security operations have been conducted.
1.3.4 In addition, Indian Coast Guard has been undertaking community interactions programmes
for the fishermen to bring in awareness about safety issue at sea. The community interaction
programmes are also conducted to sensitize the fishing community on the prevailing security
situation and develop them to be the ‘Eyes and Ears’ for intelligence gathering. Since 2009, a total
of 2288, community interaction programmes have been conducted till date.

3
1.3.5 The ab-initio training of marine police personnel by Coast Guard was started in July, 2006.
The training is conducted at 10 Coast Guard DHQs for marine police ranks of ASI Head Constable
and below. This training consists of 3 weeks orientation modules and 1 week of On Job Training
(OJT) module. So far, 2985 police personnel have been trained by the Indian Coast Guard.
1.3.6 In the background note the Ministry has informed that the responsibilities and
communication mode of coastal security has been defined as follows:–
(a) Regional Coastal Security Operation Centers (RCSOCs) are control centers under
respective Coast Guard Regional Commander. All inputs related to coastal security
operations/exercises are analyzed at this centre for coordination amongst all agencies
involved in coastal security within territorial waters.
(b) State Coastal Security Operation Centers (SCSOCs) are control centers under
respective Coast Guard District Commander. All inputs related to coastal security
operations/exercises received from the Area Coastal Security Operation Centers
(ACSOCs) for the entire District under the Coast Guard District Commander are
analyzed at this centre for coordination amongst the agencies at district level. The
information is shared with Regional Coastal Security Operation Centers (RCSOCs).
(c) Area Coastal Security Operation Centers (ACSOCs) are the control centers under
respective Coast Guard Station Commander for acting as linkage at local level for hub
and spoke concept of coordination. All inputs related to coastal security operations/
exercises are analyzed at this Centre for coordination amongst the agencies at local level.
The information is shared with State Coastal Security Operation Centres (SCSOCs).
(d) District Control Room: These are the Control Rooms established at each of the coastal
district of the coastal State under respective District Magistrate/Collector for acting as
linkage at local level with State agencies and the Indian Coast Guard. The information
from the District Control Room is shared with State Control Room and the nearest
Area Coastal Security Operation Centers (ACSOCs).
(e) State Control Room: These are the operation centers established by coastal State
Government and Adminstration of Island territories. The information available with the
State Control Room are to be shared with District Control and Regional Coastal
Security Operation Centres (RCSOCs).
1.4 Coastal Security Scheme
1.4.1 The Coastal Security Scheme has the objective of strengthening infrastructure of Marine Police
Force for patrolling and surveillance of coastal areas, particularly shallow areas close to the coast.
1.4.2 The Ministry has informed that the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I), based on the
Perspective Plans prepared by the coastal States/UTs, was implemented from 2005-06 with an
initial outlay of 
R 551 croes ( R 400 crore non-recurring and R 151 crore recurring) over a period
of 5 years. Subsequently, the Scheme was extended by 1 year upto March, 2011 with an additional
non-recurring outlay of 
R 95 crores, thereby taking the final outlay to R 646 crores. Under the
Scheme, coastal States/UTs were provided with 73 coastal police stations, 97 check posts, 58
outposts, 30 barracks, 204 interceptor boats, 153 jeeps and 312 motor cycles. The Coast Guard
stations function as hubs and the coastal police stations as spokes. The implementation of the
Scheme has been completed. Garden Reach Shipping and Engineering Ltd. (GRSE), Kolkata
provides AMC/repair services to 88 interceptor boats provided to the States/UTs on the Eastern
Coast and Goa Shipyard Ltd. provides AMC/repair service to 116 interceptor boats supplied to
Western Coastal States/UTs. (States/UT- wise components are at Annexure-I)

4
1.4.3 The Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II) has been formulated in the context of the fast
changing coastal security scenario subsequent to the Mumbai incidents on 26/11 and followed by
a vulnerability/gap analysis carried out by concerned States/UTs for strengthening coastal security
infrastructure. Currently, Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme is under implementation w.e.f.
1st April, 2011 for a period of 5 years with an outlay of R1580 crores. Under the 2nd Phase, the
coastal States/UTs will be provided with 131 Marines Police Stations, 60 jetties, 10 Marine
Operation Centers, 150 boats (12 Tons), 10 boats (5 Tons), 20 (19 Mts. ) boats, 35 RIBs (Rigid
Inflatable Boats), 10 large vessels (Andaman and Nicobar Islands), 131 four wheelers and 242
motorcycles. (Coastal States/UT-wise components are at Annexure-II).
1.4.4 Under the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I and Phase-II), manpower is to be provided by
the concerned coastal States/UTs. Government of India provides assistance for training.
1.5 Budgetary Allocation
1.5.1 In 2013-14, 
R150 crores have been earmarked and for 2014-15, R150 crores have been
proposed for the Coastal Security Scheme. Further provision would be made depending on the
requirements.
1.5.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that it is in the process of procuring 150 (12 Ton)
boats for all coastal States/UTs, except Tamil Nadu. In addition, 10 large vessels for A&N Islands,
20 (19 mtr) boats for Tamil Nadu, 10 (5 Ton) boats for Gujarat, and 35 Rigid Inflatable Boats
(RIBs) for A&N Islands and Lakshadweep are also being procured. Funds may be required at the
time of delivery of these boats/vessels, for which sufficient budgetary provision has been made
with the approval of the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission.
1.5.3 It has further informed that Under Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II), a total amount of
R101.29 crores has been released to the coastal States/UTs for construction of Coastal Police
Stations, Jetties, procurement of four wheelers, two wheelers and equipments for CPS. A statement
showing the State/UT-wise release of funds is enclosed (Annexure-III).
1.6 Steering Committee to oversee the implementation of the coastal security scheme
1.6.1 Ministry of Home Affairs has constituted a Steering Committee at the level of Secretary
(Border Management), to oversee the implementation of the coastal security scheme and also to
ensure better coordination among the various stakeholders. In the Steering Committee meeting held
on 26.09.2013, the progress of each State/UT was reviewed and these States/UTs have advised to
expedite completion of the coastal police stations as well as jetties and also purchase of vehicles
and equipments in time-bound manner.
1.6.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that in the Ministry of Home Affairs, there is
a mechanism of Annual Action Plan by which Annual Targets are fixed at the beginning of financial
year for achievement and the same is monitored on quarterly basis by the Home Secretary. In the
case of Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II) also, an Annual Action Plan is in place where the
progress is closely monitored and necessary follow up actions are taken for achieving the set
target.
1.7 Various provisions/facilities envisaged for enhancing coastal security
1.7.1 Construction of Jetties
1.7.1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed the Committee that the following provisions/
facilities have been envisaged for enhancing coastal security.

5
1.7.1.2 The Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II), provides for construction of 60 jetties in the
coastal States/UTs each at a cost of  R50 lakhs. Though the States/UTs have identified the land/
site for construction of Jetties, the desired progress could not be made due to land acquisition
issues. Further, the coastal States/UTs have requested for enhancement of this grant, as the amount
provided is insufficient for construction of jetties. The States/UTs have been advised to strategically
relocate the jetties in proximity of the exiting fishing harbors which would, inter alia , (a) avoid
delay in land acquisition (b) cut down the costs and (c) address dredging problems.
1.8 Setting up of Marine Police Training Institutes (MPTIs)
1.8.1 It has been proposed to establish two Marine Police Training Institute (MPTIs) one each
on the East Coast and the West Coast. For establishing MPTI, land admeasuring 250 acres with
water-front along with connectivity to big town/city is to be provided free of cost by Coastal
States/UTs. A Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of JS(BM) which includes
Members from BPR&D, Navy and Coast Guard for inspecting the sites offered by the coastal
States/UTs. In the case of West Coast, Gujarat and Maharasthra have offered the requisite land.
In the case of East Coast, the Government of Andhra Pradesh has offered the necessary land.
1.9 NPR/Fisherman ID Cards
1.9.1 There are two types of cards, viz. NPR ID Cards issued by the Registrar General of India
(RGI) for Coastal village population and Fisherman Cards issued to the Fishermen by the Union
D/o Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries. RGI has captured biometric details of 67,50,519
persons of age 18 years and above, and distributed 65,72,523 NPR ID cards. D/o Animal
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries has produced and delivered 11,18,817 fishermen ID cards till
date.
1.10 Registration of Vessels/Boats
1.10.1 It was decided in June, 2009 to have a uniform registration of fishing vessels of less than
20 meter overall lengths. The uniform registration is done under Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 by
the States/UTs. A total of 1,86,104 fishing vessels have been registered under the new on-line
registration system.
1.11 Tracking System (transponders) for Boats
(a) For boats less than 20 meters, RFID (Radio Frequency Identification Device) and MSS
(Mobile Satellite Services) is being planned, after pilot study by Navy.
(b) M/o Shipping is also conducting a pilot study on fitting Automatic Identification System
(Proprietary Transponder) [AIS(O)] on the fishing vessels of less than 20 meters.
(c) DG, Shipping has issued two circulars to ensure installation of Automatic Identification
System (AIS) Type B transponders in all types of vessels including fishing vessels of
above 20 metres in length.
1.12 Constitution of State Maritime Boards (SMBs)
1.12.1 T amil Nadu, Gujarat and Maharashtra have constituted SMBs. Puducherry has constituted
Maritime Security Committee and Daman and Diu has constituted Maritime Advisory Committee.
Governments of Karnataka, Kerala, AP, Goa and UTs of A&N Islands and Lakshadweep have been
advised to constitute SMBs, at the earliest. As there is no minor or private port in the State of West
Bengal, Government of West Bengal is of the view that there is no need for setting up of SMB.

6
CHAPTER-II
ISSUES/CONCERNS OF COASTAL STATES/UTs
REGARDING COASTAL SECURITY
2.0 The Committee in order to get a feel of ground realities requested the coastal States and
UTs to send their comments on coastal security situation and implementation of coastal security
scheme in their respective States/UTs. All the coastal States/UTs except the State of Maharastra
have sent their comments. The same were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for replies.
The Comments from the State Government of Maharastra were not received inspite of the request
made by the Committee and reminders sent in this regard. The present chapter deals with the
issues/problems/handicaps specific to the concerned States/UTs and replies of the Ministry of Home
Affairs and other concerned Union Ministries. Issues common to the coastal States and UTs are
discussed in chapter III. The recommendations of the Committee are also made in succeeding
paragraphs.
2.1 Gujarat
2.1.1 Gujarat coast is highly sensitive due to its close proximity to a very vulnerable part of
International Maritime Border Line (IMBL).The Existing patrolling scheme consists of patrolling
through 5 Ton and 12 Ton boats supplied to the marine police stations. The strategy is that the
‘brown waters’ are looked after by the police and coast guard and the “blue waters” are the
responsibility of the Navy. This is supplemented by vehicular patrolling along sensitive land routes
in the hinterland. Coastal Outposts and check posts have been established in the hinterland and
watch is maintained on the vulnerable points of the coastline.
2.1.2 Concern of the State on multifarious coastal security problems
2.1.2.1 Gujarat coast due to its multifarious problems requires many more assets to be put up
in place. According to the Gujarat Government, considering the diverse nature of the coast, the
coastal strategy needs to be customized and a ‘one size fits all’ may not achieve desired ends. The
number of boats needs to be augmented.
2.1.2.2 The Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) was formulated based on the Perspective Plan
prepared by the coastal States/UTs. Under Phase-I, Gujarat was sanctioned 10 coastal police
stations, 25 Check-posts, 46 Outposts, 30 interceptor boats - 20 (12 Tons) and 10 (5 Tons),
20 Jeeps and 101 Motor Cycles. A lump sum financial assistance of Rs.10 lakh per coastal police
stations was also provided for purchase of computer and other equipments.
2.1.2.3 The Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II) which is currently under implementation has been
formulated on the basis of vulnerability/gap analysis carried out by coastal States/UTs in the context
of fast changing coastal security scenario post 26/11. Under Phase-II, additional infrastructural
requirements are provided for strengthening the coastal security structure of the States/UTs. Under
this, Gujarat has been sanctioned 12 coastal police stations, 5 jetties, 31 boats - 21 (12 Ton) and
10 (5 Ton), 12 four-wheelers and 24 motor cycles. 
R15 lakh per coastal police station has also
been provided for purchase of surveillance equipments, computer systems etc. The specifications
of the 10 (5 Ton) boats have been modified as per the request of the State Government and also
to suit the marine operational requirements.
6

7
2.1.2.4 Further, the Ministry has released the eligible amount of R11.04 crores for implementation
of the above components of the Scheme (except boats). The boats/vessels are centrally procured
by MHA.
2.1.3 The Committee agrees that Gujarat coast is highly sensitive due to its close
proximity to a very vulnerable part of International Maritime Border Line (IMBL).The
Committee is in agreement with the State Government that it needs more funds and
infrastructure to improve and strengthen coastal security preparedness. The Committee
recommends that under the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II), all the infrastructural and
logistical gaps in the coastal security apparatus of the State should be filled in view of its
vulnerability due to hostile atmosphere in the coastal area of Gujarat. Necessity of
additional funds may be considered after discussing with State Government.
2.1.4 Role of Mercantile Marine Department
2.1.4.1 The State Government has informed that the Mercantile Marine Department (MMD) under
the Ministry of Shipping does not provide inputs on national security matters. The State
Government feels that this regulatory body should be pro-active on issues related to benami
investment in ship-building, under-valuation of investment etc. It also needs to be more responsive
to requests from agencies dealing with national issues.
2.1.4.2 Responding to the issue, Ministry of Shipping has informed that the mandate of MMD is
to check the technical aspects and seaworthiness of the vessels registered under Merchant Shipping
Act and MMD will not be in a position to bring out investment details.
2.1.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the issues raised by the State Government
regarding non-availability of inputs on national security matters and regulation of benami
investment are worth noting and deserve attention. The Committee feels that if the
Ministry of Shipping is not the relevant agency then the concerned agency be it Ministry
of Home Affairs or any other agency should provide necessary inputs to the State
Government. Ministry of Home Affairs may look into this matter.
2.1.6 Involvement of Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships (DGLL)
2.1.6.1 The State Government has suggested that the Directorate General of Light Houses and
Light Ships (DGLL) functioning under the Ministry of Shipping should be involved in a more
creative and purposeful manner in the maritime security affairs.
2.1.6.2 Ministry of Shipping has informed that DGLL, under the Ministry of Shipping, is
responsible for provisions and maintenance of Aids to Marine Navigation. The facilities provided
along the Coast of Gujarat includes 42 Lighthouses, 19 Radar Beacons (Racons), 4 DGPS, 2 Deep
Sea water channels, 1 Vessel Traffic Service for the Gulf of Kuchch which sufficiently meet the
navigation safety needs of Gujarat waters.
2.1.6.3 It has also informed that DGLL is fully involved in setting up of Coastal Surveillance
System in a purposeful and creative way since early 2000. DGLL has established National
Automatic Identification System (AIS) Network which is capable of tracking suitably equipped
vessel of 300 GRT and above and also those vessels which are equipped with class B AIS
Transponder as per DG (Shipping) Notice. NAIS is an efficient tool for Coastal Surveillance which
is presently used by security agencies.
2.1.6.4 It has further informed that DGLL has also taken up the Pilot Project for sub 20 m
vessels. When successfully and efficiently implemented, all the vessels plying in territorial waters

8
and up to a distance of 50 kms. shall be tracked. DGLL can also take up any further technology
driven work need for the coastal security.
2.1.7 The Committee, notwithstanding the reply of the Ministry, desires that the concern
of the State Government may appropriately be addressed. Secretary, Shipping may hold a
meeting in the matter.
2.1.8 Security issue of Ship-breaking industry
2.1.8.1 The State Government has informed that several issues relating to the security issues of
Alang ship-breaking yard have been raised by several security agencies from time to time. Several
of these issues are in the policy domain. Still, there is no response from Steel Ministry.
2.1.8.2 The Ministry of Steel has replied that in pursuance of the order dated 6th September,
2007 of the Supreme Court of India in CWP No.657 of 1995, Ministry of Steel has notified a Ship-
breaking Code on 23.3.2013 for regulating ship-breaking ship-recycling. As per the provisions of
the ship-breaking code, the following measures are prescribed for ensuring security: (i) The ships
coming for breaking are inspected by personnel of Navy, Customs, Port Authority and other
agencies before granting permission for anchoring of ships, (ii) with regard to security related
aspects, the State Maritime Board (SMB)/Port Authority issues orders in consultation with Navy
and Coast Guard; (iii) a record of ships reporting for breaking along with the nature and details
of ship is maintained by the State Maritime Board/Port Authority, shall be provided to the Navy and
Coast Guard, as soon as their expected time of arrival (ETA) is received; (iv) photographic record
of all ships reporting for recycling shall be maintained by the SMB and provided to the Navy and
Coast; (v) the details of arrival and departure of the crew, in particular, the foreign crew members
are to be reported to the concerned naval authority prior to the arrival and departure; and (vi) a
monthly security and intelligence meeting shall be conducted by each Port Authority/SMB by calling
representatives from local police, IB, Coast Guard and Navy.
2.1.8.3 The Ministry has further stated that steel is a de-regulated sector. Ship-breaking Yards fall
in the category of “Factories” covered under the Factories Act, 1948, which is administered by the
Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India/State Governments. Hence, the Ministry
of Steel has no legal authority to supervise or control any private steel factory. However, the
Ministry of Steel plays a facilitative role to ensure growth and development of steel industry.
2.1.9 Security of off-shore oil installations
2.1.9.1 The State Government has further observed that similar disconnect with national security
issues is seen in the case of M/o PN&G. It has, therefore, suggested that greater engagement with
law enforcement agencies is required.
2.1.9.2 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (M/o P&NG) has replied that it is primarily
responsible for ensuring security of Off-shore Oil installations, including security of Single Point
Moorings (SPMs) falling in the coastal areas. The Ministry works in close coordination with all the
operators as well as the Indian Navy/Coast Guard. Meetings of Offshore Defence Advisory Group
(ODAG) and On-shore Security Coordination Committee are held at regular intervals in which
various stake-holders, including the State DGP participate.
2.1.9.3 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has installed V ATMS (Vessel and Air-Traffic
Management System) in Western Coast and also procured 23 ISVs which are in the process of
being commissioned.
2.1.10 It appears that the Ministry of Home Affairs is not aware of the issue. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may look into the security
concerns expressed by the State Government. The Committee recommends that the

9
Ministries of Home, Shipping, Steel and Petroleum and Natural Gas should hold a meeting
with the State Government of Gujarat to understand the missing link and find suitable ways
to address its concerns.
2.1.11 Integration of visual imagery from aerial surveillance and satellite imagery
2.1.11.1 The State Government has suggested that there is a need to integrate visual imagery from
aerial surveillance platform and satellite imagery.
2.1.11.2 The Ministry of Defence has replied that the National Maritime Domain A wareness
(NMDA) project which is presently under consideration, envisages development of common
operational picture of all maritime activities in the seas around India, based upon sources such as
radars, Automatic Identification System (AIS), Long Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT),
Vessel Traffic Management System (VTMS), Vessel and Air Traffic Management System (VATMS),
Coastal Surveillance Network, Fishing Vessel Registration data base, Fisherman Biometric ID data
base, Pre-arrival Notices, Port Community System and MAC/SMAC data bases.
2.1.12 The Committee recommends that the National Maritime Domain Awareness
(NMDA) project, which envisages development of common operational picture of all
maritime activities in the seas around India based upon various sources, should be finalized
at the earliest. The Committee hopes once the NMDA is established it will provide one stop
solution for providing satellite imagery for Surveillance purposes. This will be useful for all
coastal States and not just Gujarat.
2.1.13 Calibration of VTMS to the security needs
2.1.13.1 The State Government has further suggested that there is a need to mesh commercial
navigation system like VTMS (Vessel Traffic Management System) with the coastal security control
rooms and calibrate the VTMS to the security needs.
2.1.13.2 The Ministry of Shipping has explained that VTMS System, Gulf of Kutch maintained by
Director General of Light House and Light Ships (DGLL), is already linked to Coast Guard
authorities at Jakhau and Okha and Naval authorities at Okha. Similarly, VTMS system established
by Gujarat Maritime Board is under PPP mode for Gulf of Kutch and is linked to Naval/Coast
Guard authorities at Gandhidham. Further VTMS information can be shared by the concerned State
agencies from the Coast Guard/Navy.
2.1.14 The Committee recommends that the request of the State Government may be
considered.
2.1.15 Deliberate Oil spills by insurgents
2.1.15.1 The State Government has also expressed its fear regarding deliberate oil spills by
insurgents for creating fire hazards for destruction of ships and port properties. It is of the opinion
that funds from MHA should be earmarked for creating oil-spill combating centers with equipment
as required by coast guard.
2.1.15.2 Ministry of Shipping has informed that Oil pollution cess @ 50 paisa per MT is being
collected and the Ministry is preparing a scheme for assisting Major and non-Major Ports from this
fund to procure equipment and dispersants to combat oil spill.
2.1.16 The Committee recommends that the scheme may be prepared at the earliest. It
also feels that the Ministry should address the fears expressed by the State Government of
deliberate oil spills by insurgents, for creating fire hazards for destruction of ships and port
properties, by procuring equipment and dispersants to combat oil spill. This issue concerns
all the coastal States.

10
2.1.17 Requirement of equipments for meeting ISPS Audit
2.1.17.1 The State Government has stated that ISPS requires enhancement of various equipment
like radio-active screening etc. which drain out major funds. This should be taken up under
financial assistance through MHA.
2.1.17.2 Ministry of Shipping has informed that DG (Shipping) is conducting regular audit of ISPS
in the major ports. Radioactive material scanners are being installed in all major ports by M/s ECIL
at port entry and exit gates. The equipment have been received and installation is in progress.
2.1.18 The Committee recommends that Radio-active material scanners should be
installed at all entry/exit points of all major ports in all the coastal States.
2.1.19 The State Government has also suggested that there is a need to chalk out programme
to impart basic skills to the fishermen in intelligence gathering, so that they can be cultivated as
effective informers. Government of Gujarat has conducted fishermen awareness programme
benefitting 15,000 fishermen. With 1.4 lakh fishermen in the State, it is necessary that the
Government of India must provide financial assistance in order to enable 100% coverage of
fishermen by the training and to make this programme continuous.
2.1.20 The Committee agrees with the State Government and is of the opinion that
fishermen can be a rich source of intelligence and can definitely be cultivated as effective
informers. The Central government should device a programme for imparting basic skills
in intelligence gathering to the fishermen through out the country in all coastal States.
2.1.21 The State Government has informed that Government of India provides 
R50 lakhs for
construction of a jetty which is insufficient and needs to be revised suitably if the jetties are to
be constructed on a permanent and sustainable basis. The five jetties sanctioned in Phase-II are
insufficient to anchor the 61 boats (including 30 Phase-II boats). As per expert opinion, the cost
of jetties will be approximately 
R5 crore and the GOI must consider increasing the amount to R
5 crore as well as the number of jetties.
2.1.22 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that recently, the States/UTs raised the issue
of inadequate financial support ( R 50 lakhs per jetty) being provided under Coastal Security Scheme
during the meeting of the Steering Committee for Review of Coastal Security held on 26.9.2013.
Construction cost of jetties would be dependent on various factors, including length of jetty which
is determined by the types of boats to be berthed and its location. It was decided that the States/
UTs will review the physical dimension of the jetties based on local conditions and requirements
and will examine to relocate the Jetties adjacent to the fishing harbours to avoid land acquisition
requirements, and to save costs on requirement of dredging. The coastal States/UTs have promised
to send a report to MHA on the above issues by November, 2013, so that the issue of inadequate
financial support is examined by MHA with the help of experts.
2.1.23 The Committee recommends that all coastal States/UTs should send their reports on
construction of jetties to the Ministry of Home Affairs so that their requirements of funds
for construction of jetties may be looked into as per local conditions. It is also of the
opinion that if the funds are found inadequate they may be suitably enhanced according to
the requirements of concerned States/UTs.
2.2 Goa
2.2.1 Goa is a small State with a coastline of 105 kms. The State Government has informed
that the infrastructure provided by the MHA in two Phases of Coastal Security is felt adequate to
meet with the objectives of formation of Coastal Security Scheme i.e. to the strengthening

11
infrastructure for patrolling and surveillance for coastal areas, particularly shallow areas close to
the coast, which hereto, have remained largely un-policed.
2.2.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has explained that as regards implementation of Coastal
Security Scheme (Phase-I) is concerned, the procurement of 10 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIBs) is
yet to be completed by the Government of Goa despite release of R20 lakhs for the same. The
Government of Goa has informed that despite floating of tenders 4 times viz. on 10.8.2007,
7.9.2010, 30.10.2012 and 2.4.2013, the tendering process could not be completed because of
reasons like bids were not as per specifications as laid down in tender documents or single tender
situations. The Government of Goa is now going for a fresh tender.
2.2.3 The Committee is not happy to note that procurement under phase I was not
completed. The Ministry may impress upon the State Government to complete the process
at the earliest. This brooks no further delay.
2.2.4 Coastal Security-multi agency responsibility and surveillance
2.2.4.1 The State Government has observed that Coastal Security is a multi agency responsibility.
Indian Coast Guard is the principal agency for maintaining security in the maritime zones whose
responsibility is to coordinate amongst the various stakeholders and to check the preparedness and
validation of the procedure towards Coastal Security. It has further underlined that some of the
issues already on the India’s Coastal Security plan particularly installation of Coastal Radar
surveillance network, a chain of automatic identification system, setting up of Maritime Board by
the States needed to be taken off, at earliest.
2.2.4.2 The Ministry has commented that Navy is taking up RFID (Radio Frequency Identification
Device) and MSS (Mobile Satellite Services) as pilot projects for boats less than 20 mtrs. As
regards MSS, the study will start in the monsoon of 2014 in Porbhandar. For RFID, the pilot study
will be conducted in Bombay.
2.2.4.3 As regards Automatic Identification System (Proprietary Transponder) AIS(P) in fishing
vessels of less than 20 meters, Director General of Light House and Light Ships under the Ministry
of Shipping, proposes to conduct pilot study initially using 1000 transponders in the fishing vessels
along the Gujarat coast.
2.2.5 The Committee recommends that pilot projects for RFID, MSS and AIS(P) may be
undertaken so as to ascertain their feasibility for implementation and the same should be
completed at the earliest so that a final view may be taken in this regard. The Committee
of the opinion that such technological interventions are extremely important to improve the
logistics of coastal security apparatus and, therefore, should be put into service as soon as
the feasibility studies prove positive. The issue was also raised during the Study Visit of the
Committee to the Coastal Police Stations in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee is of the
opinion that a separate group is needed by including people who work on this subject in the
aviation sector in a collaborative effort with the Coast Guard and agencies dealing with
satellites and transponders for early implementation.
2.2.6 Seaworthiness of Boats
2.2.6.1 The State Government has also highlighted that Interceptor Boats allotted under Coastal
Security Scheme Phase – I, i.e. 12 Tonnes and 5 Tonnes are not High seaworthy.
2.2.6.2 The Ministry has informed that Goa will be getting 4 (12 Ton) boats under Phase-II of
the Scheme. The specifications for above boats have been finalized in consultation with the coastal
States/UTs. These boats have endurance range of 200 nautical miles and able to withstand
conditions of sea-state 4.

12
2.2.7 The Committee however desires that the concern of the State Government may be
examined again.
2.3 Karnataka
2.3.1 The Karn ataka Coastal Security police covers three districts i.e. Dakshina Kannada, Udupi
and Uttara Kannada Districts. The coastline of Karnataka runs in to nearly 320 kms in length
stretching from Talapadi in Dakshina Kannada Distt. towards Kerala State, Majali in Uttara Kannada
Distt towards Goa State covering territorial water up to 5 NM in sea and 500 meters on shore.
Coastal Security police have 5 police stations in three districts. Mangalore CSP Station in DK Distt.,
Malpe CSP Station in Udupi Distt, Bhatkala CSP Station in Uttara Kannada Dist., Kumta CSP Station
in Uttara Kannada Distt, Karwar CSP Station in Uttara Kannada Distt. All the 5 Coastal Police
Stations of Phase I have been completed and are functioning.
2.3.2 Preference for professional fishermen in appointments and other issues
2.3.2.1 The State Government is of the view that present patrolling scheme has to be further
strengthened by providing full manpower and equipments like Fibre Reinforced Plastic boat etc.
Strength of experienced technical staff for boat patrolling and maintenance is an essential thing.
The government also feels that preference for appointment of technical staff may be given to
professional fishermen community as they have got knowledge about sea and have got skill in
marine activities.
2.3.2.2 The State Government has also informed that in the second phase proposal of another 4
police station ie (1) Hejamadi – Dakshina Kannada District (2) Gangolli – Udupi District (3)
Honnavara – Uttara Kannada District (4) Belekeri Ankola Taluk – Uttara Kannada District may be
taken up considering the above suggestions.
2.3.2.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that Under Phase-II, four Coastal Police
Stations have been sanctioned for Karnataka. While land is in possession for 3 CPSs, land is being
acquired for the 4th CPS. Further, construction work has started in respect of 1 CPS.
2.3.2.4 The State Government has made following suggestions: i) total sanctioned staff to be
filled; ii) technical staff strength be provided fully; and iii) the Police Officers and men working
in CPS may be given benefit of special life insurance scheme.
2.3.2.5 The State Government has also informed that now Coastal Security Police are using jetties
of Fisheries and Port Department to anchor the boats. But some fishermen have raised objections
to it. It is difficult for Coastal Security Police to keep vessels safely.
2.3.4 The Committee feels that it is a ticklish issue. The Ministry of Home Affairs may
discuss with State Government and fishermen and solve the problem.
2.3.5 The State Government has further informed that land for building of police stations and
jetties are required for proposed 4 police stations, and jetties for all the 9 police stations. For this
purpose other departments have been requested and proposals are under consideration. The Coastal
Security Police SP’s office is housed in a rented building at Udupi. 2.80 Acres of land has been
already proposed in Shivalli village Sy. No.433/1 (i) of Udupi in which Coastal Security Police
headquarters and residential buildings for SP, DySP and other officers can be taken up. The State
Government has also informed that it has planned to recruit separate staff for the Coastal Security
Police and train them adequately in sea-faring. It has also assured that issue of Identity Cards to
all fishermen and crews by Fisheries Directorate will be expedited.

13
2.3.6 The Committee notes the assurance of the State Government given to the Ministry
and desires that the recruitment may be completed at the earliest. Issuing of ID cards may
also be completed at the earliest.
2.3.7 Funds for construction of 4 Coastal Police Stations under phase-II and 2 jetties have been
released to State of Karnataka. Manpower for manning boats and Coastal Police Stations are being
provided by States/UTs. The salary and perks and other benefits to the coastal police personnel is
also being provided by the concerned States/UTs.
2.3.8 The Ministry is of the view that the States have to take necessary steps to sensitize the
marine police personnel of their role and responsibility through appropriate training programmes.
The expenditure towards training of marine police is being reimbursed by the Government of India.
It also advised the State Government that the State marine police force must be raised as a
dedicated force without interchangeability with the civil police.
2.3.9 The Committee will discuss common issues relating to training, raising of marine police
in the next chapter.
2.4 Kerala
2.4.1 Provision of Jetties and floating wharfs
2.4.1.1 The State Government has suggested that Jetties may be provided for each of the Coastal
Police Stations sanctioned failing which the life of the boats will be affected and the loss due to
the premature condemnation would be much more than the expenditure for providing jetties and
slipways.
2.4.1.2 It has further suggested that since the identification of space and construction of the
jetties may be a problem in some places providing floating wharfs near the respective Coastal Police
Stations may be considered.
2.4.2 The Ministry has informed that 4 jetties and 20 boats of 12 Ton have been sanctioned
for Kerala under Coastal Security Scheme Phase–II. Decision regarding size, type and design of
jetties has been left to the States/UTs with a ceiling of maximum 
R 50 lakhs for each approved
jetty.
2.4.3 The Committee desires that the suggestion of the State Government for providing
wharfs where constructing Jetties is a problem, may be looked into. Even though the
decision has been left to the State Government, the Ministry may discuss the issue with the
State.
2.5 West Bengal
2.5.1 The State Government has informed that the coastal area in West Bengal extend to 259.50
km and include the Sunderban area bordering Bangladesh. The Coastal area falls within the district
of South 24-Parganas and East Medinipur. At present, the six Police Stations approved under
Phase-I of the Coastal Security Scheme are functioning and maintain regular surveillance and
patrolling along the coast line. These police stations are Fraserganj, Maipith and Sunderban Coastal
Police Stations under South 24-Parganas district, Digha Mohana and Talpatighat Coastal Police
Stations under Purba Medinipur district and Hemnagar Coastal Police Station under North-24
Parganas district. Apart from this, the Government of India has approved for creation of eight new
Coastal Police Stations at Junput, Mandarmoni and Nayachar under East Medinipur district and
Diamond Harbour, Harwood Point, Gangasagar, Gobardhanpur and Jharkhali under South 24-
Parganas district under Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme which is underway.

14
2.5.2 Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
2.5.2.1 The following problems are being faced by the State Government in implementation of the
scheme:–
(a) High cost of POL to run the Interceptor Boats;
(b) There are no petrol pump dealers in the remote area to supply fuel to the extent of
R14 lakhs per month on credit basis for each coastal police station;
(c) Shortage of Technical Manpower to run the boats as response to working in remote
areas has not been upto expectation; and
(d) Paucity of vested land the coastal areas have in initial stages led to problems of
allotment of land and delayed construction.
2.5.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that in phase-II of the Coastal Security
Scheme, West Bengal has been sanctioned 7 interceptor boats (12 Ton capacity) and 4 jetties, 8
four wheelers and 16 motor-cycles to augment the resources for coastal security. The Ministry has
responded that Fuel charges @ R 5 lakhs per boat per month for 12 tonne boat and R 4 lakhs
per boat per month for 5 tonne boats are reimbursed by MHA. It has further stated that manpower
for manning boats and coastal Police Stations is being provided by States/UTs. MHA has advised
to recruit retired Navy and Coast Guard personnel for this purpose. The Central Government has
proposed to establish Marine Police Training Institute, one each on the East and West coast for
training marine police personnel.
2.5.4 The Committee is dissatisfied by the replies given by the Ministry of Home affairs
regarding the issues of inadequate technical manpower, maintenance of equipments and
high cost of running the interceptor boats. Several States/UTs have similar complaints which
need to be seriously looked into by the Central government. The Ministry may examine the
concern of the State Government on the high cost of POL. The Committee will deal with
technical manpower and maintenance issues in the next chapter.
2.6 Odisha
2.6.1 The State Government has informed that Odisha State has a coastline of 485 kms. Various
strategic installations are located on the coast such as Gopalpur Port, IRE, Matikhal and INS,
Chilka under Ganjam district, Paradip Port, proposed POSCO project and Oil Refinery Project
under Jagatsinghpur district, Dhamara Port, Wheeler Island (DRDO installation) in bhadrak District,
ITR and P&EE, Chandipur in Balasore district. In view of lack of water depth in river Hugli,
Kolkata Port and its subsidiary port at Haldia are not able to handle large ships. Already there are
three major ports in Odisha and eight ports are going to be set up. After completion of these ports,
there would be traffic in excess of 200 million tones. In order to have a better watch on the
onshore and offshore economic activities, a dedicated Marine Policing System is required in Odisha.
In the first phase of Coastal Security Scheme, as many as 5 Marine Police Stations (MPS) have
been operationalised and in the 2nd phase additional 13 Marine Police Stations are in process of
being set up.
2.6.2 The State Government has further stated that the five Marine Police Stations in Odisha
are patrolling the sea line. Each Marine Police Station has been provided with 22 Ex-Navy personnel
to operate the boats. Patrolling is being taken up in a continuous manner in conjunction with Coast
Guard. Recently Government has made a provision for a separate head of account for provision
of funds from State Police Budget for Marine Police Unit. As far as patrolling in the shallow water
is concerned, it would be more economical and strategically productive to use hired local boats.

15
The State Government felt that one 12 Ton boat is adequate to meet the requirements of
interception and follow up of suspect boats. The 5 Ton boats which are available with Marine
Police Stations are not suitable for regular use in the adverse sea condition. In view of the above
it would be a better strategy to hire locally available boats (2 per Marine Police Station) which will
facilitate in carrying out continuous preventive watch in shallow waters for checking fishing boats
and other small crafts.
2.6.3 According to the State Government, at present, the Coastal Security System is monitored
in the intelligence Department with District SP being in charge of the Marine Police Stations.
Marine Police is keeping watch on infiltration of foreign boats, human trafficking, trade between
Bangladesh and India through sea route and Bangladeshi refugees. Information from the coastal
villages through Marine Police System will help in assessing the specific threat that may be
emanating and take corrective measures. The State Government has further informed that
maintenance of coastal security from the infrastructural point has two major drawbacks: one is the
maintenance of sophisticated boats and second is non-availability of adequate jetty facility for
security and berthing of the boats. Apart from the above, certain additional infrastructural facilities
are required to put in place for overall improvement of the coastal security plan for Odisha.
2.6.4 The State Government has informed that the staff of Marine Police is inadequate. The
boats are run by Ex-Navy personnel. There are no training facilities to upgrade the skill of Marine
Police personnel. The total staff strength and the no. of Marine Police Stations i.e.18 are inadequate
to patrol 485 kms of coastline. The Central assistance given for construction of Marine Police
Station is 33 lakh which is inadequate for the construction of a Police Station building. This
necessitates opening of 7 Out Posts with 20 men barracks where the boats can be berthed.
Similarly for the Marine Police Stations there is requirement of 12 (50 men) barracks for the
personnel. As number of jetties allotted to Odisha is not adequate, there is requirement of 8
additional jetties.
2.6.5 The Union Ministry of Home Affairs has clarified that AMC for maintenance of boats of
Odisha has been entrusted to Garden Reach Shipbuilders Engineers Limited (GRSE), Kolkata.
Timeline for attending maintenance of boats has also been fixed in the AMC.
2.6.6 A provision of 5 jetties, 13 Coastal Police Stations, 26 boats (12 Ton), 13 four wheelers
and 26 two wheelers has been made for State of Odisha under Coastal Security scheme
Phase-II. Necessary funds for starting the above work has already been released to State of
Odisha. MHA is taking action to procure the boats centrally and distribute the same to coastal
States/UTs.
2.6.7 The Ministry has also replied that under the Coastal Security Scheme, necessary training
is imparted to State Marine police personnel through Coast Guard. The Government of India
reimburses the entire training expenditure. It is also proposed to establish one Marine Police
Training Institute on the East Coast for meeting the training requirements of the coastal States/UTs
on East Coast.
2.6.8 It was further informed that under the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II), funds @
R48
lakhs and R50 lakhs is provided to the coastal States/UTs for construction of one coastal police
station and jetty respectively. In the case of Odisha, 13 CPSs and 5 jetties have been sanctioned
and a total of 
R 232.22 lakhs has so far been released for construction of CPSs and jetties. So
far, none of the States has raised any issue regarding the funds allocated for construction of CPSs.
The balance amount to the extent of 
R952.38 lakhs would be released on receipt of utilization
certificates in respect of the previous release.
2.6.9 The Committee recommends that the requirement of manpower, coastal police
stations and jetties may be reassessed along with the realistic requirement of funds to be

16
provided for establishment thereof. The issues relating to manpower, training and
maintenance will be dealt in the next chapter.
Other issues raised by the State
2.6.10 Land from Paradeep Port
2.6.10.1 The State Government has complained that despite instructions of Central Government,
the Shipping Ministry has not given its consent for allotment of one acre of land inside Paradip
Port for setting up of Marine Police Station. The proposal of S.P., Jagatsinghpur for earmarking
the identified land for construction of Police Station has been approved by the Board of Trust of
Paradeep Port Trust, but is pending at Ministry level.
2.6.10.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that it has taken up the matter for allotment of
land for Paradip Coastal Police Station with M/o Shipping. The Ministry of Shipping has framed
“Land Policy Guidelines on Lease of Port land” which is under consideration of the Government
for approval.
2.6.11 The Committee recommends that the land for setting up of Marine Police Station
inside Paradip Port may be provided at the earliest.
2.6.12 Release of Funds
2.6.12.1 The State Government has also highlighted that due to non-availability of adequate berthing
facility and the fact that there is heavy fluctuation in tide in estuaries, there is threat of damage
to Marine Police boats. It has requested that funds earmarked for construction of 5 approved jetties
@ Rs.50 lakhs per jetty may be allotted immediately for taking up construction.
2.6.12.2 Ministry of Home Affairs has replied that funds for construction of jetties @ 
R 50 lakhs
per jetty has been approved and part installment of fund has been released for starting the
construction work. Further releases will be made on submission of utilization certificates for the
earlier releases.
2.6.13 The Committee recommends that the State Government must submit the
utilization certificates to the Central Government so that further funds could be released
for construction of jetties.
2.6.14 Repairing Centre at Paradeep
2.6.14.1 The State Government has further observed that to keep the technologically advanced
Marine Police boats in working conditions GRSE, Kolkata has been directed by the Ministry of
Home Affairs for setting up of a repairing centre at Paradip. Despite the fact that accommodation
has been provided at Paradip, the regional repairing centre has not been made fully operational.
2.6.14.2 The Ministry has replied that GRSE has made arrangements for providing services to all
the boats through their authorized agency at Paradip. Further, emergency and critical defects are
attended on priority by deputing Technicians from GRSE, Kolkata.
2.6.15 The Committee desires that the Ministry may discuss the matter with the State
Government to resolve the issue.
2.6.16 The State Government has also informed that it has already sanctioned 405 posts of
Police Personnel and 110 technical posts for five Marine Police Stations that had been made to the
Coast Guard authorities, New Delhi to provide a Commandant level officer to help in better
implementation of the coastal security scheme and for drawing up of SOP’s for the Phase-II. This

17
post has been created in the rank for AIG . Unless coastal security system is fully implemented, it
would be difficult to provide adequate security to the existing infrastructural projects and proposed
projects in future.
2.6.17 The Ministry has replied that the Coast Guard has already brought out SOPs for all the
coastal States/UTs which are being implemented in the States/UTs.
2.6.18 The Committee feels that the State Government by now must have got the
information. However, Ministry of Home Affairs may discuss the matter with Coast guard
and the State Government.
2.7 Andhra Pradesh
2.7.1 The State Government has informed that for all existing Coastal Security Police (CSPs),
full sanctioned strength shall be maintained by filling up all vacancies in order to do effective
Coastal Policing. Fresh Recruitment to fill up existing vacancies of Technical Crew Members and
also for Newly Sanctioned CSPs has to be conducted by forming a selection committee. Also
tenure of crew shall be enhanced from present 1 year to at least 3 years to give them security
of tenure. A letter is being addressed to DGP, AP in this regard. It has also suggested that for
effective monitoring of Boat patrolling, it is essential to have a GPS tracking system of boats.
Further, Transponders that are being fitted on fishing boats by DG Shipping may also be fitted to
Coastal Security Fast Interceptor Boats for tracking and co-ordination.
2.7.2 The Ministry has replied that Manpower for manning boats and Coastal Police Stations is
to be provided by the concerned State/UT. MHA has advised to recruit retired Navy and Coast
Guard personnel for this purpose.It has further informed that all phase-I boats and proposed phase-
II boats, except 5 Ton phase-I boats, have GPS system fitted in them. Besides, all boats/vessels
provided by MHA will be fitted with AIS (transponders) after finalization of technology which is
currently under pilot-study by Ministry of Shipping.
2.7.3 During the visit to Andhra Pradesh on 7
th November, 2012, the Inspector General of
Police, Coastal Security Police, Andhra Pradesh flagged the following issues immediate attention:–
(i) Internal Security Challenges Group (Task Force to examine issues, connected with
National Security and Left Wing Extremism, Terrorism and social conflicts issues.
Etc.,) recommended an incentive scheme i.e. Sea Duty Allowance of 50% on pay
for Marine Police Personnel as the duties involve risk at the sea and since sea
patrolling is a tough job. This will motivate Police Personnel to work in Marine
Police Stations as presently there is very poor response in all ranks to work in
Marine Police Stations. Already Government of Karnataka had sanctioned 50% on
basic pay as sea risk allowance to its Coastal Security Personnel.
(ii) The above Committee also recommended that Police Personnel who served for 3
years in Police Department having experience in policing skills, and aged below 30
years should be taken on deputation for 5 years to work in Marine Police Wing.
(iii) As per G.O. Ms No. 138 dated 31
st May, 2011, the Coastal Security Police/Marine
Police has been placed on par with Government Railway Police i.e. an independent
Marine Police Wing to work under the control of IGP, Marine Police (Coastal
Security), VSP. This needs to be implemented immediately by fixing quota from
each district/APSP/Battalion for deputation to Coastal Security Police.
(iv) In order to run the organization as a deputation unit as per G.O. Ms. No 138 dated
31st May, 2011, there is an immediate need to strengthen the office with sufficient
Ministerial Staff at all levels. At least 1 Superintendent, 2 Senior Assistants, 6

18
typists are necessary to run the organization. Presently only 4 typists for Coastal
Security/Marine Police Headquarters have been sanctioned under G .O. Ms No. 353
which is grossly inadequate. Hence the above posts need to be sanctioned. Pending
this 1 Superintendent and 2 Senior Assistants may be attached to Coastal Security/
Marine Police Headquarters from Chief Office/APSP/L&O units.
(v) For all existing CSPs, full sanctioned strength shall be maintained by filling up all
vacancies in order to do effective Coastal Policing.
(vi) Fresh Recruitment to fill up existing vacancies of Techinical Crew Members and
also for Newly Sanctioned CSPs has to be conducted by forming a selection
Committee. Also tenure of crew shall be enhanced from present 1 year to 5 years
to give them security of tenure as is the case in some States. A letter is being
addressed to DGP, AP in this regard.
(vii) While patrolling in sea, the crew members require to carry readymade food with
them so as to enable them to patrol the Coast for long hours. Diet charges are
allotted under the budget provision for Coastal Security Police. The same shall be
used for the above purpose.
(viii) There are 555 villages in the Coast line of Andhra Pradesh. To involve local
fishermen in intelligence collection, there is a need to recruit at least one SPO from
every fishermen village in the coast line i.e. 508 SPOs @ 
R3,000/- for Police/VSP/
2011 dated 23rd December, 2011 was submitted to the Government but it has been
rejected.
(ix) The proposal of Director Police communications vide C.No. 1434/DSPC - INST/
Marine Police/2012 dated 27th February, 2012 is to be implemented for effective
communication on the Coast Line.
(x) For effective monitoring of Boat Patrolling. It is essential to have a GPS traking
system of boats.
(xi) Transponders that are being fitted on fishing boats by DG shipping may also be
fitted to Coastal Security Fast Interceptor Boats for tracking and co-ordinate.
2.7.4 The Committee recommends that the pilot-study regarding fitting AIS
(transponders) may be completed in a time bound manner so that the findings of the same
may be implemented thereon.
2.7.5 Other issues flagged by the State Government relate to manpower and related
matters. The issues relating to manpower recruitment training etc. are dealt in the next
chapter. However, the Committee recommends that the specific issues raised by the State
Government of Andhra Pradesh may be appropriately addressed. Some issues also concern
other States as well and a careful examination of the issues is necessary.
2.8 Tamil Nadu
2.8.1 The State Government has raised the issue of Berthing Charges. Two Fast Interceptor Boats
in Chennai Harbour and two Fast Interceptor Boats in Tuticorin Old Harbour have been berthed for
patrolling in these areas. But, the port authorities have raised “Berthing Charges”, at the rate of
R1.2 lakhs per boat. This is bound to affect smooth interaction between the Coastal Security
Scheme Group and the Port Authorities. The State Government has desired that these berthing
charges be waived. The issue was also raised during the visit of the Committee from 14
th to 15 th
June, 2012.

19
2.8.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has replied that M/o Shipping for major ports and Secretary
for minor ports have been advised to allot berthing place to security related vessels on priority
in the meeting of the National Committee on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security
against Threats from Sea (NCSMCS) held under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on
6
th September, 2013.
2.8.3 Further, a provision of 12 Jetties has been made for Tamil Nadu under Coastal Security
Scheme Phase-II, funds for which have also been released. In the Steering Committee meeting held
on 26.9.2013, all the coastal States/UTs, including Tamil Nadu Government have been requested to
start the construction of jetties, at the earliest.
2.8.4 The Committee hopes that the issues related to berthing of boats would be resolved
as a result of measures undertaken by the Ministry. The Ministry may review the matter
on a regular basis.
2.8.5 During its visit to Tamil Nadu from 14
th to 15 th June, 2012, The Committee discussed the
subject with the representatives of the State Government. The State Government of Tamil Nadu
informed the Committee that it had established the Coastal Security Group in 1994 to secure the
Coastal Borders. It submitted a note on coastal security containing the following information:-
2.8.5.1 Coastal Security Group, CID
(a) The Coastal Security Group, CID, was formed by the Government of Tamil Nadu
on 27 th June, 1994 with the following objective:
(i) Prevention of smuggling of fuel and medicines and other essential
commodities from the Tamil Nadu Coast to Sri Lanka.
(ii) Prevention of intrusion of militants into Tamil Nadu.
(iii) Prevention of collusion between fishermen and militants.
(b) This unit is functioning under an Additional Director General of Police, who is
assisted by an Inspector General of Police at Chennai and a Superintendent of
Police at Ramanathapuram.
(c) Coastal Security Group has Zonal Offies at (1) Chennai (2) Nagapttinam
(3) Vedaranyam (4) Pattukottai (5) Ramanathapuram (6) Muthupet (7) Pattukottai
(8) Pudukkottai (9) Rameshwaram (10) Tuticorin and (11) Kanniyakumari
(d) 60 check posts were sanctioned in 1994 which are functioning all along the
Coastline of Tamil Nadu from Thiruvallur to Kanniyakumari. The check posts are
manned by armed TSP personnel.
(e) Patrol Boats: Eight Rigid Inflatable Boats and six Gemini Boats were supplied in
2005-06 to Marine Police Stations for patrolling purpose. They were supplied under
Modernization of Police Force Scheme.
2.8.5.2 The total outlay for Phase-I was 44.08 crores and the entire sanctioned amount was
utilized. Construction of all 12 sanctioned Marine Police Stations has been completed. However,
construction of 5 out posts and 7 Additional check posts was yet to be completed out of 12 and
40 sanctioned respectively. Twelve Nos. of 12 Tone and twelve Nos. of 5 Tone Fast Interceptor
Boats were supplied by Government of India under coastal security scheme Phase-I. Engineers,
Kolkotta supplied these boats. The boats are fitted with LMG, and the patrol teams are provided
with INSAS Rifle and Pistol. The Fast Interceptor Boats are operated by Technical Staff who are
the Ex-petty Officers of Indian Navy 21 technical staff had been recruited out of 72 sanctioned
posts.

20
2.8.5.3 Government of India have approved the proposal for 30 new Marine Police Stations, 20
numbers of 12 Tone Boats, 13 Jetties with 30 Jeeps and 60 Motorcycles under Phase-II of Coastal
Security Scheme. The total financial outlay for Tamil Nadu is R107.36 crores of which
R9.452 crores was released. Twenty four All Terrain Vehicles (ATV) had also been sanctioned by
the Government of Tamil Nadu with an expenditure of R1.56 crores.
2.8.5.4 A T oll Free Number, “1093” has been activated at the Control Room, Coastal Security
Group, Head Quarters, Chennai and it has been displayed on every boat and on important buildings
in Coastal areas.
2.8.5.5 Coastal Security Exercises are conducted once in six months to identify deficiencies and
loopholes in the security preparedness along the Coast. Operation Barricade was conducted in
July, 2009 in Co-ordination with Coast Guard/Navy. Operation Rakshak was organized in
December, 2009 while Operation Hamla was tested in August, 2010 and again from 22
nd June, 2011
to 24 th June, 2011. Another Operation Hamla was held on 28 th and 29 th March, 2012.
2.8.5.6 The State Government also informed that 192 actionable intelligence reports were
generated and passed on in 2011. This year so far 19 intelligence reports were generated.
2.8.5.7 The State Government of Tamil Nadu also raised some issues for attention of the
Committee:–
(i) Tardy maintenance work of Fast Interceptors Boats by GRSE:
(ii) Earmarking of land by Port Authorities for setting up Coastal Police Stations at
Chennai, Tuticorin and Ennore. The Marine Police Stations had been proposed under
Phase-II of Coastal Security Scheme. The difficulties faced in acquiring land in
these Ports are discussed below:
1. Chennai Port:
To establish a Marine Police Station at Chennai harbor in Phase-II of Coastal
Security Scheme, a request to the Port Trust was made to allot 50 cents of
land within the port premises on 27th April, 2011. However, the Chennai Port
Trust did not respond to the request. Hence, an alternative site of State
Revenue Department outside Chennai harbor area has been indentified and the
process of acquiring it initially initiated.
2. Tuticorin Port
A piece of 58.77 of land in Survey No. 278 in Tuticorin Port area belonging
to VOC Port Trust was indentified for the construction of Marine Police
Station under Phase-II of Coastal Security Scheme. The Port Authorities have
agreed to allot the land on long term lease basis.
3. Ennnore Port
It is proposed to establish a Marine Police Station in the vicinity of Ennore
Port for which land to an extent of 50 cents is required Port authorities are
being addressed to allot land.
2.8.5.8 Solution:It will be useful if Port Authorities could lease cut land on nominal rent basis.
2.8.6 The State Government opined that there must be a system of encouraging frequent
interaction with the common people living in the border areas and coastal areas, if any intelligence

21
of substance and merit is to be collected. For this, a scheme of Economic incentive should be
expanded. The Central Government can provide funds for this scheme through the State
Intelligence Agencies.
2.8.7 The Committee recommends that the necessary land allocation may be done at the
earliest so that the marine police station could be established. It further recommends that
an all out effort should be made to resolve all such issues within a stipulated time period.
It also urges the Port Authorities to look into the suggestion of providing cut land at
nominal rent on lease. The Committee also urges the concerned agencies to put in place
a system for frequent interaction with common people of coastal areas. Such an exercise
should be conducted in the local dialect as far as possible so that intelligence gathering
could be enriched further.
2.9 Daman and Diu
2.9.1 There are five Coastal villages in Daman and three Coastal Villages in Diu. However, the
Territory does not have any classified major or minor port. The Union Territory of Daman and Diu
has one landing point each located at Nani Daman and Ghoghla respectively. These can be
classified as small jetties and are being used for anchoring of fishing boats.
2.9.2 The State Government has informed that all the boats of the UT of Daman and Diu are
operational and carry out patrolling daily for 4 to 5 hours for Daman and 3 to 4 hours daily for
Diu except 5T boat of Daman as the same is under repair by GSL, Goa. Daily patrolling is being
carried out at the rate of 4 to 5 hours daily which in turn cumulatively comes to 120 to 150 hours
per month for Daman whereas for Diu it comes to 90 to 120 month. Patrolling along the coast
of Daman is carried out during the high tide only due to geographical conditions of the coastline
of Daman.
2.9.3 The Ministry has informed that Goa Shipyard Ltd. (GSL) has set up four service centres
which are operating at Bhavnagar, Veraval, Jamnagar and Porbander to provide uninterrupted
service support for boats patrolling in entire Gujarat and UT of Daman and Diu. These centres are
equipped with trained manpower consisting of 8 personnel for providing day to day service support
to the boats. In addition, the services of technicians posted in Maharashtra are also extended in
the close vicinity of Gujarat and Daman and Diu.
2.9.4 Problem faced in maintaining Coastal Security
2.9.4.1 Presently suitable jetties with electrical supply, fuel supply, and fresh water supply are not
available in both the districts of UT of Daman and Diu. However, in Coastal Security Scheme
(CSS) Phase-II construction of two jetties each at Daman and Diu have been sanctioned by the
Ministry of Home Affairs for which the tendering is in process. Patrolling along the coast of
Daman is carried out during the high tide only due to geographical condition of the area of Daman.
Further, proper dredger of channel/navigational marking to navigate the coastal boats is not
available.
2.9.4.2 The UT Government has informed that Marine Police of UT of Daman and Diu do not
have local staff but recruitment rules (R.R.) are being revised to throw open recruitment of
Sukhani level to local experienced Tandels. The Ministry has replied that under the Coastal Security
Scheme (Phase-II), U.T. of Daman and Diu has been sanctioned 2 coastal police stations and
2 jetties. Dredging of channel is a day-to-day maintenance process and is the responsibility of the
UT Administration. Under the Scheme, the manpower for the coastal police stations has to be
provided by the concerned coastal State/UTs.

22
2.9.5 The effort on the part of the UT Administration to recruit local fishermen for the
marine police is laudable and will contribute for the improved patrolling and surveillance
along the coast of Daman and Diu. The Committee desires that the local people so recruited
for Marine Police may be given sufficient training.
2.9.6 It was further observed that Rocky coastline exists in Diu district. Hence, it is not easy
to penetrate from sea side. Besides, it has also highlighted that Diu is close to Pakistan and many
fishermen of Diu regularly get captured by Pakistani authorities.
2.9.7 The Committee desires that the issue of Diu fishermen being captured by Pakistan
authorities may be addressed appropriately.
2.10 Lakshadweep
2.10.1 Extent of coastal areas in the UT is 132 kilometres.The State Government has informed
that patrolling jurisdiction of the 4 Coastal Police Stations namely Minicoy, Androth, Kavaratti and
Kiltan, sanctioned in the 1st Phase of the Scheme extend to 5 to 12 nautical miles from the base
line of the Islands and those uninhabited Islands/fishing grounds /sand banks/reefs within the
jurisdiction of the 4 Islands. In the 1st Phase the U.T. Administration has been allotted two 12 Ton
and four 5 Ton Interceptor boats. The above boats are utilized for patrolling purposes. Besides, the
fishermen in all the Islands are sensitized and advised to keep vigil about presence of unidentified/
alien boats, dhows, ships etc within our waters and pass over information by quickest means to
the concerned Police Stations or to the toll free telephone number 1093 provided at all 4 Coastal
Police Stations.
2.10.2 The UT has further elaborated that implementation of Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II)
is currently under progress. Under Phase-II of the Scheme, Lakshadweep has been sanctioned
3 Coastal Police Stations, 2 jetties, 6 (12 Ton) boats, 12 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIBs) and 3 four-
wheelers and 6 two-wheelers. Further, a sum of R15 lakh per coastal police station is also provided
for purchase of equipments, computer systems and furniture.
2.10.3 The UT Government has informed that the interceptor boats particularly 5 Ton Interceptor
boats require high octane petrol as fuel and as the consumption rate is very high the operational
cost is highly expensive.
2.10.4 The Ministry has further informed that under Phase-II of the Scheme, Lakshadweep will
be provided with 6 (12 Ton) boats. These boats have endurance range of 200 nautical miles and
able to withstand conditions of sea-state 4. Further, 12 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIBs) are also being
provided.
2.10.5 The UT Government has also stated the 5 Ton and 12 Ton boats are not suitable for
patrolling during Monsoon. Besides during the Monsoon in some of the islands where there is no
lagoon it is not possible to keep boats afloat inside because of the heavy southern westerly wind
and as the lagoon entrances are not negotiable due to heavy waves. As such, patrolling in Island
waters during the Monsoon needs to be exclusively conducted by Coast Guard/Navy and the local
Coastal Police may be entrusted with shore watch system from Watch Towers established in each
Island at vantage points in the coastal area.
2.10.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs may prepare guidelines for off season activities of
Marine Police such as in Monsoon. This may apply to other States too. Ministry of Home
Affairs may carefully examine the issue.
2.10.7 The Ministry has explained that Patrolling and surveillance programme are finalized at local
level by Marine Police, Coast Guard and Navy, as per requirement.

23
2.10.8 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with the UT
Government in finalizing surveillance programme. In no circumstance can vacuum be
allowed to exist in Coastal policing as it can have severe consequences for internal security.
2.11 Puducherry
2.11.1 U.T. of Puducherry comprises of four enclaves viz. Puducherry, Karaikal, Mahe and
Yanam. The coastal areas of these four enclaves are: Puducherry (35 kms.); Karaikal (21 kms.);
Mahe (1.5 kms.) and Yanam (no coastal area) only back waters of Godavari river of about 12 kms.
2.11.2 The UT Adminstration has informed that under Phase–I of the Scheme, MHA has
sanctioned one Coastal Police Station at Karaikal with 3 interceptor boats. The Coastal Police
Station has been functioning since 19.11.2006. These boats were received in 2009. Out of these
3 boats, 2 boats are berthed and operated at Karaikal and one boat is berthed and operated at
Puducherry to look after the coastal areas of Puducherry.
2.11.3 Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
2.11.3.1 The UT Government has informed that under Phase I of the Coastal Security Scheme,
MHA had approved 48 posts which include 23 technical, 23 non-technical (Police personnel) and
2 ministerial staff. Out of this 23 technical staff, only 3 Luscar PCs have been recruited and the
remaining technical staff are yet to be recruited for want of Recruitment Rules. For the past
2 years, the boats are being operated and maintained by only 2 Coxswain Syrangers and 3 Luscar
PCs with the help of other executive staff (Police personnel). It is difficult to perform regular
sorties due to shortage of boat crews and delay in getting the repairs rectified by GRSE in case
of a defect after adopting all procedures.
2.11.3.2 The Ministry has replied that as per the Coastal Security Scheme, manpower for manning
boats and Coastal Police Station are to be provided by the concerned State/UT. Ministry of Home
Affairs has approved the creation of 169 posts of different categories (76 Techncial and 93
Executive Posts) for the Coastal Police Stations in Puducherry in July, 2013. Recruitment is to be
done by the UT Administration.
2.11.3.3 The UT Government has informed that MHA has suggested to recruit Ex-Navy/Coast
Guard personnel as boat crews. It seems that the ex-navy/coast guard personnel are offered heavy
pay and therefore absorbed in private shipping companies after their completion of 15 years of
service in Indian Navy or Coast Guard. Therefore, these ex-Navy/Coast Guard personnel expect
more pay and allowances at par with other shipping companies. Further as there is no promotion
aspect once they are absorbed as boat crew, there is reluctance shown towards joining the Coastal
Security groups in the U.T. of Puducherry.
2.11.4 The Committee is disappointed to note that out of 23 technical posts approved in
CSS phase I, only 3 have been filled and the others could not be filled for want of
recruitment rules. Further, 76 technical posts have also been approved under phase II of
the scheme. In view of the Committee, this is a very typical case of sorry state of affairs.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Recruitment Rules may be
framed at the earliest so that the sanctioned technical and also non-technical posts may be
filled at the earliest to deal with shortage of technical man power. The Committee also
agrees with the UT Government that if the incentive structure provided to the employees
is not attractive enough, it would be difficult to recruit and retain capable people needed
for the purpose. The Committee is therefore not satisfied with the routine reply of the
Ministry and desires that it be more pro-active in recruiting right people so that the Coastal
Security scheme does not remain merely on paper.

24
2.11.5 The UT Government has further informed that while sanctioning the technical posts under
Phase-I of the Scheme, the designations of boat crews were Coxswain Syranger, Engineer Driver,
VHF Operator, Syrang and the Luscar PCs. In the meantime, MHA had re-designated these
technical posts as Skipper Mate, Boat mechanic, Radio Operator and Deckhandlers and restructured
the pay scales. Accordingly, modifications and framing of recruitment rules for the re-designated
posts have been sought for from the Government which is yet to be finalized. Therefore, uniform
system of designation of technical posts on a boat may be prescribed for all the Coastal States/
UTs.
2.11.6 The Ministry has replied that police being a State subject, a ‘uniform’ designation of
posts/technical posts may not be feasible and it is left to the discretion of the individual States/
UTs to adopt particular designation as suitable to them.
2.11.7 The Committee desires that the Ministry may discuss with all States/UTs and take
a decision in the matter.
The UT Government has suggested the following strategy to address the problems:
1. Adequate strength of boat crew (Technical staff) to be sanctioned for each Coastal
Police Station as per the guidelines of MHA, New Delhi to maintain regular sea sorties
to the expectation of MHA with 5 set of crews for each Coastal Police Station.
2. To sanction as per the strength suggested in SOP by BPR&D, New Delhi and recruit
executive staff (Police Officers and men) exclusively for Coastal Security with
adequate training in sea fare activities.
3. To announce sea faring allowances to the Coastal security personnel for active
participation.
4. To fix promotion facilities for the boat crews.
5. Setting up of a workshop by the supplier of the boat to attend to the faults
immediately for the Coastal Police Stations of U.T. of Puducherry covering the four
enclaves viz., Puducherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam.
2.11.8 All the above suggestions apply to all the coastal States/UTs. The Ministry needs to
adopt a common approach on the above suggestions. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry may look into the above suggestions of the UT Government to find out their
feasibility for implementation.
2.12 Andaman and Nicobar Administration
2.12.1 The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are situated in the Bay of Bengal at a distance of 1200
km from the mainland. These Islands are spread over an area of 8249 sq.km. The distance from
the North Point (Landfall Island) to the South (Indira Point Great Nicobar Island) is about 800 km.
with a vast coastline of 1,962 km. This group comprises of 572 islands of which only 38 are
inhabited.
2.12.2 A&N Islands are strategically very important for the country as these are situated far off
from the mainland and much closed to the countries of South East Asia. Myanmarese Territory
(Coco Island) is only 45 km. away from the Northern most point of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
and Indonesia is only 160 km away from Campbell Bay which is the Southernmost point of A&N
Islands.
2.12.3 The strength of the Marine Police, in so far as these Islands are concerned, lies
exclusively in the fact that the Coastal Police Stations are not different from the existing regular

25
police stations. This implies that ground intelligence and vital contacts with the sea faring sections
of the society already exist and thus the preparedness to handle any marine threat which has an
element of local cooperation or connivance is better as compared to other agencies which are
involved in Coastal Security.
2.12.4 Owing to its proximity to Myanmar, Thailand, Indonesia, a large number of foreigners
intrude into Indian territory for poaching of Marine resources. International sea passage (Malacca
Strait) is also not very far from our coastline at Southern tip of the Islands, which makes the
islands strategically very important. Further, a large number of islands are uninhabited and scattered
over a large area in Andaman and Nicobar archipelago, easily accessible by anti-national elements.
Bangladeshi Nationals often intrude into these Islands through sea route. A number of Bangladeshis
have been arrested recently in the islands and deported.
2.12.5 These Islands also have settlers from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Myanmar and possibility
of these settlers being used by elements from their erstwhile countries cannot be ruled out. The
UT Government is of the view that left out LTTE cadre may look for safe havens in the near
vicinity and may take advantage of our uninhabited Islands for their temporary hideouts. The local
Tamil population in the Islands, like other parts of the country, is also sympathetic to the cause
of Sri Lankan Tamils. Further, sympathy of Srilankan Tamil refugees who were brought and settled
in these islands during 1960’s and 70’s may be easily gained for abetting, aiding and assisting the
LTTE outfit in providing temporary shelters under the thick forest covers in the islands.
2.12.6 In fact the geographical location/conditions make these islands an ideal place for providing
“safe havens” for terrorist groups for jungle warfare training and even dumping grounds for arms
and ammunition.
2.12.7 In A&N Islands the Commander –in-chief, A N Command has been designated as C-in-C
Coastal Defence. Accordingly, in A&N Islands, the Indian Navy takes care of air and sea
surveillance in high sea and beyond Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of India and also have the
concurrent jurisdiction of A&N Police i.e. from 0-12 Nautical miles. However, the responsibility of
safeguarding the coastline upto 12 Nautical miles lies with the A&N Police.
2.12.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs has provided ten 12 Ton Fast Interceptor Boats and
sanctioned 40 vehicles and 186 posts for the UT of A&N Islands CSS (Phase-I), accordingly the
ten 12 Ton fast interceptor boats have been deployed at the strategic location in A&N Islands along
with the sanctioned manpower and the vehicles have also been deployed for coastal surveillance.
No new coastal police station has been sanctioned for the U.T., since all the existing 21 out of
22 police stations are located in coastal areas and deemed to be coastal police stations.
2.12.9 Fishermen Watch Groups have been constituted in the jurisdiction of each Coastal Police
Stations and regular interaction and meetings are being held for information –sharing and sensitizing
fisherman. A Coastal Security Toll free number 1093 has been activated for receiving sensitive
information related to coastal security.
2.12.10 For the purpose of patrolling in shallow water and creeks, the UT Government has
procured and positioned wooden dinghies and Rigid Inflatable Boats. Intelligence sharing meeting
are held on a monthly basis with all security agencies such as A&N Command, Coast Guard,
Forest, Fisheries and IB officials for up-dating information and for taking action. On
apprehension of foreign intruders, joint interrogation are held for collection of information to
ascertain the modus operandi. For operational readiness, Joint Exercise are organized twice in a
year for validation of SOPs and ascertaining lacunae for further recommendations and
strengthening of the coastal security mechanism. Till date, six such Joint Exercises have been
conducted in the A&N Islands.

26
2.12.11 In order to maintain surveillance in remote far flung islands, the A&N Command is
conducting Jan Pehchan patrol exercise twice in a month wherein the Police personnel are deployed
for capacity building.
2.12.12 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that under the Coastal Security Scheme
(Phase-(II), A&N Islands have been sanctioned 20 coastal police stations (CPSs), 10 Marine Police
Operational Centres (MPOCs) and 10 jetties for strengthening the coastal security set up. In
addition, 20 four-wheelers and 20 motor-cycles have also been sanctioned. Assistance of R15 lakh
per CPS has also been given towards purchase of equipments, computer systems etc. Ministry of
Home Affairs has already released the entire eligible amount of R27.02 crores for implementation
of the above components.
2.12.13 Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
2.12.13.1 The UT Government has informed that A&N Islands have peculiar geographical
locations and conditions which make it vulnerable to serious threats from illegal cross-border
activities by various foreign elements. The A&N Islands consist of deep tropical jungles and remote
islands, separated by miles of deep sea from each other. The foreign intruders often go deep into
the creeks and jungles to take shelter. In such a scenario, in the absence of adequate infrastructure
for apprehension of foreign intruders makes it a daunting task.
2.12.13.2 The UT Government has further informed that apart from this, the fast interceptor boats
have limitations in terms of limited endurance (can ply a maximum of four hours at one go),
frequent refueling (limited fuel tank capacity) and have no capability to traverse high seas (cannot
withstand sea swell of 2 mtrs due to inadequate draft and height of the boat). The primary
weakness of the Marine Police is infrastructural, both operational and auxiliary. As on date the
marine police does not have the capability to undertake operations beyond 5 nautical miles from
the coastline. Even this is subject to weather conditions. Fuel supply is yet to be institutionalized,
inventory management is rudimentary and skilled manpower is grossly inadequate. The opportunity
created by Coastal Security Scheme is primarily aimed at making up for the weaknesses. Once that
is done, the marine police shall emerge from the shadows of the Navy and the Coast Guard and
shall actually become an active and able partner of these agencies in security of our maritime
frontiers.
2.12.13.3 The UT Government has stated that other factors which hampers the operation of boats
are absence of adequate funds for procurement of HSD for boats and maintenance is also a prime
factor, since the procurement of spare by the maintenance vendor takes a significant time in
rectifying defects.
2.12.13.4 In order to tackle the same the UT Government has prepared a comprehensive security
plan wherein it has proposed for setting up ten Marine Operational Centres in A&N Islands at prime
locations and proposed induction of ten large vessels. The Marine Operational Centres will be the
nerve centres for Coastal Security of A&N Islands. The large vessels shall conduct patrolling in
and round remote islands and at high sea. The FIBs and small dinghies and RIBs shall maintain
surveillance in creeks and shallow waters for detection and apprehension of foreign nationals.
2.12.13.5 The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that keeping in view the special and specific
requirements of A&N Islands, 10 large vessels of C143 Class, 23 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIB) and
10 Marine Police Operational Centres (MPOCs) have been sanctioned under Coastal Security
Scheme Phase-II.
2.12.13.6 The Ministry has explained that the proposed large vessels of C-143 class would have
range of 500 nautical miles at a speed of 20 Knots at Full load which can endure sea state 4 and
safe operability at sea state 6.

27
2.12.14 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the Ministry has approved a
separate comprehensive security plan of A&N Islands. The Committee desires that this plan
may be implemented at the earliest.
2.12.15 The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the UT Government in preparing
a comprehensive security plan wherein it has proposed for setting up ten Marine
Operational Centres in A&N Islands at prime locations for upgrading coastal security in
A&N Islands. It hopes that the Central Government would provide the necessary support
needed by the UT in implementing its proposal in the larger framework of Coastal Security
Scheme as envisaged by the Centre. The Ministry may also look into the funds
requirements for HSD and the problem of maintenance of boats. These issues need to be
looked into in view of strategic location of the islands. The Ministry may also look into the
inadequate skilled manpower.
2.12.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that the components which are not part of
Coastal Security Scheme Phase-II and which are essentially required for the security of A&N
Islands, have been approved by MHA in the form of Comprehensive Security Plan of A&N Islands
for taking up in other schemes/plans.

28
CHAPTER-III
OTHER ISSUES
3.0 The Committee deliberated at length on the subject and came across various issues including
those which were common to the Coastal States/UTs. The present chapter is based on the replies
given by the various Ministries, including the Ministry of Home Affairs.
3.1 Shortage of Technical Manpower and lack of training facilities
3.1.1 V arious State Governments in their submissions to the Committee have highlighted the
shortage of technical man power and as a natural corollary emphasized the need to establish Marine
Police Academy for training manpower.
3.1.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has responded by stating that the sea borders require
specialised skills and monitoring frame-work. Further, the coastal States/UTs also face difficulties
to get well-trained personnel for manning the coastal police stations, boats and to perform marine
coastal security operations. In order to address the specialized training requirement of the State
Marine police personnel, the Ministry has planned to set up two Marine Police Training Institutes–
one each on the Eastern and Western Coast. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (Border Management) has recently visited the sites offered by the States of Gujarat and
Maharashtra for setting up of the Marine Police Training Institute. The Committee would also visit
the State of Andhra Pradesh where the State Government has provided a suitable land in
Machillipatnam Mandal of Krishna District.
3.1.3 After the Committee has submitted the report on the suitability of land, a view would be
taken by the Government on the location for setting up of the Marine Police Training Institute. In
the meantime, the Coast Guard is meeting the requirements of coastal States/UTs for providing
training to the State Marine Police personnel.
3.2 The Committee strongly recommends that the proposed Marine Police Training
Institutes – one each on the Eastern and Western Coast may be set up as soon as possible
as the specialized training required by the Marine police personnel is of utmost importance.
The Committee is also of the view that the Central and concerned State Governments
should pro-actively coordinate with each other so that the project does not get trapped in
bureaucratic hurdles and the institutes are set up in a definite time frame.
3.3 Manpower Recruitment
3.3.1 Some of the State Government highlighted the fact that the Ministry of Home Affairs has
circulated standard Recruitment Rules for technical posts. Filling up these posts is proving difficult
as the Manpower required with requisite qualifications is not readily available since the pay package
offered, are not attractive in par with the qualifications. It was suggested that to overcome this
problem, recruitment of Technical Manpower can be initiated centrally and depute Technical
Manpower to the States to maintain the uniformity.
3.3.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has explained that as per the Coastal Security Scheme
(Phase-I&II) manpower for manning boats and Coastal Police Stations is to be provided by the
concerned State/UT.
28

29
3.4 The Committee feels that all the coastal States may face this problem. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Central Government should provide assistance to the
states in recruiting technical manpower as the states agencies do not have the requisite
know-how and experience of doing the same. Coastal security is a joint venture of both the
Governments and when there are shortcomings on the part of State Governments, the
Central Governments step in to help them out.
3.5 The Committee has been informed by the Government of Karnataka that the State
Government plans to recruit separate staff for Coastal Security Policing and wish to train
them adequately in sea-faring. The step has been welcomed by the Home Ministry. The
Committee also appreciates the step taken by the Government of Karnataka and urges
other State Governments/UTs to also raise dedicated cadres for marine policing as has been
planned by the Government of Karnataka.
3.6 Coordination and consultation between the Central and State Governments
3.6.1 Some of the State Governments were of the view that Coastal Security Scheme suffers
from an excessive ‘top down’ approach and there must be a provision for prior consultation with
end users for continuous feedback and evaluation.
3.6.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has responded by stating that the States and UTs have been
fully associated both with formulation and implementation of the Scheme. It may be noted that the
Coastal Security Scheme (Phase I) was formulated based on the Perspective Plan prepared by the
coastal States/UTs and the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II) which is currently under
implementation has been formulated on the basis of vulnerability/gap analysis carried out by coastal
States/UTs in the context of fast changing coastal security scenario post 26/11.
3.6.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs has further informed that it has constituted a Steering
Committee at the level of Secretary (Border Management), to identify problems and requirements
of coastal State/UTs and to oversee the implementation of the coastal security scheme besides
ensuring better coordination among the various stakeholders. This mechanism provides a platform
to the coastal States/UTs for consultations and also to give their feedback for effective
implementation of the coastal security scheme.
3.6.4 The NCSMCS (National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against
threats from sea) chaired by the Cabinet Secretary is being used by the coastal States/UTs to give
their feedback on the coastal security issues.
3.7 The Committee hopes that some of the measures as undertaken by the Ministry would
help in resolving the concerns of the State Government. It also recommends that the officials
of the coastal states and the Ministry of Home Affairs should meet more often so that the
suitable means and ways may be chalked out to implement the scheme satisfactorily.
3.8 Coastal security set up in India is a three layer set up comprising of Navy, Coast
guard and marine police. The Committee though appreciating the fact that coastal security
is a team effort requiring a lot of coordination between the three agencies, still it is of the
opinion that a clear demarcation of jurisdiction and responsibilities should be made. A clear
hierarchy of command at national level should be established so that responsibility for
commission and omission during an emergency situation could be fixed.
3.9 Maintenance of boats and other equipments
3.9.1 Several States/UTs have complained regarding maintenance of boats.They have brought to
the notice of the Committee that the maintenance agencies i.e. Goa Shipyard Ltd. and GRSE,

30
Kolkata for the Coastal States/UTs on western and eastern coasts are woefully inadequate. The
Committee has been informed that in case of major problem the technician has to be summoned
from outside State/UT and also some of the machine parts are not easily available in the local
market which delays repairs. As a result, the vessel remains non operational. The State Government
of Tamil Nadu has informed that AMC has been entered by Government of India with GRSE,
Kolkata to maintain them. But, the progress of repairing and restoring the boats by GRSE under
AMC leaves much to be desired. Four numbers of 12 Ton boats and five numbers of 5 Ton boats
are out of action due to this tardy maintenance work by GRSE. Even regular oil servicing of boats
to ensure their smooth running has not been under taken by GRSE. As a result, their use is
severely restricted with reference to the norms fixed by Government of India.
3.9.2 Suffering from similar problems, the Government of Kerala has suggested that a Regional
Workshop at Kochi and minimum training to the personnel in attending minor repairs would ensure
better maintenance and improve operational capability.
3.9.3 The UT Government of Puducherry has similarly highlighted that no maintenance fund and
delay in repair works because of lack of technical manpower and expertise to rectify even a small
snag developed on a boat due to regular sorties, the boats remain non-operational for a long time
for want of rectification by the supplier of the boat. As there is no separate maintenance fund
allotted to attend to small repairs at the customer level, there is delay in repair works which affects
the patrolling efficiency. Such complaints are not exclusive to the above States/UTs but have
invariably been highlighted by almost all the coastal States/UTs.
3.10 The Committee is totally dissatisfied by the Ministry’s response and its approach
towards the issue of maintenance. It needs to be more serious on the issue and address the
issue of maintenance appropriately. It also notes the complaints of similar nature made by
other Coastal States/UTs. The Committee feels that the issue should be looked afresh in
consultation with the State Governments so that such issues could be resolved satisfactorily.
It recommends that the Ministry should hold a meeting with all the service providers and
the concerned Governments for resolving all outstanding issues related to maintenance, so
that the boats and other equipments do not lie idle for want of rectification even when
there are slight technical malfunctions. The Committee also recommends that technical
know how for small technical defects may be given to local operators so that they do not
have to depend upon others even for small problems. The Committee also suggests that
decentralization of the maintenance of boats may be considered.
3.11 Port Security
3.11.1 In its Outcome Budget (2012-2013), the Ministry has observed that the Security of
12 major ports of the country is being looked after by the CISF. These major ports are also subject
to periodical security audit by the IB. However, no security norms for the 187 minor ports of the
country have so far been evolved. Ministry of Shipping has constituted a working group in
July, 2009 for standardization of ports security. The working group was mandated to draft the
broad guidelines and prescribe uniform security standards for the ports. The working group has
submitted its report which is under consideration in the Ministry of Shipping.
3.12 The Committee is surprised to note that even after the Mumbai attack, 187 minor
ports of the country still lack standardized security cover. The Committee strongly
recommends that an early decision may be taken on the report submitted by the working
group of the Ministry of Shipping so that security norms for Minor Ports may be
established. There should be regular security audit of the minor ports also alongwith major
ports.

31
3.13 Non procurement of vehicles on account of austerity measures
3.13.1 When enquired why out of sanctioned 131 four-wheelers, only 57 four-wheelers have been
purchased by the States/UTs, the Ministry has explained that the release of funds for procurement
of vehicles in respect of Maharashtra, Goa, Kerala, Odisha, West Bengal and the UT of Daman and
Diu could not be made in view of the Ministry of Finance’s restriction/ban on purchase of new
vehicles. This issue was also discussed in the Steering Committee meeting held on 26.09.2013
wherein it has been decided to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for seeking ‘one
time’ relaxation for purchase of vehicles.
3.13.2 It further informed that in the case of Tamil Nadu, the State Govt. has placed orders for
procurement of 30 four-wheelers and 60 two-wheelers.
3.14 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance at the earliest for getting the proposal cleared. It also
urges the Ministry of Finance to give ‘one time’ relaxation for purchase of vehicles in the
larger national interest .
3.15 Constitution of Maritime Boards
3.15.1 Some States are yet to constitute Maritime Boards. When asked about the progress, the
Ministry has informed that Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Maharashtra have constituted SMBs.
Puducherry has constituted Maritime Security Committee and Daman and Diu has constituted
Maritime Advisory Committee. The issue of constitution of State Marine Board was discussed in
the 8
th NCSMCS (National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against
threats from sea) held on 6th September, 2013 and in the Steering Committee meeting held on
26th September, 2013 and the States of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Goa, and UT of A&N Islands
have been advised to constitute SMBs, at the earliest. The UT of Lakshadweep has been advised
to follow the Puducherry/Daman and Diu model for setting up of Maritime Advisory/Security
Committee. In the case of Karnataka, Kerala and Odisha, their respective Maritime Board Bills/
Ordinance are being examined in Judicial Division of MHA for obtaining the assent of the President.
As there is no minor or private port in the State, Government of West Bengal is of the view that
there is no need for setting up of SMB.
3.16 The Committee strongly urges the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Goa
and UT of A&N Islands to constitute State Maritime Boards at the earliest. It also urges
the Ministry of Home Affairs to expedite examination of Maritime Board Bills/Ordinance of
the Governments of Karnataka, Kerala and Odisha so that the Boards can be established
at the earliest.
3.17 Incentives to people joining marine police
3.17.1 Regarding need for providing incentives to people joining marine police, the Ministry has
informed that, under the Coastal Security Scheme (both Phase-I and II), the manpower for coastal
police stations and operation of boats are to be provided by the coastal States/UTs. As regards
training to the marine police personnel, the Coastal Security Scheme (both Phase-I and II) has
provision for imparting training to the marine police personnel through Coast Guard. The
expenditure incurred on this account by the States/UTs is reimbursed by the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
3.17.2 It further informed that the coastal S tates/UTs face difficulties in getting well-trained
personnel for manning the coastal police stations, boats and to perform marine coastal security
operations. Keeping this in view and also to fulfil the technical training requirement of the State

32
marine police personnel, the Ministry has planned to set up two Marine Police Training Institutes–
one each on the Eastern and Western Coast.
3.17.3 It also informed that the suggestions given by this Committee for grant of special incentives
to marine police personnel on the lines of BSF/CRPF are worth-considering and the coastal States/
UTs would be advised to examine and adopt the suggestion.
3.18 The Committee strongly recommends that an attractive incentive structure may be
considered personnel recruited for coastal security.
3.19 Land acquisition for setting up of coastal security infrastructure
3.19.1 Regarding land acquisition for setting up of coastal security infrastructure, Ministry of
Home Affairs informed that it periodically reviews the implementation of coastal security scheme
with the State/UTs and other stake-holders. A Steering Committee at the level of Secretary (Border
Management), has been constituted to oversee the implementation of the coastal security scheme
and to ensure better coordination among the various stakeholders and to address inter-agency
issues.
3.20 The Committee feels that setting up of coastal security infrastructure should not get
stuck on account of failure in acquiring land for the purpose. It recommends that review of
the progress may be done from time to time so that the projects are not unnecessarily
delayed, keeping in mind their importance. Wherever there are issues of land acquisition, the
Ministry may take up with the sates for resolving them so that infrastructure is in place.
3.21 The Committee during its visit observed that the office of the Coastal Security is in
Hyderabad, which is very far from the coastal areas in the State. Responding to this issue, the
Ministry has informed that presently, one Additional SP and two DSPs who are headquartered at
Vizag are looking after the coastal security in the State. The Headquarter of IG, Coastal Security
which is presently at Hyderabad is a temporary arrangement only. For permanent Coastal Security
Headquarter to be located at Vizag, the Government of Andhra Pradesh is identifying suitable land.
3.22 The Committee is not convinced and observes that the temporary arrangement as
has been made in Hyderabad can be temporarily made at some coastal town. Land required
for permanent Coastal Security Headquarter in Andhra Pradesh may also be allotted soon
in Vizag. All such headquarters/offices in other States related to coastal security which are
far from the coastal areas may be shifted to appropriate coastal towns.
3.23 Need for recruiting people well-versed with local language
3.23.1 The Committee during its visit to Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu has been informed that
there is a need for people well-versed with local language in order to interact with the fishermen.
The Ministry has informed that on finalization of dates and place for conducting a Community
Interaction Programme (CIP), a team comprising representative of Coast Guard, Indian Navy,
Marine Police and Fisheries Deptt. of State/UT and headed by an officer of commandant rank from
Coast Guard is deputed. Coast Guard makes efforts to nominate Coast Guard personnel with local
dialect. The assistance of Fisheries Department representative or local fishermen conversant in
Hindi/local language are sought for effective communication with fishermen.
3.24 The Committee, however, recommends that all possible efforts should be made to
recruit people knowing local dialect so that interaction with local fishermen becomes easy
and smooth.The fact that fishermen are the ‘eyes and ears’ of the coast further emphasizes
the importance of knowledge of local dialect necessary for intelligence gathering. Any
literature as may be necessary may be distributed to fishermen in local language.

33
3.25 Community Interaction Programmes
3.25.1 The Committee was informed that post 26/11, there have been as many as 2,288
community interaction programmes. When enquired whether this is just a periodic or a casual
phenomena or there are some structured programmes for this purpose, the Ministry has informed
that since 2009, a total of 2342 Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) have been conducted
by the Coast Guard till 30th September, 2013. The CIPs with fishermen initiated by the Coast
Guard in the 1990s have helped in understanding the micro issues of fishermen. It is purely a
voluntary participation by fisher folks. The participation of fishermen in CIPs varies from 25
fishermen in fishing villages of A&N Islands which are thinly populated and up to 60 fishermen
in densely populated fishing villages along other coastal States/UTs.
3.26 The Committee is of the view that the community programme should gradually evolve
from a body with voluntary nature to a body with semi-professional nature on the lines of
civil defence so that they can also play a vital role in coastal security. Local fishermen may
also be provided orientation programmes to impart necessary skills for intelligence gathering
and keeping vigil on the coast while continuing with daily professional chores.
3.27 Total requirement of manpower for coastal security
3.27.1 On being enquired about total requirement of manpower for coastal security in India, the
Ministry of Defence has informed that the present sanctioned strength of the Indian Coast Guard
is 13333 personnel (1850 officers, 9864 EP and 1619 civilians). In addition, formation of Sagar
Prahari Bal (SPB) comprising 1000 men and induction of 80 Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) for
force protection duties for Indian Navy has also been approved. The induction process for the SPB
has been completed and over 300 personnel have been deployed till now. Additional requirement of
manpower for coastal security is examined on the basis of responsibilities assigned and threat
perceptions from time to time.
3.28 The Committee recommends that all the sanctioned posts for coastal security may be
filled up in time so that the vigilance on the coast is not compromised for want of adequate
number of personnel. It exhorts the ministry to avoid procedural pitfalls so that the posts
can be filled in stipulated time period. The Committee desires that the scheme should not
suffer for want of man power.
3.29 Recruitment process for 1000 personnel under Sagar Prahari Bal
3.29.1 On being enquired about the recruitment process for 1000 personnel under Sagar Prahari
Bal (SPB) out of which only 200-plus people have been recruited, the Ministry has replied that,
the recruitment process for 1000 personnel under Sagar Prahari Bal (SPB) has already been
undertaken. The actual positioning of the personnel is aligned with the induction of Fast Interceptor
Crafts (FICs). As on date, 17 officers and 341 sailors have been inducted.
3.30 The Committee desires that the rest of the personnel may be recruited as and when
the remaining Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) are inducted. The Committee hopes that a
time line for the same would be fixed by the Ministry for strict adherence.
3.31 Security along West Bengal coast
3.31.1 Infiltration of foreign nationals in A&N Islands
3.31.1.1 When enquired about the reports that Chinese are holding some equipments in Coco
Island; infiltration from Bangladesh; and Ross Island is given to some private party for marine

34
development, the Ministry has informed that as regards the infiltration of Bangladeshi nationals,
there has been only one instance in last five years in which on 20.09.2013, one Bangladeshi national
along with 4 persons of Thai nationality were apprehended without any valid documents and they
were also in possession of arms and ammunition. However, 969 Bangladeshi nationals have been
rescued under distress, since 2009. For A&N Islands, there is a Joint Command of defence forces,
which looks after the strategic and defence requirements.
3.32 The Committee is of the view that the security agencies including marine police
need to be extremely watchful as the terrorists would be looking for new and
unconventional modus operandi to make terror strikes. Remote and uninhabited islands
may provide them the much needed safe havens to regroup themselves.
3.33 The Committee also recommends that the security agencies including marine police
should always be watchful in thwarting any incursions by foreigners.
3.34 Issues related to Ministry of Shipping
3.34.1 Imposing Cess to combat oil spills
3.34.1.1 Regarding the possibility of insurgents in oil spills in the sea, Ministry of Shipping has
informed that ‘Oil Pollution Cess’ is being levied and collected from 1.10.1988. The oil pollution
cess once paid at any port for a given parcel or tonnage is valid for a period of three months for
the same size of future parcel/tonnage for the said vessel. The oil cess of 50 paise per tonne of
the oil cargo handled is being collected from the respective steamer Agent who handles the oil
tanker. 90% of the oil cess amount is remitted to Central Government and 10% is retained by the
Port as Service Charges.
3.34.1.2 The amount of oil pollution cess collected and deposited by various major ports and non-
major ports under the Maritime Boards and State Governments for seven years from 2005-06 to
2011-12 was R27.58 crore. Though the oil pollution cess is being collected for nearly twenty-five
years since October, 1988, no money was ever utilized for the intended purpose for want of a
scheme for implementation.
3.34.1.3 A scheme is envisaged to support major and non-major ports by way of financial
assistance for the procurement of equipment and / or allied facilities from the oil pollution cess.
The scheme is expected to be approved for implementation by mid 2014.
3.35 The Committee is not clear as to whether the collected cess will also be used to
tackle situations when oil gets spilled into the sea either in an accident or as a result of
misadventure by any body. The Committee is of the opinion that a portion of such collected
cess should also be kept to tackle ‘post-spill’ emergencies while the rest can be utilised for
proper handling and storage of oil cargo. The Committee is also surprised by the fact that
though the oil pollution cess is being collected for nearly twenty-five years since October,
1988, no money was ever utilized for the intended purpose for want of a scheme for
implementation. The Committee therefore recommends that the scheme for implementation
should be approved at the earliest so that the same can be implemented.
3.36 Issues related to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
3.36.1 Issuance of biometric ID cards to fishermen
3.36.1.1 When asked about the population of the fishermen across the East and West coasts and
the coverage of the fishermen for the identity cards, the Ministry has informed that as per statistics

35
compiled by the Deptt. Of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries, a total of 41.41 lakh marine
fishermen are living in 3432 fishing villages, out of which, 26.25 lakh fishermen are directly
involved in fishing and allied activities. Out of the 18.12 lakh fishermen identified for issuance of
biometric ID cards, 11.22 lakhs ID cards have been produced and of which, 11.18 cards have been
dispatched to the States/UTs for delivery to the fishermen. It is an on-going process and the
progress depends on the pace of verification of fishermen details by the Fisheries Department of
coastal States/UTs.
3.37 The Committee urges the Government to complete issuing of biometric identity cards
of the remaining fishermen. It also recommends that a data bank of such cards should be
maintained for ready reference. Such a measure would help in identifying intruders and
foreign nationals entering the country.
3.38 Registration of the fishing vessels and boats
3.38.1 Regarding the progress of registration of the fishing vessels and boats, which are being
operated by the local people, the Ministry has replied that as per statistics of the Deptt. of Animal
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries, a total of 1.99,141 fishing vessels comprising of 52,982
traditional boats, 73,410 motorised boats and 72,749 mechanised crafts are plying in the sea. Till
26
th October, 2013, a total of 1,88,581 (94.7%) fishing vessels have been registered under the
newly developed ‘Uniform On-line Registration System’.
3.39 The Committee notes that more than ninety per cent of fishing vessels and boats
have been registered. It feels that by keeping track of such vessels, the security agencies
would be in a better position to keep a vigil on such vessels. The Committee recommends
that registration of all fishing vessels may be completed at the earliest.
3.40 Fishermen Awareness Programme
3.40.1 Regarding Central Assistance for Fishermen Awareness Programme in the States/UTs, it has
been informed that D/o. Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture
is the Nodal Authority for organizing Fishermen Awareness programme in the States/UTs. The
D/o. Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has informed that it has no objection in imparting
basic skills to the fishermen in intelligence gathering and to cultivate them as effective informers.
However, the Department has not made any budgetary allocation to provide financial assistance for
such training programme for fishermen.
3.41 The Committee urges the Ministry of Agriculture through its Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to formulate a Scheme to bring about awareness among
the fishermen of coastal States/UTs. It also urges the Ministry of Home Affairs to
coordinate with it and other relevant agencies to prepare the modalities of such a progamme
for early implementation. It also recommends that the necessary budgetary allocation in
this regard be made.

36
36
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee agrees that Gujarat coast is highly sensitive due to its close
proximity to a very vulnerable part of International Maritime Border Line (IMBL).The
Committee is in agreement with the State Government that it needs more funds and
infrastructure to improve and strengthen coastal security preparedness. The Committee
recommends that under the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-II), all the infrastructural and
logistical gaps in the coastal security apparatus of the State should be filled in view of its
vulnerability due to hostile atmosphere in the coastal area of Gujarat. Necessity of
additional funds may be considered after discussing with State Government. (Para 2.1.3)
Role of Mercantile Marine Department
The Committee is of the opinion that the issues raised by the State Government
regarding non-availability of inputs on national security matters and regulation of benami
investment are worth noting and deserve attention. The Committee feels that if the
Ministry of Shipping is not the relevant agency then the concerned agency be it Ministry
of Home Affairs or any other agency should provide necessary inputs to the State
Government. Ministry of Home Affairs may look into this matter. (Para 2.1.5)
Involvement of Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships (DGLL)
The Committee, notwithstanding the reply of the Ministry, desires that the concern
of the State Government may appropriately be addressed. Secretary, Shipping may hold a
meeting in the matter. (Para 2.1.7)
Security of off-shore oil installations
It appears that the Ministry of Home Affairs is not aware of the issue. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may look into the security
concerns expressed by the State Government. The Committee recommends that the
Ministries of Home, Shipping, Steel and Petroleum and Natural Gas should hold a meeting
with the State Government of Gujarat to understand the missing link and find suitable ways
to address its concerns. (Para 2.1.10)
Integration of visual imagery from aerial surveillance and satellite imagery
The Committee recommends that the National Maritime Domain Awareness (NMDA)
project, which envisages development of common operational picture of all maritime
activities in the seas around India based upon various sources, should be finalized at the
earliest. The Committee hopes once the NMDA is established it will provide one stop
solution for providing satellite imagery for Surveillance purposes. This will be useful for all
coastal States and not just Gujarat. (Para 2.1.12)
Calibration of VTMS to the security needs
The Committee recommends that the request of the State Government may be
considered. (Para 2.1.14)

37
Deliberate Oil spills by insurgents
The Committee recommends that the scheme may be prepared at the earliest. It also
feels that the Ministry should address the fears expressed by the State Government of
deliberate oil spills by insurgents, for creating fire hazards for destruction of ships and port
properties, by procuring equipment and dispersants to combat oil spill. This issue concerns
all the coastal States. (Para 2.1.16)
Requirement of equipments for meeting ISPS Audit
The Committee recommends that Radio-active material scanners should be installed
at all entry/exit points of all major ports in all the coastal States. (Para 2.1.18)
The Committee agrees with the State Government and is of the opinion that
fishermen can be a rich source of intelligence and can definitely be cultivated as effective
informers. The Central Government should device a programme for imparting basic skills
in intelligence gathering to the fishermen through out the country in all coastal States.
(Para 2.1.30)
The Committee recommends that all coastal States/UTs should send their reports on
construction of jetties to the Ministry of Home Affairs so that their requirements of funds
for construction of jetties may be looked into as per local conditions. It is also of the
opinion that if the funds are found inadequate they may be suitably enhanced according to
the requirements of concerned States/UTs. (Para 2.1.23)
Goa
The Committee is not happy to note that procurement under phase I was not
completed. The Ministry may impress upon the State Government to complete the process
at the earliest. This brooks no further delay. (Para 2.2.3)
Coastal Security-multiagency responsibility and surveillance
The Committee recommends that pilot projects for RFID, MSS and AIS(P) may be
undertaken so as to ascertain their feasibility for implementation and the same should be
completed at the earliest so that a final view may be taken in this regard. The Committee
of the opinion that such technological interventions are extremely important to improve the
logistics of coastal security apparatus and, therefore, should be put into service as soon as
the feasibility studies prove positive. The issue was also raised during the Study Visit of the
Committee to the Coastal Police Stations in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee is of the
opinion that a separate group is needed by including people who work on this subject in the
aviation sector in a collaborative effort with the Coast Guard and agencies dealing with
satellites and transponders for early implementation. (Para 2.2.5)
Seaworthiness of Boats
The Committee however desires that the concern of the State Government may be
examined again. (Para 2.2.7)
Karnataka
Preference for professional fishermen in appointments and other issues.
(Para 2.3.2)

38
The Committee feels that it is a ticklish issue. The Ministry of Home Affairs may
discuss with State Government and fishermen and solve the problem. (Para 2.3.4)
The Committee notes the assurance of the State Government given to the Ministry and
desires that the recruitment may be completed at the earliest. Issuing of ID cards may also
be completed at the earliest. (Para 2.3.6)
Kerala
Provision of Jetties and floating wharfs
The Committee desires that the suggestion of the State Government for providing
wharfs where constructing Jetties is a problem, may be looked into. Even though the
decision has been left to the State Government, the Ministry may discuss the issue with the
State. (Para 2.4.3)
West Bengal
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
The Committee is dissatisfied by the replies given by the Ministry of Home affairs
regarding the issues of inadequate technical manpower, maintenance of equipments and
high cost of running the interceptor boats. Several States/UTs have similar complaints which
need to be seriously looked into by the Central Government. The Ministry may examine the
concern of the State Government on the high cost of POL. The Committee will deal with
technical manpower and maintenance issues in the next chapter. (Para 2.5.4)
Odisha
The Committee recommends that the requirement of manpower, coastal police
stations and jetties may be reassessed along with the realistic requirement of funds to be
provided for establishment thereof. The issues relating to manpower, training and
maintenance will be dealt in the next chapter. (Para 2.6.9)
Other issues raised by the State
The Committee recommends that the land for setting up of Marine Police Station
inside Paradip Port may be provided at the earliest. (Para 2.6.11)
Release of Funds
The Committee recommends that the State Government must submit the utilization
certificates to the Central Government so that further funds could be released for
construction of jetties. (Para 2.6.13)
Repairing Centre at Paradeep
The Committee desires that the Ministry may discuss the matter with the State
Government to resolve the issue. (Para 2.6.15)
The Committee feels that the State Government by now must have got the
information. However, Ministry of Home Affairs may discuss the matter with Coast guard
and the State Government. (Para 2.6.18)

39
Andhra Pradesh
The Committee recommends that the pilot-study regarding fitting AIS (transponders)
may be completed in a time bound manner so that the findings of the same may be
implemented thereon. (Para 2.7.4)
Other issues flagged by the State Government relate to manpower and related
matters. The issues relating to manpower recruitment training etc. are dealt in the next
chapter. However, the Committee recommends that the specific issues raised by the State
Government of Andhra Pradesh may be appropriately addressed. Some issues also concern
other States as well and a careful examination of the issues is necessary. (Para 2.7.5)
Tamil Nadu
The Committee hopes that the issues related to berthing of boats would be resolved
as a result of measures undertaken by the Ministry. The Ministry may review the matter
on a regular basis. (Para 2.8.4)
The Committee recommends that the necessary land allocation may be done at the
earliest so that the marine police station could be established. It further recommends that
an all out effort should be made to resolve all such issues within a stipulated time period.
It also urges the Port Authorities to look into the suggestion of providing cut land at
nominal rent on lease. The Committee also urges the concerned agencies to put in place
a system for frequent interaction with common people of coastal areas. Such an exercise
should be conducted in the local dialect as far as possible so that intelligence gathering
could be enriched further. (Para 2.8.7)
Daman and Diu
Problem faced in maintaining Coastal Security
The effort on the part of the UT Administration to recruit local fishermen for the
marine police is laudable and will contribute for the improved patrolling and surveillance
along the coast of Daman and Diu. The Committee desires that the local people so recruited
for Marine Police may be given sufficient training. (Para 2.9.5)
The Committee desires that the issue of Diu fishermen being captured by Pakistan
authorities may be addressed appropriately. (Para 2.9.7)
Lakshadweep
The Ministry of Home Affairs may prepare guidelines for off season activities of
Marine Police such as in Monsoon. This may apply to other States too. Ministry of Home
Affairs may carefully examine the issue. (Para 2.10.6)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with the UT
Government in finalizing surveillance programme. In no circumstance can vacuum be
allowed to exist in Coastal policing as it can have severe consequences for internal security.
(Para 2.10.8)
Puducherry
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
The Committee is disappointed to note that out of 23 technical posts approved in CSS
phase I, only 3 have been filled and the others could not be filled for want of recruitment

40
rules. Further, 76 technical posts have also been approved under phase II of the scheme.
In view of the Committee, this is a very typical case of sorry state of affairs. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Recruitment Rules may be framed at
the earliest so that the sanctioned technical and also non-technical posts may be filled at
the earliest to deal with shortage of technical man power. The Committee also agrees with
the UT government that if the incentive structure provided to the employees is not
attractive enough, it would be difficult to recruit and retain capable people needed for the
purpose. The Committee is therefore not satisfied with the routine reply of the Ministry and
desires that it be more pro-active in recruiting right people so that the Coastal Security
scheme does not remain merely on paper. (Para 2.11.4)
The Committee desires that the Ministry may discuss with all States/UTs and take a
decision in the matter. (Para 2.11.7)
All the above suggestions apply to all the coastal States/UTs. The Ministry needs to
adopt a common approach on the above suggestions. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry may look into the above suggestions of the UT Government to find out their
feasibility for implementation. (Para 2.11.8)
Andaman and Nicobar Administration
Problems being faced in maintaining Coastal Security
The Committee also takes note of the fact that the Ministry has approved a separate
comprehensive security plan of A&N Islands. The Committee desires that this plan may be
implemented at the earliest. (Para 2.12.14)
The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the UT Government in preparing a
comprehensive security plan wherein it has proposed for setting up ten Marine Operational
Centres in A&N Islands at prime locations for upgrading coastal security in A&N Islands.
It hopes that the Central Government would provide the necessary support needed by the
UT in implementing its proposal in the larger framework of Coastal Security Scheme as
envisaged by the Centre. The Ministry may also look into the funds requirements for HSD
and the problem of maintenance of boats. These issues need to be looked into in view of
strategic location of the islands. The Ministry may also look into the inadequate skilled
manpower. (Para 2.12.15)
OTHER ISSUES
Shortage of Technical Manpower and lack of training facilities
The Committee strongly recommends that the proposed Marine Police Training
Institutes – one each on the Eastern and Western Coast may be set up as soon as possible
as the specialized training required by the Marine police personnel is of utmost importance.
The Committee is also of the view that the Central and concerned State Governments
should pro-actively coordinate with each other so that the project does not get trapped in
bureaucratic hurdles and the institutes are set up in a definite time frame. (Para 3.2)
Manpower Recruitment
The Committee feels that all the coastal States may face this problem. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Central Government should provide assistance to the
States in recruiting technical manpower as the States agencies do not have the requisite

41
know-how and experience of doing the same. Coastal security is a joint venture of both the
Governments and when there are shortcomings on the part of State Governments, the
central Governments step in to help them out. (Para 3.4)
The Committee has been informed by the Government of Karnataka that the State
Government plans to recruit separate staff for Coastal Security Policing and wish to train
them adequately in sea-faring. The step has been welcomed by the Home Ministry. The
Committee also appreciates the step taken by the Government of Karnataka and urges
other State Governments/UTs to also raise dedicated cadres for marine policing as has been
planned by the Government of Karnataka. (Para 3.5)
Coordination and consultation between the Central and State Governments
The Committee hopes that some of the measures as undertaken by the Ministry
would help in resolving the concerns of the State Government. It also recommends that the
officials of the coastal States and the Ministry of Home Affairs should meet more often so
that the suitable means and ways may be chalked out to implement the scheme
satisfactorily. (Para 3.7)
Coastal security set up in India is a three layer set up comprising of Navy, Coast
guard and marine police. The Committee though appreciating the fact that coastal security
is a team effort requiring a lot of coordination between the three agencies, still it is of the
opinion that a clear demarcation of jurisdiction and responsibilities should be made. A clear
hierarchy of command at national level should be established so that responsibility for
commission and omission during an emergency situation could be fixed. (Para 3.8)
Maintenance of boats and other equipments
The Committee is totally dissatisfied by the Ministry’s response and its approach
towards the issue of maintenance. It needs to be more serious on the issue and address the
issue of maintenance appropriately. It also notes the complaints of similar nature made by
other Coastal States/UTs. The Committee feels that the issue should be looked afresh in
consultation with the State Governments so that such issues could be resolved satisfactorily.
It recommends that the Ministry should hold a meeting with all the service providers and
the concerned Governments for resolving all outstanding issues related to maintenance, so
that the boats and other equipments do not lie idle for want of rectification even when
there are slight technical malfunctions. The Committee also recommends that technical
know how for small technical defects may be given to local operators so that they do not
have to depend upon others even for small problems. The Committee also suggests that
decentralization of the maintenance of boats may be considered. (Para 3.10)
Port Security
The Committee is surprised to note that even after the Mumbai attack, 187 minor
ports of the country still lack standardized security cover. The Committee strongly
recommends that an early decision may be taken on the report submitted by the working
group of the Ministry of Shipping so that security norms for Minor Ports may be
established. There should be regular security audit of the minor ports also alongwith major
ports. (Para 3.12)
Non procurement of vehicles on account of austerity measures
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance at the earliest for getting the proposal cleared. It also

42
urges the Ministry of Finance to give ‘one time’ relaxation for purchase of vehicles in the
larger national interest . (Para 3.14)
Constitution of Maritime Boards
The Committee strongly urges the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Goa
and UT of A&N Islands to constitute State Maritime Boards at the earliest. It also urges
the Ministry of Home Affairs to expedite examination of Maritime Board Bills/Ordinance of
the Governments of Karnataka, Kerala and Odisha so that the Boards can be established
at the earliest. (Para 3.16)
Incentives to people joining marine police
The Committee strongly recommends that an attractive incentive structure may be
considered personnel recruited for coastal security. (Para 3.18)
Land acquisition for setting up of coastal security infrastructure
The Committee feels that setting up of coastal security infrastructure should not get stuck
on account of failure in acquiring land for the purpose. It recommends that review of the
progress may be done from time to time so that the projects are not unnecessarily delayed,
keeping in mind their importance. Wherever there are issues of land acquisition, the
Ministry may take up with the sates for resolving them so that infrastructure is in place.
(Para 3.20)
The Committee is not convinced and observes that the temporary arrangement as
has been made in Hyderabad can be temporarily made at some coastal town. Land required
for permanent Coastal Security Headquarter in Andhra Pradesh may also be allotted soon
in Vizag. All such headquarters/offices in other States related to coastal security which are
far from the coastal areas may be shifted to appropriate coastal towns. (Para 3.22)
Need for recruiting people well-versed with local language
The Committee, however, recommends that all possible efforts should be made to
recruit people knowing local dialect so that interaction with local fishermen becomes easy
and smooth.The fact that fishermen are the ‘eyes and ears’ of the coast further emphasizes
the importance of knowledge of local dialect necessary for intelligence gathering.
Any literature as may be necessary may be distributed to fishermen in local language.
(Para 3.24)
Community interaction programmes
The Committee is of the view that the community programme should gradually
evolve from a body with voluntary nature to a body with semi-professional nature on the
lines of civil defence so that they can also play a vital role in coastal security. Local
fishermen may also be provided orientation programmes to impart necessary skills for
intelligence gathering and keeping vigil on the coast while continuing with daily professional
chores. (Para 3.26)
Total requirement of manpower for coastal security
The Committee recommends that all the sanctioned posts for coastal security may be
filled up in time so that the vigilance on the coast is not compromised for want of adequate

43
number of personnel. It exhorts the ministry to avoid procedural pitfalls so that the posts
can be filled in stipulated time period. The Committee desires that the scheme should not
suffer for want of man power. (Para 3.28)
Recruitment process for 1000 personnel under Sagar Prahari Bal
The Committee desires that the rest of the personnel may be recruited as and when
the remaining Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) are inducted. The Committee hopes that a
time line for the same would be fixed by the Ministry for strict adherence. (Para 3.30)
Security along West Bengal coast
Infiltration of foreign nationals in A&N Islands
The Committee is of the view that the security agencies including marine police need
to be extremely watchful as the terrorists would be looking for new and unconventional
modus operandi  to make terror strikes. Remote and uninhabited islands may provide them
the much needed safe havens to regroup themselves. (Para 3.32)
The Committee also recommends that the security agencies including marine police
should always be watchful in thwarting any incursions by foreigners (Para 3.33)
Issues related to Ministry of Shipping
Imposing Cess to combat oil spills
The Committee is not clear as to whether the collected cess will also be used to
tackle situations when oil gets spilled into the sea either in an accident or as a result of
misadventure by any body. The Committee is of the opinion that a portion of such collected
cess should also be kept to tackle ‘post-spill’ emergencies while the rest can be utilised for
proper handling and storage of oil cargo. The Committee is also surprised by the fact that
though the oil pollution cess is being collected for nearly twenty-five years since October,
1988, no money was ever utilized for the intended purpose for want of a scheme for
implementation. The Committee therefore recommends that the scheme for implementation
should be approved at the earliest so that the same can be implemented. (Para 3.35)
Issues related to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
Issuance of biometric ID cards to fishermen
The Committee urges the Government to complete issuing of biometric identity cards of the
remaining fishermen. It also recommends that a data bank of such cards should be
maintained for ready reference. Such a measure would help in identifying intruders and
foreign nationals entering the country. (Para 3.37)
Registration of the fishing vessels and boats
The Committee notes that more than ninety per cent of fishing vessels and boats
have been registered. It feels that by keeping track of such vessels, the security agencies
would be in a better position to keep a vigil on such vessels. The Committee recommends
that registration of all fishing vessels may be completed at the earliest. (Para 3.39)

44
Fishermen Awareness Programme
The Committee urges the Ministry of Agriculture through its Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to formulate a Scheme to bring about awareness among
the fishermen of coastal States/UTs. It also urges the Ministry of Home Affairs to
coordinate with it and other relevant agencies to prepare the modalities of such a progamme
for early implementation. It also recommends that the necessary budgetary allocation in
this regard be made. (Para 3.41)

45
MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th May, 2011 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rishang Keishing
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri L.K. Advani
7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
8. Shri Raman Deka
9. Shri Mohd.Maulana Asrarul Haque
10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shri Ravneet Singh
15. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay
16. Shri Harsh Vardhan
17. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sharada Subramaniam, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda
for the meeting.
3. * * *
47
*** Relates to other matter.

48
4. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the subjects to be undertaken by the Committee for
detailed study and examination. After some discussion the following subjects were identified by the
Committee for the purpose :–
1. Security at Airports in the country;
2. Working of Immigration Division in the Ministry of Home Affairs;
3. Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad;
4. Disaster Management in the country;
5. Administration of Union Territories;
6. Infrastructure Projects and Economic Development in NE Region;
7. Functioning of Civil Defence Training Institutes in the country;
8. Coastal Security Management;
9. Indo-Bangla Border Fencing;
10. Problems faced by the Home Guards and their Working Conditions; and
11. Law and Order situation in Delhi.
5.0 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 11.15 
P.M.

49
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th October, 2013 in Committee
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Santiuse Kujur
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Adsul
8. Shri L.K. Advani
9. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
10. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
11. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Shri Ramen Deka
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Datta Meghe
15. Shri Rathod Ramesh
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
17. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Home Secretary
49

50
2. Shrimati Gauri Kumar, Secretary, Border Management
3. Shri S.A. Ibrahim, Director, Intelligence Bureau
4. Shri Bhagwan Shanker, Joint Secretary, Border Management
5. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary (C&PG)
6. Shri K.K. Sharma, Additional DG (Ops), BSF
7. Dr. Anand Kumar, Additional Director, Intelligence Bureau
8. Shri A.K. Shukla, Joint Director, Intelligence Bureau
9. Shri P.S. Dhiman, DIG (Ops), BSF
10. Shri Radhakrishna Kini A., Additional DG, BPR&D
11. Shri H.K. Sharma, Deputy Director General (Provision)
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Dr. Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Capt. L.K. Panda, Nautical Advisor, o/o DG Shipping
3. Shri Vineet Bakshi, CMD, Goa Shipyard Ltd.
4. Shri A.K. Verma, CMD, Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers
Representatives of Cabinet Secretariat
1. Shri Rajinder Khanna, Special Secretary
2. Shri R. Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Vice Admiral Girish Luthra, DG, Naval Operations, Navy
2. Capt. Rajeev Ashok, Director, Naval Operations, Navy
3. Shri Ram Subhag Singh, Joint Secretary (Navy)
4. Shri K.R. Nautiyal, DDG (Ops), Indian Coast Guard
5. Shri Asish Srivastava, Director, Indian Coast Guard
Representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shri Armane Giridhar, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Animal Husbandry. Dairying and Fishing
1. Shri B. Vishnu Bhat, Fisheries Development Commission
2. Captain A. M. Surej, Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. He also welcomed Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Member, Lok Sabha who joined
Committee’s sitting first time after his nomination to the Committee.
2.1 The Chairman informed that the Committee would take up the subject ‘Coastal Security
Management in the Country’ and recapitulated that the erstwhile Committee had decided to seek
written comments of all the concerned coastal State Governments and UTs in this regard and nine
States and UTs had furnished the same.
2.2 The erstwhile Committee visited Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The Committee held
meetings and visited certain marine police stations which were set up in the recent past and had
discussions with the Coast Guard, the State Police and also with the District Administration in that
regard. The Committee had noted certain issues for calling attention of the Central Government.

51
The comments of the States were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for response and the
same had also been circulated to Members. In this connection, he had invited the Home Secretary
to give a presentation on the subject.
 [At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and all other senior officers from different
Ministries/Departments to the meeting of the Committee and gave a brief of the work/study done
by the erstwhile Committee on the subject. He asked the Home Secretary to make a presentation
on the main features of Phase-I and Phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme and the experience
gained in the implementation of the Scheme indicating the budgetary provisions and the future
requirements. The Home Secretary highlighted the following issues:
● Safeguarding the sea borders requires specialised skills and monitoring frameworks.
Traditionally, the coastal security is managed by the Indian Coast Guard. However, for
an effective coastal security management, the involvement of coastal States and Union
Territories had become necessary.
● A three-tier coastal security ring all along our coast is now provided by the Marine
Police, the Indian Coast Guard and the Indian Navy. The Marine Police had a
jurisdiction up to 12 nautical miles of territorial waters. The Coast Guard is responsible
both for the territorial waters as well as for the area extending up to 200 nautical
miles. The Indian Navy has functional jurisdiction beyond 200 nautical miles, though
it remains responsible for the overall maritime security, which includes coastal security
and off-shore security.
● Phase-I of the Coastal Security Scheme was implemented from 2005-06 to 2010-11
with an outlay of R646 crore with a view to strengthen the infrastructure of the State
Marine Police force by providing financial assistance for the construction of coastal
police stations, check-posts, outposts, barracks and procurement of jeeps and
motorcycles as well as interceptive boats for patrolling and surveillance of coastal
areas, particularly the shallow areas close to the coast.
● Subsequent to the Mumbai attack in 2008, the entire coastal security scenario of the
country was subjected to a multi-level, inter-Ministerial review which led to taking of
several initiatives by the various Central Government Ministries and Departments.
● After vulnerability and gap analysis, the Ministry of Home Affairs formulated the
Phase-II of Coastal Security Scheme to further augment the infrastructural support to
the coastal States and the Union Territories by way of additional coastal police stations,
jetties, high-capacity and fast-moving boats.
● To meet the requirement of well-trained personnel for manning the coastal police
stations, boats and marine coastal security operations, two Marine Police Training
Institutes, one each on the Eastern and the Western Coast has been planned to set up.
● MHA is also exploring the possibility of raising exclusive Marine Police personnel on
the lines of the India Reserve Battalions which are deployed in different parts of the
country.
4.0 The Joint Secretary (Border Management) made a power point presentation. The highlights
are as under:
● The Director General, Coast Guard had been designated as Commander Coastal
Command and is responsible for overall coordination between Central and State agencies;

52
● The Coast Guard has been nominated to function as Lead Intelligence Agency to
provide institutional arrangement for coordination and sharing of intelligence among
various agencies operating on the coast;
● In phase-I, coastal States/UTs were provided with 73 coastal police stations, 97 check
posts, 58 outposts, 30 barracks, 204 boats, 10 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIBs), 153 jeeps
and 312 motor cycles;
● Implementation of phase-I of the Scheme completed except construction of few CPs
due to land acquisition problems. At some places, construction of CPs was underway;
● Outlay for the phase-II of the Scheme was R1580 crore to provide 131 Marine Police
Stations, 10 Marine Operational Centres for A&N Islands, 60 jetties, 150 boats (12
Tons.), 20 (19 mtr.) boats for Tamil Nadu, 10 (5 Ton) for Gujarat, 35 RIBs-
23 for A&N Islands and 12 for Lakshadweep, 10 large vessels for A&N Islands,
131 Four wheelers and 242 motorcycles. Besides, a lump-sum assistance of R15 lakhs
per Coastal Police Station for surveillance equipments, computer system and furniture
will be provided;
● Out of 131 CPSs, 68 have been operationalised. Land for 131 CPSs has been identified
and land has been acquired for 97 CPSs. States have been advised to operationalise
CPSs in rented buildings by the end of October, 2013 pending construction of CPSs
and jurisdiction would be allocated and notified by December, 2013 so as to complete
the coastline;
● Out of 60 sanctioned jetties, land of 55 jetties has been identified and for 10 jetties
land has been acquired. Construction of one jetty has started; States/UTs have been
advised to strategically locate jetties adjacent to existing fishing harbours;
● Out of 131 four wheelers and 242 two wheelers, 57 four wheelers and 74 two
wheelers have been purchased;
● The SOP for Coastal Police Stations, which was prepared by BPR&D in close
coordination with all stakeholders, is under implementation;
● Eighty five Coastal Security Exercises have been conducted biannually. Eighty seven
Joint Coastal Petrol with Marine Police and Customs were conducted. 2985 police
personnel were given training by Coast Guard. Besides, Coast Guard undertook 2288
community interaction programmes for fisherman act as ‘Eyes and Ears’;
● For Marine Police Training Institutes, Maharashtra and Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh
have offered water front 250 acre land free of cost and a Committee consisting
Members of BPR&D, Navy and Coast Guard would inspect the sites;
● RGI has distributed more than 65 lakh NPR Id cards to coastal area population and
animal Husbandry Department had produced and delivered more than 11 lakh fisherman
ID Cards;
● 1,86,104 fishing vessels of less than 20 mtrs. have been registered on line and for
registration of fishing vessels of more than 20 mtrs. An amendment in the Merchant
Shipping Act was under consideration;
● Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Maharashtra have constituted State Maritime Boards.
Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Goa were yet to constitute SMBs. Puducherry and
Daman and Diu have constituted Maritime Security Committee and Maritime Advisory
Committee respectively.

53
5. After power point presentation, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised the
following queries/issues:
● What is population of the fishermen across the East and West coasts and coverage of
the fishermen for the identity cards and the time by when they will be covered fully?
● What is the progress made in registration of all fishing vessels and boats operated by
the local people?
● By when the pilot study of the RFID, MSG and AIGP will be completed.
● Reasons for not having security norms for 187 minor ports?
● Special incentives for motivation of marine police personnel.
● Rationale for having the office of IG, Coastal Security in Hyderabad, while the coast
is on the other side.
● Preference in the selection and recruitment of Marine Police to the fishing community.
● Capturing of fishermen of Gujarat and forfeiting of their superior boats by Pakistan.
● Rationale of submission of MHA on likelihood of left-out LTTE cadre looking for safe
havens in the uninhabited Indian islands for their temporary hideouts and thus justifying
the claims of Sri Lankan Government.
● What is the total number of persons who participated in community interaction
programmes and the duration of all these programmes and whether it is structured
programme?
● Smuggling of cows across the riverine areas of Sunderbans into neighbouring country
and payment there of in fake currency.
● Duplication of registration number of boats and its misuse by terrorists of neighbouring
countries.
● Presence of Chinese in Coco Island and permission given to a private party for marine
development in Ross Island in A&N Islands.
6. Responding to the queries pertaining to his area of activities, the representative of the Coast
Guard informed that
● Bids have been received for pilot study on MSS Transponders and the study would be
completed by the end of the year 2014. The Chief of Naval Staff has expressed his
apprehensions on the high infrastructural and operational cost of RFID because of
existence of a large number of fishing landing points on the both coasts of the country
and some of them are not registered and authorized. It has been decided to have a
relook on the project and then proceed. In the mean time, work on satellite
transponders is being done and hopefully by the next year it would be known as to
how identification of fishing boats can be done in sea and coast. Regarding
participation of people in Community Interaction Programmes, he informed that on an
average 50-60 persons participate in a programme and they are given brief on the
fishing areas and implications of venturing into the international maritime boundaries.
● As per the Fishermen Census carried out by the Central Marine Fisheries Research
Institute, the total fishermen population in the coastal areas is 4.14 million. Out of this,
active fishermen engaged in fishing are estimated to be 2.62 million. 1.81 million
fishermen population have been covered under the biometric ID and digitized data for

54
biometric identity to the tune of 1.12 million has been obtained. The Government has
already distributed cards to 1.11 million. These cards are separate cards with some
additional details regarding boats, etc. The card being issued by the RGI does not have
those details.
6.1 The Vice Admiral, Indian Navy informed that in February, 2009, the CCS gave approval for
creation of Sagar Prahari Bal with a strength of 1,000 personnel. Sagar Prahari Bal is part of the
Indian Navy. As on date, more than 17 officers and 290 sailors have been inducted. After approval
for procurement of 80 Fast Speed Crafts, contract for 80 FSCs was signed and the first set of
boats has arrived. The SPB would be manning these boats and patrolling in the harbour areas for
protection of naval assets and also local assets in the harbours. The induction process takes time
as training process takes 3-4 years.
6.2 The Director, IB informed that during the years up to September, 2013, no person from
Bangladesh has come against 17 people who were people picked up. On the Sri Lankan side, as
on September, 2013, 515 Indian fishermen with 100 boats were arrested on that side; out of
which, 430 with 68 boats were released. On the Indian side, 146 Sri Lankan fishermen with
30 boats were arrested in our waters; out of which, 111 with 21 boats were released. On the
Gujarat side, upto September, 2013, 310 Indian fishermen with 73 boats were arrested and out
of which, 389, much more, with no boat, were released as there were other fishermen earlier
also. On the Indian side, 111 people with 11 boats were picked up and 16 with no boat were
released.
6.3 The DG , Light Houses submitted as under:
● The entire Indian coastline has now 74 base stations of automatic identification system
which is monitoring all the vessels which are above 500 GMT. Under a pilot project,
field trials are being done for covering sub-20 metre vessels in Porbandar with 500
transponders. The vessels are being identified and this work would be completed by
March, 2014.
● On the other issue of security of the minor ports under the State Governments, the
shipping secretary informed that a group was set up and the Government would look
into the report and come back to the Committee on the progress.
● On the delegation of powers to the Fisheries Department for registration, the Nautical
Advisor responded that the fishing vessels above 20 metres are registered by DG-
Shipping under the Merchant Shipping Act. In order to facilitate, 28 State officers have
been authorised for registration. To facilitate further, it can be further expanded by
bringing in certain changes in the Merchant Shipping Act.
● With regard to the duplication of registration, he submitted that this matter has not
been brought to the notice, but, its possibility cannot be denied.
● Detailed report of a high-level committee to frame Standard Operating Procedures was
submitted in 2007. The Report discussed various things including the type of boats,
the funding, objectives and various equipments and Detailed SOP was submitted to the
MHA, which has been circulated to all States and the UTs.
6.4 The Horne Secretary submitted that
● A National Committee on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against Threat
on the Sea has been set up on 7 th August, 2009 under the Cabinet Secretary to look
into the coordination part. The last meeting of this Committee took place on 6 th of
September, 2013. Recently, a Steering Committee headed by the Secretary (Border

55
Management) in the MHA with representatives from various Ministries, has been set up
on 31 st July, 2013 for the review of the coastal security.
● The Union Government has advised the State Governments and the Union Territories
to locate the jetties, adjacent to the existing station harbours, wherever it is feasible,
so that they can cover the entire area. However there was difficulty in getting land for
the jetties and out of sanctioned 60 jetties, land for only ten has been obtained so far.
6.5 The Secretary (RAW) informed that the Government takes very seriously the threat from
the Lashkar-e-Taiba regarding attacks on our coastal areas, because it has not lost any of its
potency since 26/11. In  fact, it might have even gained strength over the last three or four years.
The Government is fully aware of their plans, including using some of our neighbouring areas and
the latest attempt to use Rohingyas from Myanmar. LeT was trying to set up some camps along
the border with Bangladesh, and also along the border with Thailand. The Government was in the
process of strengthening the capabilities, both in respect of technical intelligence and human
intelligence.
7. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.

56
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 29 th October, 2013 in Committee Room-A,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shri Santiuse Kujur
5. Dr. V . Maitreyan
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
13. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil
14. Shri Rathod Ramesh
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Khurshid A, Ganai, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Satpal Chouhan, Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary
4. Shri I.S. Chahal, Joint Secretary
5. Shri S.K. Chakraborty, Deputy Director General (RGI)
6. Shri H.K. Sharma, Deputy Director General
56

57
Representatives of Cabinet Secretariat
1. Shri Rajinder Khanna, Special Secretary
2. Shri R. Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of External Affairs
Shri V .M. Kwatra, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Dr. Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri Sunil Mishra, Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.M. Suraj, DG
4. Shri L.K. Panda, Nautical Advisor
5. Shri Gautam Chatterjee, Director General of Shipping
Representatives of Navy
1. Vice Admiral Girish Luthra, DG, Naval Operations
2. Captain Rajiv Ashok, Director, Naval Operation
Representatives of Intelligence Bureau
1. Shri S.A. Ibrahim, Director
2. Dr. Anand Kumar, Additional Director
Representatives of Coast Guard
1. Shri K.R. Nautiyal, IG, DDG (OPOCS)
2. Shri K.R. Nautiyal, DDG
Representative of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Ms. Rashmi Aggarwal, Director
Representative of Ministry of Defence
Shri Ram Subhag Singh, Joint Secretary (Navy)
Representative of Ministry of Steel
Shri J.P. Shukla, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Border Security Force
1. Shri K.K. Sharma, ADG
2. Shri A.K. Sinha, IG
Representative of BPR&D
Shri G.S. Chaudhary, DIG
Representative of GRSE
Shri A.K. Verma, CMD
Representative of Goa Shipyard Ltd.
Shri P.K.S. Srivastava, Director
Representatives of Administration of Andaman
1. Shri Rakesh Bhatnagar, Special Secretary
2. Shri Sudhir Yadav, DGP

58
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee and recapitulated that in the earlier meeting held on 9 th October, 2013, the Committee
heard the Home Secretary on the subject “Coastal Security Management in the country’.
2.1 * * *
2.2. The Chairman, then, informed the Committee Members that previous day he received a
phone call from the Home Secretary saying that he intends to visit Patna in the aftermath of the
blasts that have taken place. So, he had granted Home Secretary leave of absence in view of the
importance of issue and asked him to depute Additional Secretary and other officers to depose
before the Committee on the issues and queries raised in the previous sitting.
2.3 He further informed that response received from the Gujarat Government had been sent to
the Home Ministry for comments.
[At this stage, witnesses were called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs Secretary, Shipping,
Vice-Admiral, Naval operations, Director, IB and other senior officers of the various Ministries and
recapitulated that certain queries and issues were raised by the Members in the previous sitting,
however due to paucity of time, the same could not be clarified on that day. He asked the officers
to be crisp and pointed while responding to the queries raised by the Members.
3.1 The Joint Secretary, MHA submitted the following:
● To meet the multifarious problems in maintaining coastal security along Gujarat coast
and customized coastal strategy needs, the Ministry of Home Affairs had released all
the due amount, except the fund earmarked for the purchase of the boat because as
finalization of the specification was in the process. Gujarat Government had sent some
specification, which had been referred to a technical group. The Group had made
some modification which had been sent back to the Government of Gujarat for its
concurrence. After concurrence, the boats would be acquired as per the need of the
Government of Gujarat.
● The Ministry of Shipping had informed that the mandate of Mercantile Marine
Department (MMD) was to check the technical aspect and sea-worthiness of the
vessel registered under the Merchant Shipping Act and MMD would not be in a
position to bring out the investment details. On the issue of benami investments made
in ships or boats and their use for tampering with the security of the country, JS MHA
submitted that at the time of registration of vessels, under the Merchant Shipping Act
by the Mercantile Marine Department officials, the details of ownership and other
things are put on record. However, the source of money and other details are beyond
the purview of the MMD to investigate and, if it is felt, the information can be shared
with the State Government by the respective security agencies for further investigate.
● With regard to security, verification and supervisory aspects in the ship-breaking units,
the Department of Steel had informed that the Ship-breaking Code was notified on
23.03.2013 and it had all type of security drills including joint inspection by the Navy,
Coast Guard customs and other security agencies on arrival of ships, and complete
details including photographic records of the ships were maintained. The arrival and
departure details of the ship crew were also well documented.
*** Relates to other matter.

59
● The State Maritime Boards are also empowered to issue order in consultation with
Navy and Coast Guard as and when required on the security issue.
● The Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships had undertaken a number of
projects to improve the coastal security environment of the Gujarat and they had
provided along the coast of Gujarat 42 lighthouses, 19 Radar Beacons, 4 DGPS,
2 Deep Sea Water Channels, 1 Vessel Traffic Service for the Gulf of Kutch, which
is sufficient to meet the need of navigational safety requirement of the Gujarat waters.
The DGLL was fully involved in setting up of coastal surveillance system in a creative
manner since early 2000. The DGLL had established National Automatic Identification
System Network for tracking suitably-equipped vessel. A pilot project of automatic
identification system for tracking sub 20 metre vessels, plying up to 50 kms. from the
seacoast, in the coast of Gujarat had been undertaken.
● The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has also installed V ATMS (Vessel and Air-
Traffic Management System) in Western Coast and also procured 23 ISVs. These ISVs
have been deployed in consultation with the Coast Guard. There is an Offshore
Coordination Committee which functions under the supervision of DG, Coast Guard.
Evaluation of security is carried out every six months. The OSCC has the overall
responsibility of security and there are regular meetings between the Ministry of
Petroleum, Coast Guard, ONGC and all other stakeholders. Efforts are being made to
further strengthen the security.
● Last year, the Naval Headquarters proposed National Maritime Domain Awareness
Project to the Ministry of Defence, whose main centre would be in the National
Command, Control and Communication Integration Centre in Delhi. The centre would
integrate all the visual feeds and all the satellite imagery. This proposal is with the
Ministry of Finance and it would go to the Cabinet Committee on Security shortly.
With this proposal, there will be complete integration to the satisfaction of the Indian
Navy.
● For surveillance in inundated areas in Rann of Kutch, the Government has invited
Global Expression of Interest for technological solution. Out of Thirty-nine parties who
have responded, thirty-four parties have made presentation. Nine such stretches have
been identified and in all the nine stretches, the parties will make the demonstration of
the equipment with the Border Security Forces. After that, a decision will be taken.
Presently, BSF has taken the rear position behind the Rann of Kutch and the patrolling
is done to check intrusion in the area.
3.2 On the issues of dealing with oil spilling in the sea and the possibility of involvement of
insurgents therein, the Shipping Secretary informed that a cess of 50 paise per metric tonne is
collected and deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. This fund has to be drawn through a
scheme which will be taken to the EFC, and after approval, fund would be provided for equipment
to the ports for meeting these contingencies. The proposal to collect the cess was launched in 1988
and the Government is in the process of devising a scheme
3.3 With regard to regular audit under ISVs, enhancement of equipment like radio-active
screening, etc., the DG, Shipping responded that out of around 187 non-major ports, there are 53
non-major ports where export-import trade is undertaken and all such ports, where foreign ships
come, are covered under the ISPS code. Under the ISPS code, various drills are carried out and
a regular audit is done including suggestion for necessary equipment and other things. However on
the issues of seeking financial assistance from the MHA to abide by those requirements of the
ISPS, the Joint Secretary, MHA submitted that the issue will be considered in the next meeting.

60
Regarding strengthening VTM system between Okha and Jaffarabad, a representative of the
Ministry of Shipping informed that there is already Static Sensor Network along Okha to
Jaffarabad for proper coverage and in case, there is a requirement for further strengthening, VTMS
can be considered.
3.4 Regarding setting up of Coast Guard Station at Hazira (Surat), the Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Defence informed that there was already a Coastal Marine Police Station at Hazira. There would
also be a Coastal Marine Police Station at Dahej; in a very short distance of a few kilometres.
Apart from that, there was a Coast Guard Air Enclave at a distance of only 40 nautical miles on
south of Hazira. Responding to a pointed query on efficacy of the functioning of the district
control rooms under the District Magistrates, the representative of Coast Guard submitted that as
of now, the Police Control Room is the make-shift District Control Room under the control of the
District Magistrate, as they don’t have a dedicated operations room, for coastal security purposes
during the coastal security exercises which are conducted every six months.
3.5 Giving account of the recent seizure of a ship near Tuticorin, the JS (Navy), MoD
informed that the a large amount of arms and ammunition were recovered from a Sierra Leone
vessel, which was being operated by an American company. The ship was well within the
territorial waters and the crew members, who were of different nationality, were under custody.
The State Police is investigating the whole thing. JS further submitted that these vessels, which
are deployed in the high seas to provide private armed contract security personnel to merchant
vessels, are a kind of floating armories. At various international forums, including the United
Nations-led Initiative on Piracy the Government has requested to reduce the ‘high-risk area’, off
the coast of Somalia, which has presently been defined by international norms, right up to the
Eastern Coast of India. The Government wants to get it reduced to 65 degrees East Longitude,
which is roughly half of the Arabian Sea. The Government has also raised the issue at a number
of forums saying that as soon as an armed personnel who is supposed to be employed as a private
security guard in a merchant vessel enters waters, his details along with details of the arms and
ammunition that he is carrying, should be reported to India.
3.6 The Director, IB informed that cases of arms smuggling in the Sunderbans area has not
come to the notice of the Government though the Government has now put people in place to
investigate into this. He, however, admitted incidents of cattle smuggling in the area through three
routes viz. one route is via Hingalganj, through Kalindi River by boat, into Bangladesh; the second
route is Sarbaria to Dhaniakhali on the Indian side, and, then, by boat along the Rajmangal River
into the jungles inside Bangladesh. But this route is now rarely used because a new Himnagar
Immigration Post has come up there. The third route is through Jharkhali via Canning, Basanti.
Smugglers take the cattle by trucks, and, finally, by boat into Bangladesh’s Hari Nagar and Munshi
Ganj areas. Each boat carries about 16 to 18 cattle.
3.7 The Director, IB further informed that there are about 5000 Rohingya Muslims who have
entered the country through Indo-Bangla border. Some of them, of course, are genuine refugees
but the security concern is there. About 248 people have been arrested in Bengal, Assam and other
places. The Government is keeping a close track on them as they are also there in certain clusters
in Mewat, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and South India.
4. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

61
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7 th January, 2014 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Adsul
7. Shri L.K. Advani
8. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Naveen Jindal
13. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.
14. Shri Rathod Ramesh
15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed
16. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Secretary
2. Shri Rajiv Sharma, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Lokesh Jha, Joint Secretary (PP)
61

62
4. Shri S.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary (BM)
5. Shri Rakesh Singh, Joint Secretary (IS-I)
6. Shri V . Vumlunmang, Joint Secretary (F)
7. Shri Shambhu Singh, Joint Secretary (NE)
8. Shri M.A. Ganapathy, Joint Secretary (NM)
9. Shri R.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary (K)
10. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (CS)
Representatives of Intelligence Bureau
1. Shri S.A. Ibrahim, Director
2. Shri Rajiv Jain, Additional Director
3. Shri Anand Kumar, Additional Director
4. Shri M.K. Lall, Joint Director
Representative of CRPF
Shri Dilip Trivedi, DG
Representatives of CISF
1. Shri Arvind Ranjan, DG
2. Shri A.C. Verma, Special DG
3. Shri S.B. Singh, IG
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri B.S. Bassi, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri S.N. Shrivastava, Special Commissioner of Police
3. Shri T.N. Mohan, Special Commissioner of Police
Representatives of NSG
1. Shri B.S. Das, IG (Ops.)
2. Shri Enos Massey, Major
Representative of Ministry of Urban Development
Shri C.K. Khaitan, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Shipping
Shri N. Muruganantam, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Steel
Shri T. Srinivas, Director
Representatives of Steel Authority of India Ltd.
1. Shri H.S. Pati, Director (Pers.)
2. Shri Samir Swarup, DGM (Pers.)
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri G. Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Ocean Development
Shri Ravikant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Department of Atomic Energy
1. Shri K.A.P. Sinha, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar, IG, Atomic Energy

63
Representatives of Indian Air Force
1 Shri B. Suresh, ACAS Ops.
2. Shri Manmeet Singh, D Ops. AD
Representatives of Department of Space
1. Dr. Shankar Kumar, Sr. Hindi Officer, ISRO Office, New Delhi
2. Shri Mohit Satyadeep, Administrative Officer, ISRO Office, New Delhi
Representative of Ministry of Power
Shri R.S. Thakur, Director
Representatives of NMDC
1. Shri K. Jayan, DGM
2. Shri N.R.K. Prasad, DGM
Representatives of RINL
1. Shri Y .R. Reddy, Director
2. Shri P.K. Mahapatra, DGM
Representative of Ministry of Coal
Shri M.K. Sharma, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shrimati Rashmi, Aggarwal, Director
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the Committee and
wished all a happy and prosperous New Year, and thereafter, apprised them the agenda of the day
i.e. consideration and adoption of two draft Reports, namely, (i) 176
th Report on the functioning
of Delhi Police, and (ii) 177 th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme and hearing the Home
Secretary on Internal Security : Security of Vital Installations Including Airports.
2.1 The Chairman then recalled that the Committee discussed the subject ‘Delhi Police’ at
length. The Committee received suggestions and incorporated most of them. With regard to Costal
Security Scheme also, the Committee had enough opportunity to go through the presentations made
by various stakeholders involved in the Coastal Security Scheme. He recapitulated that the
Committee had an opportunity to visit the East Coast and the Southern Coast and visited Nellore
in Andhra Pradesh and Chennai in Tamil Nadu, and had interaction with the concerned State
Governments. The Committee had enough inputs from the two State Governments. Beside that, the
Committee also received views from the Coastal State Governments. The Committee also called the
agencies involved in the coastal security and discussed the issue with them threadbare.
2.2 The Chairman then informed that he received a letter from Shri Naveen Jindal raising
following three issues:–
** *
Coastal Security Scheme
(a) the infrastructure proposed to be created for the coastal security management is not
adequate to meet the challenges from the coastal threats. Liberal funding and more
concerted comprehensive efforts were required to possess a safety cover from the sea
side.
*** Relates to other matter.

64
2.3 A member of the Committee referred to page 8 of Report on coastal security and pointed
that the State of Maharashtra had not sent its comments, which was very unfortunate because
coastal security got its importance mainly after 26/11 incident. Since the incident took place in the
State of Maharashtra but not receiving a report from there was not a congenial thing. The
Chairman then stated that the Maharashtra Government was requested time and again to furnish the
response but despite that, unfortunately, the State Government had not responded.
2.4 The Chairman then directed the secretariat to incorporate the suggestions in the reports.
The Committee, thereafter, adopted the 176
th Report on the functioning of Delhi Police, and (ii)
177th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme with the above modifications.
3.0-4.2 * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.17 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

65
ANNEXURES

67
ANNEXURE -I
STATE-WISE COMPONENTS OF COASTAL SECURITY SCHEME (PHASE-I)
Sl. Name of Coastal Vessels Jeeps Motor Check Out- Barracks Rigid
No. State/UT Police Cycles Post post Inflated
Stations Boats
1. Gujarat 10 30 20 101 25 46 – –
2. Maharashtra 12 28 25 57 32 – 24 –
3. Goa 3 9 6 9 –- – – 10
4. Karnataka 5 15 9 4 – – – –
5. Kerala 8 24 16 24 – – – –
6. Tamil Nadu 12 24 12 36 40 12 – –
7. Andhra Pradesh 6 18 12 18 – – – –
8. Odisha 5 15 10 15 – – – –
9. West Bengal 6 18 12 12 – – 6 –
10. Puducherry 1 3 2 3 – – – –
11. Lakshadweep 4 6 8 8 – – – –
12. Daman and Diu 1 4 3 5 – – – –
13. A&N Islands – 10 18 20 – – – –
T
OTAL: 73 204 153 312 97 58 30 10
A lump sum assistance of R10 lakh per coastal Police Station was also provided for computer and
equipments etc.
Implementation of the Scheme is complete except:
(a) Maharashtra – (1 CPS under construction, for 1 CPS action underway for construction and
for the third CPS, same is held up due to land acquisition problem.);
(b) West Bengal – (2 CPS – Construction work in progress);
(c) Odisha – (1 CPS is held up because of non-allotment of land by Paradip Port Trust); and
(d) Tamil Nadu – construction of 2 Out Posts dropped, as the same are not required by the
Tamil Nadu Government.

68
68
ANNEXURE -II
COASTAL SECURITY SCHEME (PHASE-II)
State-wise Physical Component
Sl. Name of Costal Boats/ Boats/ Number Four- Motor Remarks
No. State/UT Police V essels Vessels of Jetties Wheelers Cycles
Stations
12 Ton Others
1. Gujarat 12 21 10 (5 5 12 24 –
Ton)
2. Maharashtra 7 14 – 3 7 14 –
3. Goa 4 4 – 2 4 8 –
4. Karnataka 4 12 – 2 4 8 –
5. Kerala 10 20 – 4 10 20 –
6. Tamil Nadu 30 – 20 12 30 60 –
(19
mtr)
7. Andhra Pradesh 15 30 – 7 15 30 –
8. Odisha 13 26 – 5 13 26 –
9. West Bengal 8 7 – 4 8 16 –
10. Daman and Diu 2 4 – 2 2 4 –
11. Lakshadweep 3 6 12
# 23 6 –
12. Puducherry 3 6 – 2 3 6 –
13. A&N Islands 20 – 10 LV 10 20 20 10**
23
# MPOC
TOTAL: 131 150 75 60 131 242 –
A Lump sum assistance of R15 Lakh per costal Police Station is also given for surveillance equipment, computer
systems and furniture.
LV-Large Vessels;
# RIB (Rigid Inflatable Boats)
** Marine Police Operational Centres (MPOC)

69
69
ANNEXURE -III
COASTAL SECURITY SCHEME (PHASE-II) STATEMENT ON RELEASE OF FUNDS TO COASTAL STATES/UTS
CPS  
@  48 L for  R
all States/UTs 
except 
@ 60 L for  
Laksha-
dweep 
&  20 L for R
upgradation 
of existing 
CPS in A&N 
Islands 
Jetties 
 @ 50 L 
Four 
Wheelers 
@ 7 L R
Two 
Wheelers 
@ 0.60 L R
Equipments
for CPS 
@ 15 L R
Sl. 
No. States/ts 
Nos. Total  Nos. Total Nos. Total Nos. Total 
Cost 
Total
No. 
of 
CPS 
Total Total Eligible 
Amount 
Amount 
Released 
1 Gujarat 12 576 5 250 12 84 24 14.4 12 180 1104.40 1104.40 
2 Maharashtra 336 3 150 7 49 14 8.4 7 105 648.40 243.0 0 
3 Goa 4 192 2 100 4 28 8 4.8 4 60 384.80 271.8 0 
4 Karnataka 4 192 2 100 4 28 8 4.8 4 60 384.80 384.8 0 
5 Kerala 10 480 4 200 10 70 20 12 10 150 912.00 400.0 0 
6 Tamil Nadu 30 1440 12 600 30 210 60 36 30 450 2736.00 2379.2 0 
Cons-
truction
of 10 
Marine 
Oper-
ations 
Centres 
R 200
L x 5
R 50
L x 3
R 100
L x 2
7 Andhra 
Pradesh 
15 720 7 350 15 105 30 18 15 225 1418.00 1392.10  
8 Odisha 13 624 5 250 13 91 26 15.6 13 195 1175.60 223.22  
9 West Bengal 8 384 4 200 8 56 16 9.6 8 120 769.60 200.00  
10 Daman & Diu 2 96 2 100 2 14 4 2.4 2 30 242.40 226.00 
11 Lakshadweep 3 180 2 100 3 21 6 3.6 3 45 349.60 309.19  
12 Puducherry 3 144 2 100 3 21 6 3.6 3 45 313.60 294.11  
13 Andaman 
and Nicobar 
Islands 
20 400 10 500 20 140 20 12 20 300 1350 2702.00 2702.00  
TOTAL 13141.20 10129.82 
Rupees in lakhs
7
Cost Cost

70
70
ANNEXURE-IV
LIST OF REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
Report Title of the Report
No.
12
1
st On Demand Nos. 42 and 44 of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs
for the year 1993-94
2nd The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privilege) Amendment Bill, 1992
3rd The Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1991
4th The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1992
5th The Census (Amendment) Bill, 1992
6th The Human Rights Commission Bill, 1993
7th The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
8th The Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993
9th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
10th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
11th The Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
12th The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994
13th The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 1992
14th The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1994
15th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
16th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
17th The Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
18th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1995
19th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 1995
20th The Working of Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
21st The Hire-Purchase (Amendment) Bill, 1989
22nd The Pondicherry (Administration) Amendment Bill, 1995
23rd The Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995
24th The Election Commission (Charging of Expenses on the Consolidated Fund of India)
Bill, 1994

71
12
25th The Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Bill, 1995
26th The Situation in Jammu and Kashmir
27th The Private Security Guards and Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 1994
28th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
29th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
30
th The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
31
st The Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventeenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
32
nd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
33rd The Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
34th Demands for Grants (1996-97) Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
35th The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1996
36th Insurgency situation in the North Eastern Region
37th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
38th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
39th The Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
40th The Lokpal Bill, 1996
41st The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Services) Amendment Bill, 1998
42nd The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998
43rd The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
44th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
45th The Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs
46th The Indian Majority (Amendment) Bill, 1997
47th The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1997
48th The Administrators-General (Amendment) Bill, 1998
49th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997
50th The Lokpal Bill, 1998
51st The Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1998

72
12
52nd The Notaries (Amendment) Bill, 1997
53rd Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Bill, 1998
54th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
55th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
56th The Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Company Affairs.
57th Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 1998
58th Explosive Substances (Amendment) Bill, 1999
59th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
60th The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
61st The Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
62nd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Supreme
Court Bill, 1994
63rd The Salaries Allowances, Leave and Pensions of the Officers and Servants of the Delhi
High Court Bill, 1994
64th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 1999
65th The Companies Bill, 1997
66th The Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Bill, 1999
67th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Home Affairs
68
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixtieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
69
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Ministry
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
70
th The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1999
71st The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Personnel, .Public Grievances and
Pensions
72nd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
73rd The Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
74th The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Bill, 2000
75th Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir
76th The Repealing and Amending Bill, 1999
77th The Indian Divorce (Amendment) Bill, 1999

73
12
78th The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000
79th The Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
80th The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2000
81st Lotteries (Prohibition) Bill, 1999
82nd North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 1998
83rd Personnel Policies of Central Industrial Security Force and Central Secretariat Service
84th The Lokpal Bill, 2000
85th Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts
86th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
87th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
88th The Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
89th The Companies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2001
90th The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2001
91st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its Seventy-fifth Report on Cross-Border Terrorism and Insurgency in Jammu
and Kashmir
92
nd The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2001
93rd The Competition Bill, 2001
94th The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002
95th The Repatriation of Prisoners Bill, 2002
96th The Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme
97th The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002
98th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Home Affairs
99th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
100th Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Department of Development of North Eastern Region
101st Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Law and Justice
102nd The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Bill, 2003
103rd Salaries and allowances of the Judicial officers of the Union Territories Bill, 2003
104th Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Bill, 2003
105th Constitution (One hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
106th Constitution (One Hundredth Second Amendment) Bill, 2003 and the State of Delhi Bill, 2003
107th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
108th The Assam Rifles Bill, 2003

74
12
109th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Home Affairs
110th Demands for Grants (2004-05) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
111th Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003
112th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Home Affairs
113th Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
114th The Displaced Persons Claims and Other Laws Repeal Bill, 2004
115th The Disaster Management Bill, 2005
116th The State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Bill, 2004
117th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third
Report of the Committee pertaining to the Personnel Policy of CISF
118th The Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Bill, 2005
119th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
120th The Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Development of NER
121st Examination of Administration’ of Union Territories
122nd The Communal Violence (Prevention, control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005
123rd Sashastra Seema Bal Bill, 2006
124th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred and Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
125th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
126
th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Home Affairs
127th The Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of DoNER
128th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006
129th The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Constitution (One
Hundred and Seventh Amendment) Bill, 2007
130th Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in One
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report on DFGs (2007-08) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
131st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report on DFG (2007-08) of the Ministry of DoNER
132nd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Home Affairs
133rd The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
134th The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006
135th Border Fencing and Floodlighting Projects of Indo-Pak Border
136th Revamping and Revitalization of Civil Defence in the Country
137th Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants

75
12
138th The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2008
139th The Private Detective Agencies (Regulation) Bill, 2007
140th Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in One
Hundred Thirty-second Report on DfGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of Home Affairs
141st Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-third Report on DfGs (2008-09) of the Ministry of DoNER
142nd Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration
143rd The Land Ports Authority of India Bill, 2009
144th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of Home Affairs
145th The Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
146th The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2010
147th The Repatriation of Prisoners (Amendment) Bill, 2010
148th The New Delhi Municipal Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
149th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o DoNER
150th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the M/o Home Affairs
151st The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010
152nd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Revamping and Revitalisation of Civil Defence in the
country
153rd Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Thirty-fifth Report on Border Fencing and Flood Lighting Projects along Indo-
Pak Borders
154th The Border Security Force (Amendment) Bill, 2011
155th The Enemy Property (Amendment) Second Bill, 2010
156th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendation/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Forty-second Report on Implementations of Central Scheme of Modernisation of
Prison Administration
157th Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2011
158th North-Eastern Areas (Re-organisation) Amendment Bill, 2011
159th The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2011
160th The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2011
161st Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Home Affairs
162nd Demands for Grants (2012-13) of M/o  DoNER
163rd Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad
164th The Constitution (One Hundred Eighteenth Amendment) Bill, 2012

76
12
165th Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Sixty-first Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Home Affairs
166
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its One
Hundred and Sixty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region
167
th The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012
168th The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Bill, 2012
169th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Home Affairs
170th The Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
171st The North Eastern Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
172nd Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
One Hundred Sixty-third Report on Working of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police
Academy, Hyderabads.
173
rd Strengthening of the working of Ministry of DoNER for effective implementation of
Policies, Programmes, Schemes and Projects meant for North Eastern Region
174th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Home
Affairs
175
th Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region
176
th Report on the Functioning of Delhi Police
l77th Report on the Coastal Security Scheme
178th Report on the Disaster Management in the Country
179th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in its One Hundred Thirty-seventh Report on Rehabilitation of J&K Migrants
180th Report on the Administration of Union Territories (Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Chandigarh)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.