Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HOME AFFAIRS
REPORT NO.
222
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on th December, )11 2019
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December, )11 2019
The Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HOME AFFAIRS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT
The Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11th December , 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
C.S. (H.A.) - 436


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-70
Chapter-I : Genesis of the worsening traffic situation in Delhi ............................. 1-12
Chapter-II : Selection of the subject and Proceedings of the Committee in
a Nutshell............. ................................................................................... 13-15
Chapter-III : Role, response and shortcomings of various stakeholders
dealing with the management of worsening traffic situation
in Delhi........................ .......................................................................... 16-26
Chapter-IV : Solutions to the Traffic Problem in Delhi............................. ............... 27-65
Chapter-V : Studies by IIT Delhi and Central Road Research Institute.................... 66-70
5. R
ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ......................................................... 71-87
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 8 9-110
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 111- 116

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September , 2019)
1. Shri Anand Sharma —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya
4. Shri Manish Gupta
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher
17. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
18. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
19. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
21. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
23. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
24. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
25. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
26. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
27. Shrimati Sarmistha Sethi
28. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
29. Shri Ravneet Singh
30. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
31. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P .P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Vijay Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer
Shri Akshay Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred
Twenty Second Report on ‘The Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi ‘.
2. The Committee, in its meeting held on 2 nd April, 2018 decided to examine the subject ‘The Management
of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’ and held four meetings, i.e., on 4 th October, 2018, 14th December,
2018, 11th October, 2019 and 22 nd October, 2019 besides undertaking a local visit to the IIT, Delhi on 5 th
November, 2019.  In these meetings the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the Government of NCT of Delhi, Delhi Police,
Delhi Development Authority (DDA), Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), North Delhi Municipal
Corporation (North DMC), East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC), South Delhi Municipal Corporation
(SDMC), New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC), National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB), Central
Road Research Institute (CRRI) and IIT Delhi. Besides these, views of the representatives from the State
Governments of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana were also heard.
3. The Committee, while making its Recommendations/Observations, has mainly relied upon the following
documents:-
(i) Background Notes furnished by the Ministry for various meetings;
(ii) Presentations made by Home Secretary, the Government of NCT of Delhi, Delhi Police, DDA,
North DMC, EDMC, SDMC, NDMC, CRRI, IIT Delhi and other officials during various
meetings of the Committee;
(iii) Annual report of the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iv) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the questionnaires on the subject sent by
the Secretariat; and
 (v) Replies to the queries/comments/suggestions of the Members, raised during the Committee’s
meetings, as furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 9
th December, 2019 and adopted the
same.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. For further convenience, abbreviations used in
the report have been compiled in a table under the Acronyms section.
Anand Sharma
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
9th December, 2019 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana 18, 1941 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Home Affairs
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

          ACRONYMS
AIS : Automotive Industry Standard
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Sciences
BS-VI : Bharat Stage-VI
BRT : Bus Rapid Transit
CBD : Central Business District
CCTV : Closed-circuit Television
CNG : Compressed Natural Gas
CRRI : Central Road Research Institute
DTC : Delhi Transport Corporation
DDA : Delhi Development Authority
DUSIB : Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DIMTS : Delhi Integrated Mass Transit System
EDMC : East Delhi Municipal Corporation
ECS : Estimated Car Spaces
EPE : Eastern Peripheral Expressway
EPCA : Environment Pollution Control Authority
EVs : Electronic V ehicles
GNCTD : Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
GPS : Global Positioning System
GSDP : Gross State Domestic Product
HTVs : Heavy Transport Vehicles
HPC : High Powered Committee
HHDs : Hand Held Devices
ITS : Intelligent Transport System
IRDAI : Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
IIBI : Insurance Information Bureau of India
ITMS : Intelligent Traffic Management System
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
(iv)

(v)
IGNOU : Indira Gandhi National Open University
IDTR : Institute of Driving and Traffic Research
LED : Light Emitting Diode
LCD : Liquid Crystal Display
MVA : Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act
MLCPs : Multi-level Car Parking
MoH&UA : Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs
MOU : Memorandum of Understanding
MCD : Municipal Corporation of Delhi
MMI : Multi-Modal Integration
MOST : Ministry of Surface Transport
NCR : National Capital Region
NDMC : New Delhi Municipal Council
NCRPB : Nation Capital Region Planning Board
NGT : National Green Tribunal
NHAI : National Highway Authority of India
North DMC : North Delhi Municipal Corporation
NMT : Non Motorised Transport
NMV : Non-motorized Vehicle 
NCRTC : National Capital Region Transport Corporation
NOIDA : New Okhla Industrial Development Authority
PWD : Public Works Department
PPP : Public Private Partnership
PUC : Pollution Under Control
RWAs : Residents Welfare Associations
RAIDS : Road Accident In-Depth Study
RRTS : Regional Rapid Transit System
RLVD : Red Light Violation Detection Camera
SIAM : Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers
SDMC : South Delhi Municipal Corporation

(vi)
SMS : Short Message service
TSR : Three Seater Rickshaw
TDFS : Transport Demand Forecast Study
TRIPP : Transportation, Research and Injury Prevention Project
TSR : Three-Seater auto Rickshaw
UTTIPEC : Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & Engineering)
Centre
ULBs : Urban Local Bodies
VKT : Vehicle Kilometres Travelled
VMS : Variable Message Sign
WPE : Western Peripheral Expressway

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
GENESIS OF THE WORSENING TRAFFIC SITUATION IN DELHI
1.1 Background
1.1.1 Mobility is one of the vital factors in the economic growth of cities and their capacity to sustain
growth. The efficiency of mega cities and urban centres depends largely upon improvement in smooth
movement of traffic and transport and the ability to commute for both its people and freight. There is a
direct co-relation between migration of people towards mega cities and growth of private and public transport.
In the competition between private and public transportation, it is usually the private transportation which
provides more comprehensive, comfortable and flexible mobility in the entire urban areas across the world.
However, this increase is not sustainable in the long term.
1.1.2 Delhi, though a historical city, was a small town in 1901, housing a population of only about 0.4
million which started increasing gradually after it became the capital of British India in 1911.  During and
after the partition of the country, the city also witnessed a large influx of people migrating from Pakistan and
settling in Delhi.  Over the years, Delhi has expanded its boundaries, witnessing exponential increase in both
human and vehicle population.
1.1.3 T oday, Delhi has emerged as one of the largest cities in the world, covering an area of 1,483 sq. kms.
It shares its borders on the North, West and South with Haryana and on the East with Uttar Pradesh. These
adjoining States have provided affordable accommodation with different amenities, commercial/ industrial
areas and have become preferred place for the people. Because of this people residing in these areas or are
employed in commercial/ industrial areas have to commute long distances and wade through these States to
attend workplaces at Delhi and vice versa.
1.1.4 Some of the major factors that are contributing to the present problems in Delhi relating to the traffic
have been discussed in detail as below:
Population Growth
1.1.5 Delhi is witnessing high growth with rapid increase in population. The surrounding urban settlements
of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh are increasingly merging into Delhi, when seen in terms of business and
human settlements, thereby making Delhi as a very large urban agglomerate.
1.1.6 The current population of Delhi is pegged at 19.23 Million persons (16.79 million persons as per
Census-2011 and 22.5 Million by 2025 has been predicted in Delhi Master Plan-2021), against 13.85 million
persons recorded in Census-2001. The population growth trends of Delhi since year 1951 is as under:
Y ear 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001 2011
Population 17,44,072 26,58,612 40,65,698 62,20,406 94,20,644 1,38,50,507 1,67,87,941
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
1.1.7 The decennial growth trends show that the city had recorded population growth of 17.4 % since the
year 2001.
1.1.8 Delhi is very rapidly growing, recording an average annual population growth rate of about 4.5 % as

2
against the national average growth rate of 2.1 % per annum and this is closely followed by Bangalore (3.4
%) and Mumbai (2.7 %). Further, it is of significance to note that the present Delhi population accounts for
1.34 % of the country’s population whereas in area, the NCT of Delhi (measuring an area of 1485 sq. Km)
accounts for just 0.05 % of the total area.  Taking into account the above population growth trends, Delhi is
expected to become the third largest populous city on the globe by the year 2025. Also as per the Census-
2001, the percentage of villages with more than 10,000 inhabitants was 15.18% and the population percentage
was 53.77 which drastically fell to 5.83% and 33.79%, respectively as per the Census-2011.
1.1.9 The figures point to a trend of urbanization of Delhi as more and more persons are moving towards
the urban parts of Delhi.  Delhi is witnessing a steady in-bound immigration due to available employment
opportunities. Workforce participation rate (working population divided by total population and multiplied by
100) was 32.5 % and 32.72 % for the years 1991 and 2001, respectively. Participation rate is expected to be
38.1 % in the year 2021.
Vehicle Growth Trends in Delhi
1.1.10  The urban population in Delhi is predominantly dependent on road transport. Delhi has the largest
number of vehicles on the roads as compared to any other Indian city. As per statistics of the year 2017, the
annual registration of vehicles in Delhi was 7,78,016 and total number of vehicles in Delhi were about 10.8
million which grew in year 2018 to about 11.204 million registered vehicles accounting for 12.5 % of the
total automobiles in the country.
1.1.11  The city is dominated by private vehicles, especially two wheelers and cars which together constitute
around 94.1 % of the total registered vehicles. On an average, more than 1700 new motor vehicles (about
550 cars and 1150 two wheelers)  are getting added on to the Delhi roads every day. This excludes the
vehicles getting registered in the National Capital Region (NCR) that ply on the Delhi road network on a daily
basis. Vehicle population growth in Delhi has sharply increased registering an average annual rate of 7.40 %
in the case of private vehicles and 9.15 % in the case of commercial vehicles (GNCTD, 2014). On the
contrary, Buses, Taxis and Three Seater Rickshaw (TSR) i.e. auto rickshaws only constitute about 0.35 %,
1.40 % and 1.68 %, respectively of the above 11.204 million registered vehicles. Moreover, increase in
expansion of Delhi Metro network to some extent has only attracted the bus ridership but there is a very little
effect of the metro on the number of private vehicles because metros are still not accessible in all areas and
lack of multi-modal integration at metro stations causes delay and increases travel time.
1.1.12  More vehicles on roads have accentuated the probability of road accidents and road rages as all the
roads have to take all types of vehicles, pedestrians and the slow moving traffic. As per the Road Accident
Statistics in Delhi-2018 slow moving vehicles like cycle rickshaws stood at 2,07,587, excluding bicycles. At
the same time, the trip share of bicycles on most of the Delhi roads has presently dwindled from about two
decades ago 15-18 % to 2 - 4 % now.
1.1.13  As per the Transport Demand Forecast Study (TDFS) undertaken by Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and approved by the Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning
& Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) in 2011, between 2001 and 2008, the private motor vehicle trips have
increased from 28% to 35% and non-motorized vehicle trips from 9% to 15%; however, bus trips have
decreased from 60% to 42% of the total number of trips.
1.1.14  The total length of the Delhi road network is presently about 33,000 kms. out of which 1400 kms. is
the primary road network. Incidentally, Delhi has one of the highest road densities in the country, which is

3
1794 kms. of road length per 100 sq. km. of area. However, the growth in Delhi’s road network during the
last decade is only about 2.1 per cent i.e. from 20.0 % to 22.1 % (from 2001 to 2011), which is quite less
as compared to the growth in the vehicular population of Delhi. Obviously, this scenario implies that the
capacity augmentation of the road network is going at a much slower pace leaving a huge shortfall in the
roadway capacity required to carry the motor vehicles plying in the city.
1.1.15  Moreover, there is a limitation in expanding the road network in Delhi as roads are already occupying
21% of the total area of the city. Also, other measures like road widening, construction of a number of
flyovers/grade separators have not been able to decongest the roads and meet the increasing load of vehicular
traffic. Also, introduction and expansion of the Metro Rail Network has not contributed effectively as only
bus commuters have shifted to the Metro Rail but they have not given up their personal vehicles.
Absence of Restrictions on the Vehicles Entering Delhi Ever y Day
1.1.16  As per the study conducted by Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) namely “Megacity Logistics:
Metrics, Tools And Measures For Sustainability”, in the year 2018, the number of vehicles entering Delhi
every day from other states were 6,19,946 whereas every day movement of existing vehicles of Delhi was
6,13,797. The respective figures for the year 2009, were 4,72,852 and 5,50,841. Hence, there has been an
average growth of 3 per cent in overall vehicular movement on the roads of Delhi in the last decade.  Also,
during the year 2018, 21.35% of the freight vehicles entering Delhi used the roads of Delhi just to bypass
Delhi and there was no plan till recently to regulate or restrict vehicular movement from the neighbouring
states.
Differential Gr owth of Road Infrastructur e and Absence of Non Motorised Transpor t (NMT)
Infrastructure
1.1.17  The ever increasing number of road users competing for limited road space on an already crowded
road network poses a major challenge for safe management of traffic on Delhi roads. Delhi’s Population has
experienced a four-fold increase in the last decade and has become 20.5 million (approx.) in 2017.
Correspondingly, the motor vehicular population has also seen massive growth i.e. from 2.17 lakhs in 1971
to 1.08 crore (approx) in 2017. Although, the number of motor vehicles on Delhi roads has increased 50
times (approx) between 1971 to 2017; but the road length could only be increased from 8,380 Kms. in 1971
to 33,198 kms. up to 2011, indicating an increase in capacity of about four times (approx.). This differential
rate of increase in vehicular population and road length has resulted in increased vehicle  density in the
region.
1.1.18  Though, Non Motorized Transport (NMT) provides a cheap, alternate, viable and environment friendly
option against motorized transports for travelling short distances, infrastructure for the same is almost
absent.
Inadequate Mass Public Transport System like Buses etc.
1.1.19  Buses are the most convenient, safe and economical mode of public transport to travel long distances
and travel across the city. But, the number of buses in Delhi has remained static at 5561 buses (DTC 3882
and Cluster 1679) since the last induction of buses during the Commonwealth Games of 2010. At the same
time, the population of Delhi has increased sharply since 2010 but the ridership of buses is only 41.22 lakh
per day (DTC buses-29.02 lakh and cluster buses-12.2 lakh).

4
1.1.20  There has been a shortage of about 6000 buses in Delhi which is acting as a deterrent to availability
of public transport in Delhi and NCR. Moreover, as per the targets set in Master Plan for Delhi, about 80%
of the public transport ridership will be reached by 2020. Moreover, in the year 1998, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court  in the M.C. Mehta vs Union of India & Ors.  had issued directives indicating requirement for 10,000
Stage Carriage buses.  Subsequently, the High Court had also asked Delhi Government to increase the
number of buses to 11,000. To add up, lack of rationalisation of bus routes has also contributed to the traffic
congestion on the roads of Delhi. Though there has been an increase in public transport with the introduction
of Metro trains yet people still use cars and scooters due to limited reach and lack of multi-modal integration
at metro stations.
1.1.21  Furthermore, inadequate public transport and absence of last mile connectivity with public transport
are some of the factors that have compelled people to use private vehicles. And also, being a convenient
mode of travel, for both short (<3Km) and long (>10Km) trips, cars/ two-wheelers have a distinct edge
over non-motorized mode of transports like rickshaws and bicycles.
No Plan for Freight Movement
1.1.22  Delhi has the second highest GSDP (Gross State Domestic Product) per capita income i.e. ` 360,644
(current prices; 2017–18, statistictimes.com) after Goa in India. This is an indicator of the increasing
purchasing power of the people of Delhi. This gets translated into higher demand for consumables and it, in
turn, requires more goods to be transported into Delhi from other parts of the country.  Hence, there is an
increasing volume of commercial vehicles entering into the city on a daily basis. Regardless of this, a Freight
Movement Plan has not been formulated so far. Furthermore, everyday lakhs of vehicles bypassing Delhi
also enter the City and create traffic congestion at various intersections.
1.1.23  As per the study conducted by the CRRI and sponsored by the Society of Indian Automobile
Manufacturers (SIAM) in 2009 on ‘Road Traffic and Air Pollution in Delhi’, the freight traffic share in
‘inner part’ of the city was only 2%, and that area was dominated by private vehicles, in the ‘middle part’ of
the city it was 4% and in the ‘outer part’ of the city it was about 12%.  The mean age of freight vehicles
(calculated from year 1999 to 2017) 1 is as under:
Sl. No. Freight vehicle type Mean Age (in years)
1. LT-Diesel 4.41
2. Goods Auto-CNG 4.72
3. Goods Van-CNG 4.53
4. HT-Diesel 4.52
5. MT-Diesel 4.87
1.1.24  Also, the age of goods vehicles moving in the Outer Cordon and within the National Capital Territory
of Delhi is as under:
1 “Megacity Logistic: Metrics, Tools and Measures for Sustainability”, Report submitted by the CRRI to the World Bank Group,
Year 2018.

5
1-10 years More than 10 1-10 years More than 10
(in %) years (in %) (in %) years(in %)
Light commercial 94.3 5.7 97.4 2.6
V ehicles
Two Axel Trucks 92.1 7.9 97.6 2.4
Multi Axel Trucks 94.3 5.7 95.9 4.1
1.1.25  As per the Traffic Loads Assessment on the basis of Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT), the respective
shares of each type of vehicle are as under:
S. No. Vehicle Type           Estimated Vehicle - Kms / day ( in Lakhs)
2009 2010 2015 2017
1 Cars 678.50 (45.06) 731.58 (45.51) 997.02 (47.07) 1152.18 (47.77)
2 Two Wheelers 546.57 (36.3) 576.34 (35.85) 725.15 (34.24) 805.58 (32.40)
3 Autos 196.04 (13.02) 210.68 (13.1) 283.87 (13.4) 328.05 (13.60)
4 Goods Vehicles 57.32 (3.81) 61.92 (3.85) 84.91 (4.01) 99.04 (4.11)
5 Buses 27.17 (1.8) 27.17 (1.69) 27.17 (1.28) 27.17(1.13)
TOTAL 1505.60 (100.0) 1607.69 (100.0) 2118.12 (100.0) 2412.02(100.0)
1.1.26  From the above table, it is evident that the freight vehicles share is about 4% and the VKT is increasing
at an average rate of 7%.
1.1.27  Additionally, about 5,00,000 daily trips were generated in the year 2017 and it has been estimated that
the annual rise in number of trips would be 4.1%.  Accordingly, as per the data for the year 2018, freight
trips constituted 3% of the total trips in that year.
1.1.28  It may be seen that annual trips of vehicles is estimated to increase at an annual rate of 4.1 per cent
and also VKT is slated to increase at an average rate of 7 per cent. Hence, looking at the present scenario, the
volume of freight vehicles on Delhi roads will definitely increase.
Differential Funding Pattern for Development of Road Infrastructure
1.1.29  Since, two wheelers and cars together account for 94.1 % of the vehicles in Delhi, the
infrastructure in Delhi has been developed keeping in view the private vehicles, especially cars. One of
the major reasons for congestion on the roads of Delhi is the disorientation in funding towards
transportation. The present day funding is directed more towards developing car-oriented infrastructure,
like road widening, flyovers, foot-over-bridges and underpasses and there is also a general tendency to
assume that development of car-oriented infrastructure may be allowed to continue along with
augmentation of public transport systems which is hampering the development of other necessary
infrastructures.

6
Enforcement Issues:- Inadequate Fines, Traffic Rules Violations by Riders
1.1.30  The Delhi Traffic Police enforces discipline through prosecutions for major traffic violations such
as violation of traffic signals, violation of restrictions, triple riding, riding without helmet, pillion riding
without helmet, improper parking, dangerous driving, drunken driving, minor driving, over speeding, etc.
1.1.31  The year-wise detail of the prosecutions by Delhi Police for the violation of traffic rules is as under:
Offence No. of Challans
2016 2017 2018
(upto 15.09.2018)
Red light jumping 92,037 1,67,911 1,64,301
Over speeding 86,771 1,39,985 1,02,299
Triple riding 1,02,352 1,56,043 1,48,412
Rider Without helmet 8,88,913 11,02,354 9,02,877
Pillion rider without helmet 3,96,110 4,92,192 4,24,602
Dangerous driving 2,05,470 2,34,422 1,72,338
Drunken driving 28,006 33,343 26,885
Not using seat belt 2,31,813 6,26,942 4,90,198
Use of mobile phone while driving 4,930 15,558 12,445
Improper parking 6,76,301 10,88,734 8,65,659
1.1.32  The details of year-wise challans issued and the amount collected since year 2015 is as under:
(` in crore)
Y ear Total Challan Court Challan Compounding Challan Compounding Amount
2015 34,11,256 3,42,463 30,68,793 64.53
2016 40,25,243 2,96,504 37,28,739 66.89
2017 62,87,486 3,53,499 59,33,987 98.56
2018 49,58,736 2,62,681 46,96,055 79.19
(upto 15/09)
1.1.33  The Delhi Traffic Police through its concerted and focused efforts has been taking actions against
buses, Heavy Transport vehicles (HTVs) and commercial goods vehicles for violating traffic rules viz.
stopping at non designated bus stops, wrong overtaking, not plying in the designated lane, etc. Vehicles
under these categories were impounded and prosecuted for traffic violations. In addition, special enforcement
drives are also undertaken against plying of illegal e-rickshaws, app based diesel cabs, jugar vehicles and
Gramin Sewa vehicles. During the year 2017, a total of 17,72,293 commercial goods vehicles and 9,05,739
passengers vehicles and during the year 2018 (upto 30.04.2018), a total of 6,97,195 commercial goods
vehicles and 2,84,975 passengers vehicles have been prosecuted.

7
1.1.34  Delhi traffic police also carries out special drives against over speeding, drunken driving, improper
parking of public transport vehicles to rein in indisciplined public transport vehicles and to ensure passenger
safety. Action against e-rickshaws is also taken to carry out enforcement of no entry restrictions. The
Traffic Police also carries out drives to enforce directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court on road safety
whereby proposal in appropriate cases are sent to Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi and outside Delhi
to initiate the process of suspension of driving license of the traffic violators for not less than three months.
In the year 2017, about 1,96,121 recommendations for suspending driving licenses were made and upto 30
th
April, 2018, 40,590 recommendations had been made.
1.1.35  There is a general trend of increase in violations of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Supreme Court
directions. With the enactment of The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 which amended the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 the MVA rules has enhanced the penalties which have become more stringent.
Crunch of Parking Spaces and Commercial Establishments with High Footfall with no Parking
Facilities on Main Roads
1.1.36  The number of vehicles has multiplied several times and the pressure on roads is getting accumulated
and saturated every day. There is hardly any space on the roads for movement or parking spaces to
accommodate the ever increasing number of vehicles. Hence, the gap between parking demand (number of
cars in need for parking spaces) and parking supply (number of parking spaces sufficient to cars in need to
park) has resulted in parking shortages and, over the period, it has become one of the most formidable
causes of traffic congestion on the roads of Delhi. To add to this, parking of personal vehicles on roads have
reduced three carriageway roads to one carriageway road and this has made it difficult for both vehicles and
pedestrians to use roads optimally and has led to blocking of traffic on roads.
1.1.37  Besides, the details of number of challans issued by traffic Police on account of improper parking in
the year 2018 (15
th September, 2019) are as under:
Type of Vehicle No. of Challan (2018)
HTV 42,938
LGV/MMV 1,28,423
D V an 32,636
Charted Buses 12,558
Taxi 90,743
Car/Jeep 1,86,178
TSR 1,41,769
2 Wheelers 1,23,945
Others 1,06,469
TOTAL 8,65,659
1.1.38  Also during the above period 1,28,533 vehicles were towed away while 12,941 were clamped.

8
Encroachments of Pedestrian Spaces on Mar ket Roads by Hawkers/V endors
1.1.39  The Committee pointed out that encroachment of pedestrian spaces on market roads by Hawkers/
vendors is a major reason for traffic chaos and inquired from the concenred authorities about it.  In this
regard, in the meeting held on 11
th October, 2019, the South Delhi Municipal Corporation informed that for
removal of permanent encroachment, there is a well laid down procedure under the relevant sections of the
Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. Moreover, the removal of permanent encroachments is a onetime affair. However,
continuous drives need to be done to remove the temporary encroachments at various places specially at
commercial places like markets. To add up, encroachments on roads and footpaths by hawkers and vendors
prevents smooth movement of both vehicle and pedestrian traffic and is one of the major causes for traffic
congestion.
1.1.40  The Committee was further informed that a Special Task Force has been constituted by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India under the Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman, DDA to monitor the removal of permanent
encroachments and demolishing of permanent structures constructed illegally on the roadside. Joint drives
for removal of such encroachments are regularly being conducted by the field functionaries of Delhi Traffic
Police along with officials of the concerned Municipal Bodies. Action Taken Reports in this respect are also
being forwarded to the Urban Development Deptt., GNCT of Delhi under intimation to other concerned
departments.
Poor Technology Capacity and Non Implementation of Computer  Based Management of Traffic
1.1.41  Poor technological capacity to manage roads has also contributed to the traffic problems in Delhi. In
the absence of computer based management, traffic distribution on road space is uneven as the signal cycle
time has not been optimized. Also, in the absence of any medium to communicate commuters regarding
ensuing traffic congestions, accidents, traffic jams, etc. and unavailability of technology for effective
enforcement through computer based intelligent systems have also contributed to the increase in traffic
problems.
Faulty Design of Roads and Absence of pr oper Road Infrastructur e
1.1.42  As per the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India report of the High Powered Committee
on Decongesting Traffic in Delhi,  the country witnesses close to 1.5 lakh deaths annually out of which
about 60% are pedestrians and cyclists/two wheelers and hence road safety is one of the most important
areas of concern while managing traffic. This high number of road accidents indicate towards the faulty
designing of roads/intesections and absence of adequate road infrastructure for different modes of transport.
In this regard, the representatives of IIT, Delhi informed that mixed modes like bicycles, two wheelers,
three wheelers, tempos, buses, cars and so many different types of transport are running on Delhi roads
and will continue to co-exist. There is an urgent necessity to address the issue of road safety through
improving road design and creating better infrastructure as such a high number of accidents on roads are
not acceptable.
1.1.43  The Committee during its local visit to IIT, Delhi was informed by DMRC that the metro network
runs mostly along the roads providing alternate options to commuters. Various means of passenger carrying
transport like auto-rickshaws, e-rickshaws and buses ferry metro passengers to the metro stations from
their residences and offices. But there is noticeable absence of infrastructure around the metro stations for
integration of these vehicles, management of traffic and providing space to these vehicles for halting,
boarding and disembarking of passengers. This leads to congestion on the roads during peak hours as well

9
as non-peak hours. Further, due to lack of appropriate parking facilities at the metro stations, the commuters
who are using private vehicles to reach the metro stations are parking their vehicles on the road side that
causes hindrance to free flow of traffic on roads.
1.1.44  Areas/roads/pathways around the metro stations and the access points to these stations have been
encroached upon by e-rickshaw, autos, cars etc. This often leads to blocking of roads and traffic during
peak hours.  The same scenario prevails during the rainy season when long lines of vehicles get created due
to sheltering of two wheelers under the bridges. Water logging on roads also obstruct traffic.
Uncontrolled/unplanned growth of urban centers in Delhi
1.1.45  The uncontrolled and non planned growth of urban centres has resulted in a host of problems like
traffic congestion, shortage of water and electricity, deteriorating environment, public health and amenities.
In the case of the transport sector, commensurate efforts have not been put forth to augment the mass
transport systems which could have made a lasting impact in addressing the ever increasing travel demand.
Eventually, ever growing Delhi has generated a high level of demand and dependency for travel on private
motor vehicles. During the last decade, the entry of global automobile giants in the country has largely
accentuated the entry of state of the art technology cars on a massive scale cutting across different Sedan
and other luxury models as well as the indigenous fuel efficient motorized four stroke two wheelers
(including mopeds) on the Indian road traffic scene. This has contributed to the huge increase in the
population of private vehicles in Delhi City due to the increase in affordability of households to own a
vehicle.
1.2 EFFECTS  OF  WORSENING  TRAFFIC  SITUATION
1.2.1 Some of the effects of worsening traffic faced by Delhi are as under:-
Severe Traffic Congestion
1.2.2 The Committee was informed by the representative of CRRI in the meeting held on 22 nd October,
2019 that the road traffic demand has increased exceptionally and is not in keeping with the growth in the
supply side factors i.e. increase in road network, upgradation of road infrastructure, etc. Recurrence of
extreme congestion on the Delhi roads has become a common phenomenon and has hampered  the quality
of life of all. The average speeds have been reduced to 5-10 km/hr during peak hours even on the major
arterial roads of the city leading to the loss of time of the working population, fuel wastage and environmental
pollution. Furthermore, the problem of traffic congestion has been aggravated by the rapidly increasing
population of Delhi, geographical expansion of Delhi, inadequate expansion of public transport, improper
parking on roads and lack of a central coordination mechanism for formulation and implementation of
traffic management policies in Delhi.
Increase in Severity of Road Crashes
1.2.3 The Committee was informed by the CRRI on trend in road  accidents that poor road geometrics at
crash prone locations and bad driving habits during lean hours has often lead to fatal crashes.  The tendency
of the drivers to drive at very high speed in complete violation of the approved speed limits during the lean
hours of traffic and reckless driving during peak hours are frequently acting as triggers for road crashes.
Several other factors such as very high traffic exposure including the traffic from neighbouring States using
Delhi roads for daily trips, poor road geometrics especially at major intersections, ineffective traffic control

10
devices, the conflict between motorized and non-motorized traffic as well as pedestrians at several locations
also contribute towards increasing the risk of all types of road accidents in the Delhi.
1.2.4 The number of road accidents have shown declining trends since 2015, however,  the number of fatal
road crashes and number of deaths have  not registered any sharp decline which is corroborated by the
crash severity data as below:-
Pedestrain, 44%Two Wheeler Rider, 31%Cyclist,  6%Car Occupant, 4%SMV Puller, , 1%Others, 14%
1.2.5 Also, as per the survey conducted, the involvement in road accidents is as under:
1.2.6 The number of crashes and deaths have not reduced over the years because of lack of traffic discipline
and non stringent action on traffic violators.

11
Inefficient Public Transport Sys tem
1.2.7 Despite introduction of a mass rapid transport system in Delhi in the form of Delhi Metro and an
extensive public bus service run by Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), the cluster scheme of buses run by
Delhi Integrated Mass Transit System (DIMTS), the share of trips made by private vehicles is steadily
increasing. A major reason for the failure of public transport in Delhi is attributed to the lack of proper last
mile connectivity. In the case of bus services, long waiting times, lack of information on the availability and
expected time of arrival of buses at the stops, poor conditions of bus shelters and long travel times, etc. are
the major reasons that discourage the commuters from using buses. Although, Delhi Metro has expanded
over the years, it hasn’t been able to reduce the increasing load of vehicles on roads because of lack of
multi-modal integration at all metro stations which causes unnecessary delay to the commuters and increases
travel time.
Lack of Facilities for  Non-Motorized Transport
1.2.8 Non-motorized Transport (NMT) includes all forms of travel that do not rely on an engine or motor
for movement. This includes walking, cycling and use of rickshaws etc. But absence of safe infrastructure
and large scale deaths of cyclists and pedestrians in Delhi has deterred potential Non-Motorized Transport
(NMT) users from shifting to cycling or walking. In Delhi, 50-80% of the road related injuries are suffered
by pedestrians and cyclists.
1.2.9 The provision of a good Non-motorized Vehicle (NMV) friendly infrastructure including footpaths
and Non-motorized Transport  (NMT)/ Non-motorized Vehicle  (NMV) lanes/cycle tracks can play a pivotal
role in increasing the modal share of all non-motorized trips. This will also act as an effective feeder service
to the public transport systems in Delhi city and serve to provide last mile connectivity.
Parking Problems
1.2.10  Unbridled growth in the usage of private vehicles for transportation has led to severe shortage of
parking space in the Central Business District (CBD) and other prominent and commercial areas of the city
of Delhi. Rampant and uncontrolled on-street parking has led to streets of the city themselves becoming
kind of parking lots, leading to inconvenience to all kinds of road users. Off-street parking facilities, wherever
available, have not proved to be the preferred option by commuters because of lack of popularity, no strict
enforcement, haphazard on-street parking and difficulty in accessing off street parking in some cases. This
has in turn led to further proliferation of on-street parking.
Increase in Air and Noise Pollution
1.2.11  Since transport sector is a big contributor to air and noise pollution in Delhi with the worsening
traffic scenario, the air and noise pollution related problems have become very grave. They are seriously
undermining the liveability in Delhi and have become a huge health hazard for its residents. Possibility of
using more eco-friendly alternative fuels should be explored.  Improved vehicular and tyre design with
better features to contain noise and emission; pavement design for reduced contact noise; use of natural/
artificial noise barriers around sensitive areas and use of Intelligent Transport System (ITS) technologies for
disseminating information regarding the pollution levels in various areas of the city are envisaged to help
mitigate these issues.
1.2.12  The pollution load on NCT of Delhi Road Network during the year 2016 was as under:

12
Pollutant Estimated Vehicular Emission Loads on Delhi roads
@(tonne per day)
PM2.5* 116.2
NOx 113.4
CO 322.4
@IIT Kanpur Study for Delhi (2016)
* PM2.5 = PM for emissions from vehicles                                     as per the data provided by the CRRI
1.2.13  Air pollution over the time has increased manifold and vehicular pollution is one of the major and
regular contributors to this menace. Many steps have been taken by the Central Government and Government
of NCT of Delhi in this direction like phasing out the diesel/petrol vehicles after 15/10 years of its registration,
implementation of BS-VI norms of emission, Odd-Even Scheme etc., but there has been very little improvement
in the air quality of Delhi and NCR.
Lack of Universal Accessibility and Mobility
1.2.14  Traffic Managing agencies are lacking in efforts in providing facilities for the hassle-free and safe
movement of the elderly and children and barrier free facilities for differently abled citizens in the city of
Delhi. This is not only an infringement upon their rights but also severely restricts them from using their full
potential for the betterment of society. Planning for providing facilities for them therefore is an essential
requirement.

CHAPTER-II
SELECTION OF THE SUBJECT AND PROCEEDINGS
OF THE COMMITTEE IN A NUTSHELL
2.1 Details of the meetings of the DRSC on Home Affairs on the subject
2.1.1 Keeping the importance of subject in view, the subject “Management of Worsening Traffic Situation
in Delhi” was selected for detailed examination and report by the DRSC on Home Affairs in its meeting held
on 02 nd April, 2018. The Committee held four meetings on the subject, i.e., on 4 th October, 2018, 14 th
December, 2018, 11th October, 2019 and 22nd October, 2019 and undertook a local visit to the IIT, Delhi on
5th November, 2019.
2.1.2 In the first meeting held on 4th October, 2018, the Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry
of Home Affairs, Delhi Police and Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD). The representatives of the Delhi
Police apprised the Committee of the reasons for traffic congestion in Delhi and various operational measures
undertaken and proposed to be undertaken to address the concern of traffic congestion. The Ministry of
Home Affairs inter-alia apprised the Committee of the Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS)
project and the constitution of a High Powered Committee for Management of Traffic in Delhi, under the
Chairmanship of Home Secretary, to evolve solutions and ease out the worsening traffic situation in Delhi.
2.1.3 The Committee in its meeting held on 14
th December, 2018, which was attended by representatives of
Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of NCT of Delhi, Ministry
of Road, Transport and Highways, Delhi Police, Delhi Development Authority, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation,
New Delhi Municipal Council, East Delhi Municipal Corporation, North Delhi Municipal Corporation and
South Delhi Municipal Corporation held threadbare discussions on the subject to understand and assess the
innate complexity of the problem of traffic congestion and the measures undertaken by different agencies to
tackle the same. The Committee was apprised of the various traffic management measures undertaken/
proposed to be undertaken which, inter-alia, included induction of 3000 new buses in multiple variants,
route rationalization and  ensuring last mile connectivity to Delhi Metro Rail Stations. The Committee was
also briefed about the plans to develop available parking spaces, construction of multi-level parking, and
removal of all road encroachments. The New Delhi Municipal Council briefed the Committee about the
introduction of Smart Parking Management System (SPMS) for disseminating information to the public
regarding availability of slots through mobile application on a real time basis. The Committee was also
informed about civil works to be undertaken for improving the existing road facilities in six months to one
year with the help of road constructing agencies. The Committee was apprised of the existing measures
undertaken by Delhi Police to decongest the areas of the police stations which are cluttered by impounded
vehicles by way of releasing the vehicles on a Superdari as also by sending these to Centralized Malkhanas
in different parts of Delhi. The Committee was informed about the steps taken by the DDA to encourage the
use of non-motorized transport such as creation of dedicated bicycle tracks and improvement in intersection
geometrics for hassle-free movement of non-motorized vehicles. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
informed the Committee about the plans to develop areas around 59 Metro Stations for providing facilities
such as separate pedestrian zones for dispersion of commuters towards bus stops, lanes for Non-Motorized
Transport, three-seater auto rickshaws, e-rickshaws and cycles. The Committee was informed about the
areas developed by DMRC around Moti Bagh Station, South Campus Station, Dahula Kuan, Vinod Nagar
West, Kashmere Gate station and Nehru enclave station. The Committee also took note of the progress
made so far on the long pending work of the Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS).
13

14
2.1.4 The Committee in its meeting held on 11 th October, 2019 took stock of the progress made on the
various projects/tasks shortlisted for execution in different phases. The meeting was attended by representatives
of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the Government of NCT of
Delhi, the Delhi Police, the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC),
the North Delhi Municipal Corporation (North DMC), the East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC), the
South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC), the Nation Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) besides
representatives from the State Governments of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana.
2.1.5 The Committee sought to know the status of the action streams shortlisted in the earlier meetings.
The concerned civic agencies apprised the Committee about the proposals for improvements in parking
spaces at five locations namely Lajpat Nagar, Nehru Place, Connaught Place, Bhikaji Cama Place and Karol
Bagh. The Committee was also apprised of the proliferation of shops and commercial activities on the roads
and their adverse impact on the traffic situation in Karol Bagh Area as also the effects of steps taken by civic
agencies on implementation of one-way traffic and pedestrian movement in the area. The Committee was
further informed about measures taken by other agencies like the proposal for augmentation of bus fleet,
installation of lifts in 1000 Standard Floor height non-AC CNG buses for the benefit of disabled persons,
induction of electric buses on pilot basis, implementation of plans to discourage motorized forms of transport,
the steps taken to encourage non-motorized mode with special emphasis on the bicycle sharing plans equipped
with GPS location devices and using non-standard design parts and colour in them. The Committee was
also informed that under the Multi-Modal Integration and Management of Traffic and Parking at Metro
Stations, certain requirements at metro stations were identified like footpath/plaza/ park and then pick-up/
drop off and road marking and signage required to be provisioned.
2.1.6 NCR Planning Board informed the Committee about the Regional Plan, identification of various Metro
Centres and Regional Centres to have high level of connectivity with Delhi without impacting city traffic.
The Committee was also informed about progress made in construction of Eastern and Western Peripheral
Expressways, renewal of agreements with neighboring States to encourage environment-friendly vehicles
and to facilitate seamless movement of contract carriage/buses across the NCR. Pursuing the neighboring
states of Delhi i.e. Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to increase the affordability of pubic transport by low taxation
were brought to the notice of the Committee. Impact of Delhi-Meerut Expressway and Dhaula Kuan-
Manesar expressway on improving the air quality of Delhi and easing congestion on roads was highlighted.
The need for collection of congestion tax electronically through fast tag in all the vehicles manufactured
after December, 2017 was underlined.
2.1.7 The Committee in its meeting held on 22
nd October, 2019, heard experts from the IIT-Delhi and the
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), a constituent laboratory of Indian Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research on the varied facets of traffic congestion in Delhi. The Committee considered the study by IIT on
the project, ‘Transportation, Research and Injury Prevention Project (TRIPP)’ on the development of
indigenous technology and processes for free vehicular traffic, hassle free pedestrian movement and interlinking
of facilities. The Committee’s attention was also drawn evolving ultra-low-cost solutions to the traffic
problem with regard to 35 stretches in Delhi and Noida. The Committee was briefed about research conducted
by the IIT, Delhi on device AIS-140, development of indigenous technology, low-cost solutions based on
innovative technology, cost and space saving flyovers design and Segregated Integrated Grade-Separated
Multimodal Amalgamation (SIGMA) strategy for Multi-Modal Integration, etc.
2.1.8 The Committee heard submissions of CRRI on improving road design to handle traffic congestion

15
and traffic snarls because of merging of lanes and roads. The Committee considered the proposals of CRRI
for sustainable Traffic Plan and Transportation System for Delhi, Intelligent Transport System (ITS), etc.
In this regard, some solutions devised to address traffic congestion in some locations such as Lal Bahadur
Shastri Marg, Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor at Chirag Delhi was presented before the Committee.
2.1.9 Besides, the Committee also visited IIT, Delhi at Hauz Khas, New Delhi on 5 th November, 2019, to
have in-depth understanding of the various traffic designs formulated for intersections and junctions to
make them viable for all modes of transports and beneficial for the pedestrians.

CHAPTER-III
ROLE, RESPONSE AND SHORTCOMINGS OF V ARIOUS STAKEHOLDERS DEALING WITH
THE MANAGEMENT OF WORSENING TRAFFIC SITUATION IN DELHI
3.1 General
3.1.1 Traffic management is a multi-sectoral and multi-dimensional issue as it transcends the boundaries of
number of enforcement agencies, civil agencies and land owning agencies. Being an expansive issue, it
covers under its ambit many tasks which include development and management of road infrastructure,
provisioning of safer vehicles, framing of legislation and law enforcement, mobility planning, urban land use
planning, protecting the interest of the vulnerable sections, etc. The success of traffic management strategies
in India depends upon a broad base of support and common action from all stakeholders.
3.1.2 The Committee identified the following Departments/agencies having varied stakes on the subject.
The role and interface of each agency vis-à-vis certain core issues involving management of traffic has been
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:
(i) Ministry of Home Affairs
(ii) Delhi Traffic Police
(iii) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
(iv) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
(v) Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
(vi) Govt. of NCT of Delhi
(vii) Municipal Corporations of Delhi
(viii) Delhi Development Authority
(ix) National Capital Region Planning Board
3.2. Ministry of Home Affairs
3.2.1 The Union Territory Division of the Ministry of Home Affairs deals with all legislative and constitutional
matters relating to Union Territories, including National Capital Territory of Delhi.  It is also responsible for
over-seeing the crime and the law & order situation in the Union Territories.
3.2.2 In the endeavor to decongest roads of Delhi by better management of traffic, planning and execution
of the decided tasks have been conceptualized under the platform provided by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
In this direction, the MHA constituted a “Committee on Decongesting Traffic in Delhi” and a High Powered
Committee on traffic Management” (HPC) on 28
th September, 2018, under the Chairmanship of Home
Secretary.  The said Committee decided to formulate an Implementation Plan based on the comprehensive
report viz. Report of HPC on Decongesting Traffic in Delhi, prepared by Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs.
3.2.3 During the deliberation in the meeting of DRSC on Home Affairs it was informed that the MHA is the
coordinating authority and plays a vital role in the whole affair of roping in various stakeholders and it could
be made possible through the High Powered Committee. The HPC decided six action points viz. improvement
16

17
in parking, retrofitting of 100 intersections and 77 identified corridors, complete street designing for non-
motorized transports and public amenities in identified Dwarka streets, addition of buses to the existing fleet
of buses, putting in place an Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS), multi-modal integration and
management of traffic at Metro Stations.
3.2.4 The management of traffic in Delhi requires comprehensive of efforts and actions under the jurisdiction
of legislative, executive as well as public sector enterprises. The process starts with understanding the need
of the people for better quality road space and has to pass through various stages from conceptualizing,
planning for a specific task, drafting of the plans, approval of plans by authorized agencies, budgeting for
the plans, starting execution of the plans and sorting out difficulties faced during execution of the approved
task identified to achieve the desired results.  The process just does not end with planning and execution but
assessment of the completed tasks are also required to examine their merits or shortcoming which are
helpful while making plans in future to deal with the similar traffic related problems.
3.2.5 The Committee notes that HPC is headed by the Home Secretary and observes that he has
other crucial responsibilities and his presence is required for many urgent issues/matters involving
the internal security situation and other matters concerning several departments of MHA and
other State Governments. The Committee feels that the Home Secretary cannot devote much time
towards achieving the mandate of HPC. The Committee therefore, recommends that the High
Powered Committee should be headed by some other senior officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs
other than Home Secretary.  The Committee further recommends that a representative from the
National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB) should be included in the HPC as its member.
3.3 Delhi Traffic Police
3.3.1 The prime mandate of the Delhi Traffic Police is to ensure sustainable, safe and efficient flow of
traffic on the roads of Delhi through enforcement, regulation, creating awareness and suggesting engineering
improvements in road infrastructure.
3.3.2 In pursuance of the mandate, the Delhi Traffic Police manages traffic on the basic principles of
“Mobility with Safety” with the following objectives: –
(i) Ensuring efficiency in the movement of people and goods;
(ii) Regulation of multi-modal traffic;
(iii) Effective enforcement of traffic rules and regulations;
(iv) Involvement and education of public, including school children on road safety; and
(v) Provision of pro-active suggestions in improvement of road engineering.
3.3.3 The Delhi Traffic Police lays emphasis on enforcement of discipline by the road users through quality
prosecution of major traffic violations such as violation of traffic signals, violation of restrictions, triple
riding, riding without helmet, pillion rider without helmet, improper parking, dangerous driving, drunken
driving, minor driving, over speeding, etc. Also, special drives are launched against over-speeding, against
drunken driving, against improper parking, action against public transport vehicles, against E-rickshaws for
unauthorized plying and other traffic offences. The Delhi Traffic Police is responsible for enforcing directions
of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s Committee on Road Safety.

18
3.3.4 The Delhi Traffic Police also assists other agencies in implementation of various projects/schemes
like it works with North Delhi Municipal Corporation in  implementing the scheme for pedestrians of Karol
Bagh Area; one-way scheme on Padam Singh Road, Hardhyan Singh Road, Pyare Lal Road; and  management
of Street Parking in Sarojini Nagar, etc. While deposing before the Committee in several meetings the
representatives of Delhi Traffic Police highlighted their active role in the  Intelligent Traffic Management
System (ITMS); in identifying issues in Multi-Modal Integration; parking management and removal of
encroachment and illegal parking around Metro Stations.
3.3.5 The Committee observes that  Delhi Traffic Police is mainly focusing  and putting in efforts
on regulating traffic at red-lights and intersections and little attention is paid towards violation of
traffic rules  on roads like not driving in the proper lane, changing lanes without indication,
overspeeding, dangerous driving, etc.  and enforcement of the various traffic rules at other places
on roads of Delhi.  The Committee therefore recommends that Delhi traffic Police should attach
equal importance to enforcement related aspects on roads too and not restrict itself only to regulation
of traffic at traffic signals.
3.4 Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoH&UA)
3.4.1 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs is the apex authority of the Government of India at
national level to formulate policies, sponsor and support programmes, coordinate the activities of various
Central Ministries, State Governments and other nodal authorities and monitor the programmes concerning
all issues of housing and urban affairs in the country. The MoH&UA in their efforts to increase affordability
of public transport moving across the borders of Delhi, is taking up the issue of taxation level of public
transport  with the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi  and its neighboring State viz.
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to ensure that it remain less.
3.4.2 The Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoH&UA) is also coordinating with DDA and DMRC for
implementation of projects for better traffic management in Delhi and requires huge funding and coordination
among various departments to carry out these interventions.
3.4.3 However, the Committee observes that due to lack of coordination amongst agencies like
DDA, DMRC the project on Non Motorized Transport (NMT) on the Delhi roads has not materialised.
There is absence of dedicated bicycle tracks on most of the Delhi roads and intersections have not
been retrofitted to make them safe and suitable for use by the NMT.  Therefore, the Committee
recommends that there remains an urgent necessity to strengthen the existing coordination
mechanism so that necessary infrastructure like dedicated bicycle tracks, pick and use cycle stations;
and interventions at important intersections be developed.
3.5 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) and National Highway Authority of India
(NHAI)
3.5.1 The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) is entrusted with the task of formulating
and administering policies, in consultation with other Central Ministries/Departments, State Governments/
UT Administrations, organisations and individuals, for road transport, national highways and transport research
with a view to increase the mobility and efficiency of the road transport system in the country. The Ministry
has two wings viz. Roads Wing and Transport Wing.  The Road Wing deals with development, maintenance,
standardization of National Highways in the country, etc. The Transport Wing deals with matters relating to
road transport, motor Vehicle legislation, administration of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, taxation of motor

19
vehicles, compulsory insurance of motor vehicles, promotion of Transport co-operatives in the field of
motor transport, etc.
3.5.2 The MoRT&H apprised the Committee about issues relating to highways that affect traffic on roads
of Delhi.  The Committee was informed about completion of works on three junctions and completed
projects of Eastern Peripheral Expressways covering Delhi-Meerut and  Dhaula Kuan-Manesar Expressways.
3.5.3 The MoRT&H also apprised the Committee about the facilitation being provided by them for inclusion
of technologies to ensure free flow of traffic on highways.  In this context, the facilitation that has been
extended to the projects for introduction of fast tags for vehicle identification and electronic imposition of
congestion taxes which was enforced with effect from December, 2017 in non-intrusive manner were
cited. The MoRT&H also informed the Committee about their efforts in development of E-challan system
for digital delivery of challans and creation of Vahan database and validation of vehicle number through
Short Message service (SMS). The MoRT&H has also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with transport for London (a body which runs public utility in London) for enhancing capacity of public
transport in India, augmentation in terms of capacity building, fleet modernisation of public transport in
India, Intelligent Transport system (ITS) and contracting management in the State Transport Undertaking.
3.5.4 The MoRT&H apprised the Committee in its meeting held on 11
th October, 2019 about the progress
being made in the field of induction of Electronic Vehicles (EVs) in India as under:
“Electronic Vehicle (EV) is definitely good. There are some companies which have started showing
interest in India.  The bigger manufacturers are definitely there.  Right now, we have issues with
regard to the battery availability which Government is trying to address because that is a major
component of the bus but we cannot ignore what we require in our country today.  Although we would
like to have EV but today we have about 14 lakh buses whereas we need 40 lakh buses to have some
kind of benchmarking with emerging countries.  That is something which we will have to take a call,
Sir , that electric bus at the same cost...”
“…..those Electric Vehicles remain costly at present.  The pilots are taking place in various cities.
With the introduction of BS-VI, which is going to start from 1
st April, we naturally have a solution in
which for a cost of an electric bus we can procure probably five diesel or CNG buses.  These are quite
eco-friendly also and economy-friendly also.  So, that is the discussion that would take place but then
I see technology is not going to go away. That remains our mainstay.  On Electric Vehicles, definitely,
Sir, the pilots would go on and depending upon the ultimate economic solution, it would prevail on its
own.”
3.5.5 The Committee feels that the Government should not act hastily in planning as the automobile
sector at the present stage should have the right balance. At this juncture, dependence on petrol
and diesel vehicles cannot be eliminated.  Rather, there remains an urgent necessity to go for clean
diesel which Europe and other countries are doing.  The Committee cautions that any proposal of
completely switching over to EVs, if accepted, the entire automobile sector may collapse, since it
has already started showing a down trend in terms of production and sales. The Committee therefore
strongly recommends that the Ministry should take a holistic view; adopt a pragmatic approach and
maintain the right balance of all type of vehicles which run on different fuels.
3.5.6 National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) was set up by an act of the Parliament, NHAI Act, 1988
for the development, maintenance and management of national highways. The committee was informed by

20
the Govt. of Delhi that the NHAI has taken up a project from Mukarba Chowk to Panipat which includes
eight-laning of the entire corridor and the project will completed by June, 2019.
3.6 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
3.6.1 The Delhi Metro rail was introduced in the year 2002 to provide alternative mode of public transportation.
The introduction of Metro Rail has resulted in passenger ridership shift from road based transport to Metro
Rail. The objective of the establishment of Metro is to ensure an efficient, safe, rapid, convenient, comfortable
and effective modern mass transit system ensuring high ridership levels in the city of Delhi. The Delhi Metro
is a partially elevated, partially underground and partially at-grade heavy duty metro with a length of
approximately 370 kms. transporting around  25 lakhs passengers daily. Furthermore, Delhi Metro contributes
to sustainable development in a significant manner in the environmental, social, economic and technological
dimensions.  A study conducted by the CRRI quantified the benefits accrued due to Metro and as per that
study the number of daily vehicles reduced (off the load) corresponding to current value of traffic on Delhi
Metro is estimated to be about 3.9 lakh. Multi-Modal Integration is one of the major projects of DMRC for
reducing travel time, ensuring last mile connectivity and improving overall efficiency of the Delhi metro.
3.6.2 The DMRC informed the Committee that for multi-modal integration (MMI) and management of
traffic parking at metro stations, 59 stations of Phase-III of metro network have been approved for multi-
modal integration. The MMI plans have been finalized by Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure
(Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) in consultation with all stakeholders, like road-owning agencies
such as DDA, PWD, MCD and Traffic Police.  Work at all these 59 stations has been completed.  Depending
on the availability of land, these 59 stations have separate pedestrian zones around them for easy and safe
dispersion of commuters towards bus stops, Non Motorized Transport lanes, TSR and cycle stands.  Other
measures are-dedicated bays for three wheelers, e-rickshaws and feeder buses for seamless connectivity,
drop-off facilities and pedestrian crossing facilities, road junction improvement for improving visibility and
traffic calming measures by creating a table top with synchronized traffic signals.
3.6.3 Regarding multi-modal integration and parking management at metro stations,  DMRC is working on
interventions related to cycle stand, public toilet & hawking, construction of footpath/ plaza park, pick-up
drop off and pre paid taxi system, removal of encroachment and illegal parking, road & junction improvement,
road marking and signage, drainage/sanitation and electrical services at various metro stations.
3.6.4 The Committee is of the view that although Delhi metro has expanded rapidly but still lots of
work needs to be done to ensure last mile connectivity to Metro stations. The DMRC needs to
undertake multi-modal integration measures at all metro stations. Furthermore, to address the
rapidly increasing population and urbanization around Delhi, the  DMRC also needs to take measures
like increasing fleet of metro trains, increasing frequencies of trips, rationalization of ticket rates,
raising awareness among people to use metro as it is the best  available alternate mode of public
transportation in Delhi.
3.7 Govt. of NCT of Delhi
3.7.1 The GNCT of Delhi is the main policy making and implementing agency of Traffic Management in
Delhi. There are various projects being undertaken by different departments of GNCT of Delhi Transport
department, PWD towards traffic management in Delhi.   GNCT of Delhi is also responsible for putting up
proper signage for ensuring road safety, properly guiding the commuters towards earmarked parking and
smooth flow of traffic on the roads of Delhi through its concerned departments.

21
3.7.2 Transport Department of Govt. of Delhi is responsible for procurement and maintenance of bus
fleets to manage public transport in Delhi, route rationalization of all the existing bus routes, creation of
special routes for last-mile connectivity to planned and unplanned colonies of the city to control and regulate
traffic, framing of app-based bus scheme policy and a taxi aggregator regulation policy.
3.7.3 The Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi informed the Committee that it is  actively participating in
implementation of a Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS). The Transport Department is also
instrumental in procurement of 3000 buses of three different variants both under cluster scheme and as well
as DTC and installation of security features in these buses. However, on further inquiry the Committee was
informed in its meeting held on 14
th December, 2018 by the representatives of GNCT of Delhi that no
procurement of buses has taken place since 2010.
3.7.4 The Transport Department plays a coordinating role with the traffic police, market associations and
other agencies to evolve better management skills. It emphasizes on creating tough test tracks to test new
drivers so that before getting a driving license, proper training and knowledge of driving are imparted to new
drivers.
3.7.5 The Committee expresses its concern that no procurement of buses has taken place since
2010.  A huge demand and supply gap has emerged due to increased population during the said
period as there has been no addition of buses to the existing fleet . The Committee feels that this is
a serious lapse on the part of the Transport Department which has failed in procuring new buses
during the last 10 years.  The situation is further aggravated by the fact that many buses that were
operational have also become obsolete. In view of the directions of the National Green Tribunal
(NGT) to ban plying of diesel vehicles which have outlived their span of 10 years, the Committee
strongly recommends to identify the obsolete and polluting buses and replace those with new ones,
as also to fast track the procurement of new buses to meet the demand-supply gap.
3.8 Public Works Department
3.8.1 Public Works Department, GNCT of Delhi is the main agency which is responsible for construction
and maintenance of roads and parking infrastructure in Delhi. The PWD, Delhi are involved in carrying out
construction and interventions for improvement of Pedestrian movement and decongestion of roads in
residential and market area of Karol Bagh and Dwarka. It also installs barricades and signage at prominent
locations and intersections for better management of traffic in the area, and is also involved in removal of
temporary and permanent encroachments. It is also working on construction of footpath/ plaza parks, road
marking and signage, road and junction improvement, removal of encroachment and illegal parking, drainage/
sanitation and electrical services, under  multi- modal integration and parking management at metro stations.
3.8.2 The Committee strongly recommends that the Public Works Department undertake simple
alterations to junctions and corridors, which have so far remained a much neglected area of its
activity but these can qualitatively impact the traffic situation in a positive manner.
3.8.3 The Committee observes that in the absence of proper guidelines, road signage are placed on
pedestrains footpaths, thus obstructing the free flow of pedestrians movement.  This forces pedestrains
to walk on the road which hinders the free flow of traffic. The Committee feels that putting road
signage at parking places is vital for the smooth flow of traffic. The Committee therefore recommends
that the MHA may take up with the PWD to place adequate and appropriate signage at proper places
and frame guidelines in this regard.

22
3.9 Municipal Corporations/Council of Delhi
New Delhi Municipal Council
3.9.1 The New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) area comprises of the territory that has been described as
Lutyen’s Delhi and which has historically come to be regarded as the seat of central authority in Union of
India. It comprises of important buildings like Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, Supreme Court,
North and South Blocks and buildings abutting Central Vista and also all the diplomatic missions which
function as territorial entities under the sovereign jurisdiction of their Flag States. The Government of India
is nearly the sole landowner and also owns about eighty percent of the buildings in the New Delhi Municipal
Council area and private ownership of property in this area is marginal. 
3.9.2 Regarding traffic management of NDMC area the Committee was informed by NDMC that a technology
driven parking management system in Connaught place has been installed by them with 5392 slots with
magnet-cum-infrared sensor to check slot occupancy. People can check vacant slots on their mobile phones
and LED screens have been installed near parking places to check vacant slots on a real time basis and entry
& exit devices have been installed for tickets and payments.
3.9.3 The Committee was also informed about on-road parking system with high parking fees has also
been arranged by NDMC in the area to increase parking capacity of the area and to discourage people from
using personal vehicles by imposing high fees for on road parking of vehicles. Furthermore, 8 cranes have
been arranged to lift and challan illegally parked vehicles in the CP area. Regarding the use of technology,
auto pay stations at major locations for payment by people on their own have been installed. NDMC has also
setup a command & control centre for online monitoring and regulation of parking areas of the region. It
was also informed that smart parking management system plan has been envisaged for south of Rajpath
with a capacity of 3000 parking slots. Furthermore, to promote non-motorized transport and to discourage
use of personal vehicles, a ‘pick and use’ cycle scheme has been started by NDMC with 50 dock stations
under public private partnership (PPP) mode. Plans have also been prepared for public bike sharing and e-
scooter sharing to ensure last mile connectivity in the area.
North Delhi Municipal Corporation
3.9.4 The North DMC was formed after trifurcation of Municipal Corporation of Delhi in 2012. It is
currently serving the population of almost 62 lakhs with the responsibility of monitoring, upgrading and
developing civic amenities efficiently with a view to create a better tomorrow for citizens of Delhi. It
occupies an area of 605 Sq.Km. which is about 43% of total Delhi area and North DMC maintains the roads/
streets upto 60 feet ROW along with drains located on these roads/streets. A road length of 10,153 Km. (in
12 feet width) is under the jurisdiction of North DMC. It is further sub-divided into Six Zones (Rohini, Civil
Lines, Karol Bagh, City, Sadar Paharganj and Narela Zone).
3.9.5  North DMC informed the Committee that currently they are undertaking projects of surface parking
i.e. construction of multi-level parking at Old Rajender Nagar and Karol Bagh near Shastri Park, Ajmal Khan
Road Part-I (in lanes excluding Ajmal Khan Road) Arya Samaj Road Part-I, Saraswati Marg Samaj Road
Part-II, Gurudwara Road and parking site at the adjoining office of the Income Tax Department, Jhandewalan
Extension. Further, to provide real time availability of parking slots, Information technology (IT) based
parking system is also being introduced to manage all surface parkings of Karol Bagh. Furthermore, to
address the problem of mismanagement of traffic in market area of Karol Bagh, North DMC has provided
50 civil defense volunteers in two shifts to regulate and implement pedestrianization in the area.

23
South Delhi Municipal Corporation
3.9.6 The South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) serves a population of almost 56 Lakhs with a
responsibility of monitoring, upgrading and developing civic amenities efficiently with a view to creating a
better tomorrow for the citizens of Delhi.  It occupies an area of 656.91 Sq. kms. which is further sub-
divided into 4 Zones- Central, South, West and Najafgarh Zone. The SDMC has the unique distinction of
providing civic services from posh residential and commercial areas to rural and urban villages, JJ Resettlement
Colonies and regularized and unauthorized colonies.
3.9.7 Regarding traffic management in the region, SDMC informed in the meeting held on 14
th December,
2018 the Committee that currently they are working on creation of parking space for parking in Lajpat
Nagar to decongest Lajpat Nagar, and for that marking of parking slots and numbering systems have been
completed. To start implementation of a parking area development plan by February 2019 for 700 car
spaces, SDMC is carrying out constructions for the same and is also working on implementation of “telescopic
parking pricing” to  provide automatic payment service at parking stations and common mobile application
to provide real time availability of parking slots.
3.9.8 Further, Delhi Traffic Police has agreed to empower SDMC with enforcement powers to help parking
contractors for towing wrongly parked vehicles in and around the Market area. To promote non motorized
transport and ensure smooth movement of traffic in market areas SDMC has started twelve free e-rickshaws
in October 2017 for shoppers to commute from metro to the market area.
3.9.9 Regarding multi-modal integration and parking management at metro stations, SDMC is working on
cycle stands, public toilets & hawking, construction of footpath/ plaza parks, pick-up drop off and pre paid
system, removal of encroachment and illegal parking, drainage/sanitation and electrical services at various
metro stations.
East Delhi Municipal Corporation
3.9.10  The East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC) is working on a pedestrianization & decongestion
plan for Krishna Nagar Market. Trial runs have been done for pedestrianization and places for on-street
Parking have been marked by EDMC. Further, off-street parking lots have been operationalized in some
places. EDMC has also discussed parking plans with market associations and residents welfare associations
(RWAs). EDMC is carrying out works related to pick-up, drop off and pre-paid system, removal of
encroachments and illegal parking, cycle stands, public toilets & hawking, drainage/sanitation and electrical
services under multi-modal integration and parking management at metro stations.
3.9.11  The Committee recommends that the NDMC should increase the capacity of existing
infrastructure and road network ensuring safe movement of pedestrians, cyclists, women and provide
universal accessibility. Integration of different modes of transport should also be taken up by NDMC.
The Committee observes that most of the important persons reside in and around Lutyen’s Delhi
which is under NDMC but there is no provision of separate lane to facilitate easy and free flow of
traffic resulting in traffic jams and also security concerns.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
that MHA should coordinate with Transport Department, PWD of Government of Delhi and Delhi
police to ensure free and safe movement of important persons in the area and also to avoid any
inconvenience to the commuters.
3.9.12  Further, there has been ongoing redevelopment of many colonies in the area hence, the

24
NDMC should make provisions to address the increase in traffic load in near future. The Committee
also recommends that NDMC provides necessary interventions at the rotaries in the NDMC area
like at Tughlaq road, which is small, and cannot take heavy traffic.
3.9.13  The Committee is concerned that parking projects undertaken by North DMC will not be
enough to address the parking issues in the area. Further, the North DMC needs to run regular
drives for removal of permanent and temporary encroachments in the commercial area of the
region.
3.9.14  The Committee observes that parking spaces planned by SDMC are not enough given the
rapidly increasing population and number of vehicles.  It, therefore, recommends that SDMC make
provisions for creation of additional parking spaces to address the problem of parking crunch in the
foreseeable future. To promote non-motorized transport and multi-modal integration, SDMC should
increase the number of e- rickshaws, pay and use bicycles, etc. in the area.
3.9.15  The Committee recommends that EDMC make decongestion plans for other commercial
areas of the region and search spots for multi-level car parking to take out vehicles parked on
roads both in commercial and residential areas.
3.10 Delhi Development of Authority (DDA) and Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure
(Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC)
3.10.1 The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) is responsible for the overall planning and strategies of
traffic and transport in the city along with other concerned agencies such as Public Works Department
(PWD), Delhi Municipal Corporation (MCD), New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC), Transport Dept.,
GNCTD, Ministry of Surface Transport (MOST), DMRC, NHAI etc. The DDA is entrusted with the task to
develop and strengthen a reliable, efficient and attractive multi-modal public transport system for Delhi to
minimize the gap between demand and supply by capacity increase of urban transport, to revitalize movement
in the old city, to generate conditions for safe usage of bicycles, to establish safe pedestrian movement, to
provide synergy between landuse, transport and urban economy and to conserve urban transport through
balanced development and strategies.
3.10.2  The representative of DDA informed the Committee about Dwarka where the overall length of
streets is about 70 km. out of which they have considered about 30 km. Designs have been made for
improving the road cross-section so that it is more amenable to use by non-motorized transporters and to
encourage the use of cycles and to make road crossing by pedestrians safer.  DDA further informed the
Committee about medium term and long term plans in which they are taking up Sector 12 and Sector 13 of
Dwarka, near the metro stations, on a pilot basis. DDA has also completed detailed designing for about five
kilometers of roads for improvement of road cross-section and also for introducing cycle docking stations
to encourage their use in that area.
3.10.3  Additionally, DDA is managing surface parking in the land near Jhandewalan Mata Mandir and is
working on a decongestion plan for Bhikaji Cama and Nehru Place.
3.10.4  The Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC)
has been set up by Delhi Development Authority (DDA) to enhance mobility, reduce congestion and to
promote traffic safety by adopting standard transport planning practices, capacity building, enforcement
measures, road safety audits, traffic engineering practices and better organizational co-ordination for improved

25
traffic management by efficient lane capacity and work zone management, utilities coordination, developing
traffic culture and avoiding transport planning pitfalls in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
3.10.5  All transportation projects/transport engineering solutions in Delhi by any agency having road
engineering/infrastructure implications would require clearance of the centre (UTTIPEC) to ensure that the
latest technology and research finding support is available to all new roads and projects.
3.10.6  The Committee was informed by DMRC that plans for ‘Multi-modal Integration and Management of
Traffic Parking at Metro Stations’ for 59 stations of Phase-III of metro network have been finalized by
UTTIPEC in consultation with all the stakeholders, like road-owning agencies such as DDA, PWD, MCD
and Traffic Police and work at all these 59 stations have been completed.  The plan finalized by UTTIPEC
includes separate pedestrian zones, NMT lanes, TSR and cycle stands, dedicated bays for three wheelers,
e-rickshaws and feeder buses for seamless connectivity, drop-off facilities and pedestrian crossing facilities,
road junction improvement for better visibility and traffic calming measures by creating table top with
synchronized traffic signals.
3.10.7  Though a Special Task Force has been constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India under the
Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman, DDA to monitor the removal of permanent encroachments like demolishing
permanent structures constructed on roadsides.   The impact of encroachment removal drives at the ground
level is not very evident and the encroachments keep recurring or are getting shifted to some other places in
the same locality in the form of permanent or temporary structures because of which the very purpose of
removing encroachments for making the pavements and roads available for the public gets negated.
3.10.8  The Committee is of the view that the implementing agency needs to be more diligent and
stringent. The accountability for implementing decisions with regard to removal of encroachments
should be fixed by the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Police and officers of other concerned
agencies entrusted with the work.
3.11 National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB)
3.11.1 The National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) is a unique example of inter-state regional
planning and development, covering the entire National Capital Territory of Delhi, thirteen districts of the
State of Haryana, seven districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh and two districts of the State of Rajasthan,
with the National Capital at its core. The National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) in India was
constituted under the NCRPB Act, 1985 with the key rationale to promote balanced and harmonized
development of the Region and to avoid any haphazard development.
3.11.2  The NCR Planning Board covers around 55,000 square km. area and prepares regional plan for the
whole of NCR. They have a Regional Plan 2021 in force at the moment and are in the process of initiating
work for the Regional Plan 2041. One of the key subjects in this Regional Plan is transport in which they
have covered various proposals at the regional level and these things are to be implemented by the NCR
constituent States and concerned ministries and agencies. The Expressways — the Eastern Peripheral
Expressway and the Western Peripheral Expressway and Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) corridors
of National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC), are the results of the proposals of this Regional
Plan. In the Regional Plan, they have identified various metro centres and regional centres and proposed that
those require high level of connectivity so that traffic would not enter into Delhi. At the local level, around
Delhi, they have held meetings regarding various road links which cover Haryana-Delhi, Delhi-Uttar Pradesh

26
and Haryana-Uttar Pradesh. These issues are being resolved by them under the guidance of the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affairs.
3.11.3  In order to facilitate seamless movement, NCRPB have reciprocal agreements also for contract
carriage vehicles and stage carriage vehicles. These were signed in 2008 and 2010 and had validity for ten
years and they are in the process of signing a new agreement also for contract carriage vehicles and these
are to encourage environment-friendly vehicles only and for seamless movement across the NCR.
3.11.4  The Committee observes that there is lack of coordination between the State Governments
of Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other concerned agencies in the NCR in management of
traffic. The Committee recommends that the institutional mechanism should be further strengthened
and representatives from the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) and Planning Boards
from concerned States should be included as Members in the High Powered Committee functioning
under the MHA.
3.11.5  Another important issue which remains unsolved is the taxation policy for inter-State
movement of vehicles as States have failed to form a uniform taxation policy for seamless movement
of vehicles in the region. Further, the States have failed to create high level of connectivity through
ring and peripheral roads to prevent traffic from entering Delhi which is one of the biggest reasons
for traffic congestion in Delhi. There is also an urgent need to promote affordable, fast, eco-friendly
modes of transport to address the twin problem of traffic congestion and pollution in the region.

CHAPTER-IV
SOLUTIONS TO THE TRAFFIC PROBLEMS IN DELHI
4.1 Solutions
4.1.1 Delhi, like any other city, has peculiar characteristics and a social fabric of its own.  Delhi is the
second most populous city of the world not only in terms of population but also in terms of vehicular traffic
(motorized and non-motorized).   Most of the Delhi roads have been commercialized is a bustle of activity,
buzzing with the movement of people and vehicles that lead to narrowing the capacity of roads. The high
density of population and vehicles; the inadequate infrastructure combined with indisciplined users invite a
host of problems that hinder the smooth movement of traffic.
4.1.2 Due to the varied nature of traffic related problems, planning at various stages is needed to solve the
traffic menace on the roads of Delhi.    Well planned efforts delineating a strong road map has to be chalked
out and executed in a time bound manner to ease the traffic situation in Delhi. The role of motorized private
vehicle is well established in the triggering of traffic jams. Mushrooming private vehicles are also engulfing
the already meager road space by way of improper parking or parking of vehicles in no parking zones.
4.1.3 In order to gauge the problem of congestion on roads there is a need to critically examine the contribution
of various modes of transport on the roads in terms of their capacity to carry people, road space occupied
and the efficacy in transporting people and goods.  While observing the general trends on the roads, it is
often seen that the volume of the private mode of transport viz. two wheelers and cars are greater in
comparison to the ususal public mode of transport viz. buses, metro rail, etc.  In comparison to the motorized
and non-motorized transport, the former is preferred, hence, the volume of bicycles, etc., are less on the
roads. Due to inadequate infrastructure for non-motorized transports like bicycle tracks, use of the NMT
has not achieved its desired level.
4.1.4 During the deliberations, the Committee concentrated on solutions that would be practical, feasible,
effective and durable to tackle the problem. The Committee considered the various plans devised by the
MHA with the concerned agencies for execution in a period ranging from six months to one year and also
for the longer period. The Committee considered plans devised by various departments and agencies and
their effect on the present traffic situation:
(i) Improvement in Parking;
(ii) Retrofitting of 100 junctions and 77 identified corridors;
(iii) Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets;
(iv) Rationalisation of buses and enhancing the present fleet of buses;
(v) IT based Management of Traffic;
(vi) Efforts in reducing number of vehicles on roads:
(a) Reducing the number of registration of Vehicles
(b) Contribution of metro in reducing the vehicles on roads
(c) Impact of Odd-even scheme on Delhi Roads
(d) Diversion of non Delhi bound vehicles from entering Delhi
27

28
(vii) Multi-Modal Integration and Management of Traffic and Parking at Metro Stations;
(viii) Improving driving capacity and the fitness capacity of the vehicles. Establishment of driver
training schools; and
(ix) Freight management plan.
4.2 Improvement in Parking
4.2.1 Due to urbanization of cities and movement of people from rural areas to urban areas in search of
better life there has been increase of demands for commodities in the urban areas. The increase in demand
in turn has induced expansion of markets. The number of vehicles of various variants, have increased many
times while there is hardly any space on the roads for their movement or parking spaces to accommodate
the ever increasing number of vehicles. Hence, the gap between parking demand (number of cars in need
for parking spaces) and parking supply (number of parking spaces sufficient for cars to park) has resulted
in a parking menace and over the period of time has become one of the root prominent causes for congestion
on roads. In National Capital Territory of Delhi most of the areas are facing a serious parking problem.
4.2.2 Unbridled growth in the usage of private vehicles for transportation has led to severe shortage of
parking space in the Central Business District (CBD) and other prominent commercial areas in the city of
Delhi. Rampant and uncontrolled on-street parking has led to the streets of the city themselves becoming
some kind of parking lots, causing inconveniences to all road users. Off-street parking facilities, wherever
present, have not proved to be a preferred option by commuters due to the issues of lack of popularity, bad
enforcement, haphazard on-street parking. This has in turn led to further proliferation of on-street parking.
In the absence of a planned approach to construct parking facilities and frame policy to make on-street
parking unattractive, the situation has deteriorated further.
4.2.3 The Committee notes that one of the major causes of traffic congestion at market/commercial
places is because of difficulties faced by commuters to park their vehicles due to shortage of parking
space and lack of information on availability of parking slots and knowledge of designated place for
the same, especially when an unknown and new vehicle enters the market place. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a proper and visible signages should be placed for guiding vehicles to
the designated parking lot and Light Emitting Diode (LED) screens should be installed  to give real
time availability of parking slots at various parking venues.
4.2.4 The Committee is aware that technology and innovation in the niche industry space of
automated and multilevel parking systems (MLCPs) may address the problem of clogging parking
spaces. The concept of MLCP refers to the system of automatically parking and retrieving vehicles
using an extensive intelligent system of lifts, pallets, and sensors. Delivering advantages such as
time and fuel savings, space saving, and safety, MLCPscan be solution to parking and traffic
management problems.
4.2.5 The implementation of the odd-even car rule in New Delhi is a testimonial to the dire circumstances
that the city is facing in terms of its clogged roadways and parking spaces. In such a situation, it’s critical
for government agencies and real estate stakeholders to shift to innovative, sustainable, affordable, and
environment friendly systems such as multilevel car parking systems. Stack and puzzle-based car parking
systems have already witnessed significant adoption in the country, especially in the tier 1 and some tier 2
cities.

29
4.2.6 For the future, some experts sense that tower parking systems will come to the fore, because of the
fact that they can enhance the capacity of existing parking spaces. Also, the system can be implemented
inside residential and commercial complexes, and are equipped with intelligent human-machine interface
features. Not only are MLCPs going to play a vital role in solving car parking problems across the country’s
cities, but would also have an important role in eliminating traffic congestion problems resulting from
unregulated parking in by-lanes, along sidewalks, on pavements, and on cyclist tracks.
4.2.7 MLCPs also have a lot to contribute in terms of reducing carbon footprint on the environment,
because of the ease of construction, leveraging pre-fabricated platforms and pallets, and because of the fact
that MLCPs free up a lot of real estate for landscaping. MLCPs are expected to draw a lot from PLCs and
robotization to reduce the need for human intrusion to a great extent. Manufacturers and service vendors
will look to differentiate on the basis of levels of automation, promised lifetimes of implemented solutions,
warranty periods and service quality. The MLCP market has the potential of generating a lot of employment
for skilled labourers, and is expected to percolate to other cities in the NCR as the growth wave, sweeps
across the smaller cities and towns also.
4.2.8 However, the Committee feels that time taken in parking vehicles in Multi-level Car Parking
(MLCP) is little more than parking at surface parking.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
that MLCP should be made less time consuming. Even the automated ones like MLCP at Sarojini
Nagar needs to be modified to make it attractive.
4.2.9 The Committee observes that improper parking, non planned expansion of infrastructure,
buildings and encroachments of roads often lead to increasing bottlenecks on the roads and pathways
leading to severe congestion and traffic snarls. The Committee strongly recommends that effective
parking regulation and management plans for existing facilities and a comprehensive approach for
planning for future facilities by assessing future demand should be prepared to combat this issue.
Provision of Park-and-Ride facilities at public transport terminals will also make public transport
system a better choice for the users.
4.2.10  During the deliberations, the Committee considered the initiatives of planning taken on five locations
in Delhi viz. Lajpat Nagar, Nehru place, Connaught place, Bhikaji Cama Place and Karol Bagh on a pilot basis
to understand and solve the problem of traffic congestion due to improper parking and the efforts being
made by the concerned agencies.
Lajpat Nagar (Market Area and Residential Area)
4.2.11 Lajpat Nagar, falling under the jurisdiction of South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) has over a
period become a highly congested area due to presence of a markets.  The Committee was informed of the
existing traffic situation and the Parking Area Management Plan which envisaged decongesting the area.  It
is a mixed used area containing both a market and a residential area, therefore, a comprehensive plan has
been drafted by SDMC to decongest the area.
Plan for Lajpat Nagar Market Area
4.2.12  The Commissioner, SDMC indicated that the market in Lajpat Nagar is one of the most congested
markets in Delhi having a footfall of a huge number of shoppers and hence, is facing a serious traffic
problem. The Committee was informed that there was a huge gap between the demand for the parking
spaces and their availability.  It was stated that against a requirement of 1500 car parking spaces, only 700

30
on-surface parking spaces were available.  Due to the haphazard parking of vehicles and the activities of the
illegal parking mafia, the available parking spaces could not be properly utilized.
4.2.13  The Committee was further informed that the endeavor has been to improve the traffic situation in
the market area.  Development of parking spaces and construction of multi-level parking has also been
planned to decongest the market area in Lajpat Nagar.
4.2.14  The Committee was apprised that 150 cars spaces have been added by developing a piece of land
handed over by DMRC near Lajpat Nagar metro station for providing free valet parking.  The concerned
authorities have informed that target was set for December 2018 for completion. Under the Parking Area
Management Plan, the plan to improve the road geometry, marking and numbering of the parking spaces has
been envisaged and has been worked out in consultation with the Knowledge Partner to the Ministry of
Home Affairs. The said plan includes implementation of “Telescoping Parking Pricing” with differential
parking rates for holidays as the number of vehicles parked in the market increases during holidays and
weekends.
4.2.15  The Committee was informed about the building of parking infrastructure like Stack Parking and
Multilevel parking in the area. The Committee was apprised about the planning to construct fully automated
stacked parking for 104 car spaces on Feroz Gandhi Road within a period of one year. It was informed that
the project will be completed by January, 2020.
4.2.16  The Committee was also informed about the construction of a Multi-level Car Parking (MLCP) with
capacity of 250 car spaces on piece of land procured from Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB)
on Baraat Ghar.  The Committee was apprised about some measures undertaken to streamline the parking in
the area like discontinuation of  services of the regular parking agency and managing parking by the market
association, development of a mobile application for payment for parking, collection of fares by the market
association through a developed mobile application, operationalization of free E-rickshaw service with 12
number of E-rickshaw for the shoppers to commute between Lajpat Nagar Metro Station to the market area
by the market association as a last-mile connectivity.  The Committee was also apprised about the work
done under the Multi-Modal Integration (MMI) and Management of Traffic and Parking at Lajpat Nagar
Metro Station.  Some other works are being undertaken by various agencies like the Traffic Police, DMRC
and PWD.
Plan for Residential area
4.2.17  The Committee was informed about the various plans for the residential area of the locality. Block-
wise plan, problematic zone and the parking demand, vehicle movement plan earmarking of a emergency
vehicle movement lane, parking/ no parking/visitors’ parking zone and supply and the signage plan had been
drawn up.
4.2.18  The Committee noticed that out of thirteen blocks in the area, eight blocks i.e. B,C,D,F, G ,I,J and L,
did not have enough space for free movement of even emergency vehicles which required at least six metres
of space to maneuver.  The Committee also noticed that in order to compensate for the paucity of available
free area in these blocks, some road stretches had been identified which could be used for movement of
vehicles. The Committee was informed that some road stretches have been identified to ease traffic congestion,
for improving traffic flow and to give passage to emergency vehicles. Out of 446 plots had parking facilities,
only 298 plots had parking facility. Only 88 plots had provision for stilt parking and 148 plots have no
provision of parking inside the plots. Out of a total demand for 2477 cars spaces in the area, 905 car spaces

31
are inside and more than 1572 cars had to be either parked outside on the roads or parking facilities were
required to be built.
4.2.19  The Committee was informed that plans had been envisaged for utilizing the space available on the
back-lane of the houses (300 Nos.), School run by SDMC (40 Nos.), upcoming automated stack parking
(216), stretch Nos. 4, 5, 6, & 7 of SDMC authorized parking (220 Nos.) along with shared parking spaces
at Hemu Kalni School, Moolchand Hospital, DMRC Parking and Commercial building, etc.   In this context
it was informed that streets in the area have capacity to accommodate 1414 cars spaces.   However, inspite
of efforts by the SDMC for making there available, there is deficiency of 158 car spaces in the area.
4.2.20  The Committee appreciates that South Delhi Municipal Corporation has devised the plan to
utilize the streets and places of common utilities like school, hospitals and commercial complexes
to meet the demand for parking space in the area.  The Committee however  feels that efforts are
concentrated only on utilizing the street spaces for parking spaces, whereas efforts should also be
made for enhancing the number of parking spaces by constructing more Multi-level Car parking
(MLCPs).
4.2.21  The Committee was also informed of a Signage Plan being envisaged for the whole area.  It was
informed that Indian Roads Congress (IRC) 67-2012 code, as enumerated in the Code of Practice for Road
Signs, would be followed.  It inter-alia includes signs for no parking, no entry, one way traffic, speed
breakers, visitors’ parking, etc. that would be displayed at various places of the locality for guiding the road
users.
4.2.22  Regarding enforcement of proper parking in the area, it was informed that assistance is being provided
by Delhi Traffic Police to empower SDMC with enforcement powers to help parking contractors for
towing the wrongly parked vehicles in and around the Market area.  Regarding enforcement against vehicles
improperly parked, it was clarified that wrongly parked vehicles in and around the Market areas are towed
away by the parking contractors with the help of Delhi Traffic Police.
4.2.23  The Committee notes that Lajpat Nagar area encompasses both market area as well as
residential areas. It also notes the various measures undertaken by the SDMC for easing the
worsening traffic situation in both the areas.  The Committee appreciates the move of the SDMC to
engage the Lajpat Nagar Market Association in its efforts to ease out the traffic congestion in the
Lajpat Nagar Market.  The Committee feels that this move will cast positive impact on the grim
situation as it will result in better management of the parking spaces, curbing the illegal parking
mafia and providing facilities to the commuters and shopkeepers like e-rickshaw facility and free
valet Parking facility.
4.2.24  The Committee notes the measures taken by the SDMC towards implementation of the
Parking Area Management Plan for developing 700 on-surface parking spaces.  One hundred fifty
parking places have been added on a land handed over by DMRC near Lajpat Nagar metro station
for providing free valet parking to shopkeepers. The Committee recommends that parking Area
Management Plan should also be strictly implemented for the added spaces to utilize the space
efficiently.
4.2.25  The Committee notices that Multi-level Car Parking for around 250 car spaces has been
envisaged as a medium-term plan as it would take time for completion and implementation as
many stages are involved  in the process. The Committee recommends that the timeline decided for

32
completion should be strictly adhered to and audit should be done at regular intervals to monitor
the status of completion of the MLCP.
4.2.26  The Committee is deeply concerned at the huge gap in demand and availability of parking
spaces as it was reported that more than 1572 cars had to be parked outside on the roads/back-lane
of the plots. The Committee observes that taking on board the trend of exponential increase in
vehicle volumes with passage of time, this gap between the stagnant number of parking space and
increasing demand for parking space will widen.  The Committee also feels that there will be a
requirement of more parking spaces to meet the future demand for parking. The Committee strongly
recommends that efforts should be made to complete the construction of the proposed multi-level
parking at the earliest in order to meet the ever growing demand.
4.2.27  The Committee appreciates the plan for better vehicular circulation and parking whereby,
some roads have been identified and earmarked for easy movement of vehicles in case of emergency.
However, the Committee earnestly feels that carriageways, roads, streets and back-lane of the
plots in the localities should not be used for parking purpose as it results in reduction of space for
easy movement of traffic, induces congestion and restricts free movement of vehicles in case of
emergency.
4.2.28  Keeping in view of the various aspects placed before it, the Committee feels that a pragmatic
approach to tackle the situation has to be taken.  Although, the short term plan may be implemented
for easing the present traffic situation, a broad and well visioned approach taking into account all
the factors should be contemplated. The Committee recommends that concerted and continuous
efforts should be made towards easing the present traffic situation. Every option must be explored
for constructing multi-level automated parking to meet the future demand of Lajpat Nagar market
area.
Nehru Place
4.2.29  The Committee was informed that by the DDA was developing the parking areas of Nehru Place.
There were flaws in the system of vehicular circulation and provision of parking there. Also, the area was
grappling with insufficient street network for traffic dispersal as all the open spaces have been taken over
for parking.   The Committee was apprised about the revised vehicular circulation & parking proposed for
parking and traffic movement, plaza development and pedestrian entry rationalization for improvement in
the area.
4.2.30  It was further informed to the Committee that the plan will be executed in two phases.  In the first
phase, general upgradation of the already provided infrastructure would be taken up i.e., at grade parking
for 436 Estimated Car Spaces, MLCP & Puzzle Parking for 2533 vehicles and on street parking for 190 ECS
has been envisaged.  In the second stage, proposal for construction of MLCP for 3590 Estimated Car
spaces and on-street parking for 40 Estimated Car spaces, within   building sites, have been proposed.
4.2.31  Regarding connectivity of the metro station with the locality, a skywalk from Nehru Place metro
station (on purple line) to the main entries to Nehru Place at East plaza and North Plaza at different heights
have been envisaged.  The purpose of the skywalk is to bifurcate the volume of metro users in to two
different directions.
4.2.32  The following time line for the General upgradation plan has been envisaged for Nehru Place:

33
Sl. No. Action   Date of Completion
1. Issuance of RFP Matter deliberated in Works Advisory Board on 27-09-19
and the L1 bid concurred for acceptances vide MoM
dt. 10.09.2019
2. Selection of agency 10.09.2019
3. For convenience of metro user a April 2021
skywalk connectivity from Nehru
Place metro station (on purple line)
to podium area of Nehru Place
4. Up-gradation of circulation roads, April 2021
footpath and surface parking areas.
6. Improvement for pedestrians by way
of lift, escalators, toilet facilities, Wi-Fi, April 2021
etc
4.2.33  Following time timeline for construction of Multi-Level Car Parking (Ramp-type) (phase -2) was
informed:
Sl. No. Action   Date of Completion
1. Issuance of RPF 13.09.2019
2. Selection of agency To be decided after receipt of bids on 10.10.2019. Likely to be finalized
in 3 months time thereafter
3. Completion May 2021
4.2.34  The Committee notes that the locality has insufficient space for traffic dispersal and all the
open spaces have been taken over by parking and therefore vehicular movement in the area has
been severely affected.
4.2.35  The Committee notes that request for proposals for both the stages have been issued and the
agencies to carry out the work envisaged in Phase-1 and Phase-2 have been selected. The Committee
recommends that regular monitoring of the work and concerted efforts should be made at appropriate
level so that the plan would be completed as per the timelines.
Bhikaji Cama Place
4.2.36  The Committee was informed through a presentation by Ministry of Home Affairs that Bhikaji
Cama place parking areas are also being developed by the DDA. The area accommodates all sorts of
buildings viz. residential, commercial, mixed use, institutional, urban villages, services, site and historical
monuments.
4.2.37  In the presentation, DDA, in the meeting held on 14
th December, 2018, highlighted that the Bhikaji
Cama Place has four types of parking viz. Basement parking, at-grade parking, on-street parking and basement
parking (converted to office). The Committee was informed that circulation and ‘park & walk’ plan has

34
been devised for the area. There are more through-roads for faster dispersal, road widening on South side
with priced parallel parking, consolidated ‘park and walk’ at multiple locations and better connectivity from
neighborhoods have also been planned. The Committee was informed that as per the plan only three types of
parking viz. basement parking, on-street parking and stack parking for 360 car spaces will be provided in the
area.
4.2.38  However, in the presentation before the Committee on 11
th October, 2019, the Committee was informed
that Bhikaji Cama Place contains a plaza, two at-grade parking and one patch of unused space within its
precincts.
4.2.39  The Committee was also informed that area development, parking management and decongestion
plan for the area has been envisaged.  The proposed plan will be executed in two phases i.e. Phase-1 for
general upgradation plan and Phase-2 for construction of a ramp-type multi-level car parking. Under Phase-
1, work to facilitate pedestrian movement, provision of lifts, escalators, skywalk, toilets, Wi-Fi etc., and
construction of a road linking two ends of the complex would be taken up.
4.2.40  The Committee was provided the following time line for the General upgradation plan envisaged for
Bhikaji Cama Place:
Sl. No. Action   Date of Completion
1. Issuance of RFP for hiring of agency NIT in 2nd call received and referred to competent authority
on 9/10/19 for allowing negotiations, as quoted rates are
high.
2. Selection of agency April 2020
3. To facilitate pedestrian movement, April 2021 (tentative)
provision of lifts, escalators, skywalk,
toilets, Wi-Fi etc.
4. Provision of additional roads linking April 2021 (tentative)
between   two   ends   of   complex
between Ring Road and August Kranti
Bhawan for improving movement of
motorised transport
4.2.41  Under Phase-2, a ramp-type multi-level car parking would be constructed. The Committee was
informed about the following timeline for construction of the Multi-Level Car Parking:
Sl. No. Action Date of Completion
1. Issuance of RFP for hiring of  agency 3.10.2019 in first call
2. Selection of agency Approx. 3 months i.e. by February, 2020
3. Completion of Multi-level Car Parking April 2021 (Tentative)
4.2.42  The Committee notes that the locality is highly congested and due to on-street and at-grade
parking, the vehicular movement in the locality was obstructed.

35
4.2.43  Regarding general up-gradation plan, the Request For Proposal (RFP) for hiring agency has
been received and referred to competent authority for allowing negotiations, as quoted rates are
high. A time gap of more than six months has been kept for selection of the agency.  The Committee
recommends that the process of selection of agencies should be completed in shortest possible time
so as to reduce the target.
4.2.44  Regarding construction of multi-level parking in Phase-2, the Committee notes that issuance
of RFP for hiring of agency has been issued and process of selection of work is likely to be completed
in three months i.e. by February, 2020. The Committee recommends that the construction of multi-
level parking in phase-2 should be completed without time and cost over run.  The Committee feels
that freeing the streets and lanes of the locality is necessary for the easy movement of vehicles
especially in case of emergency.
4.2.45  The Committee recommends that the work of construction of multi-level parking be taken
up on priority basis and revised schedule to pre-pone the construction of multi-level parking should
be made so that the parking  facilities in the area could be augmented which in turn will have a
positive effect on the overall traffic situation in the area.
Connaught Place
4.2.46  Connaught place area comes under the jurisdiction of New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC). The
Committee was informed by the representative of NDMC, that the area is spread over 47 square kilometres
on both North and South of Rajpath.  Delhi Metro Rail has a good network in the area as about 19 metro
stations fall in the area affording better connectivity of the area to other parts of the City.
4.2.47  The Committee was informed that both automated parking facilities parking slots and on-road Parking
facilities are available in the area.  NDMC informed the Committee that with the use of technology, utilization
of parking slots are being improved to make it more convenient for use.  In area North to Rajpath which
includes commercial roads, smart parking management system, a technology-driven parking management
system has been implemented for efficiently utilizing the available 5,392 parking slots. Each slot has been
fitted with magnet-cum-infrared sensors to indicate the availability of the slot on a real time basis and
transmitting the status of availability to the command and control room through a optical fiber line which in
turn makes the information to the general public available on a real time basis. Parking slot availability is
displayed on Light Emitting Diode (LED) screens erected in the entire area and the status of availability of
slot is also made available online through mobile phones.  The facility of making payments through auto pay
stations has also been made available at seven major roads near Connaught Place. Parking has been made
available at various locations like Delhi High Court, Patiala House Court etc., and there is a proposal to
rationalize the already available parking in NDMC area through web-based applications as a short-term
measure.
4.2.48  The Committee was apprised by NDMC about the issues faced by the authorities in managing
parking in specific areas. The Committee considered the congestion issue due to improper Parking in three
lanes around Patiala House Court, when the designated automatic Parking facility for 1600 cars is made
available at a distance of less than 200 metres just opposite the High Court. The Committee was informed
that despite enforcement measures by the Delhi Police like ‘challaning’ the vehicles for improper parking,
etc. the congestion due to improper parking persists.

36
4.2.49  The Committee was informed by NDMC that planning has been done to implement Smart Parking
Management Systems in the remaining part of the NDMC for around 3,000 parking slots and the building of
parking facilities for 1,600 vehicles near the Supreme Court of India.
4.2.50  The Committee was told that both on-street parking and multi-level parking are available in the area.
However, to discourage on-street parking the parking fare is fixed at about two-and-a-half times the normal
parking fee. It was further informed that there is a very good network of metro trains in the NDMC area and
that the last-mile connectivity through public bike sharing and e-scooter sharing is the solution for the
NDMC area. Cycle docks have been constructed under a PPP model at 50 locations for pick and use cycles.
About 500 cycles have been put in use and efforts are being made to extend the number to 1000 in due
course of time.
4.2.51  The Committee observes that due to paucity of land in the Connaught place area, the addition
of more parking space by way of building Multi-level Parking is less probable. The Committee
recommends the possibility of underground parking for the area at a suitable location should be
explored.
4.2.52  The Committee appreciates the work done by NDMC in managing the available parking
facilities in the area. The Smart Parking Management System being implemented in the North of
Rajpath is working efficiently. The Committee therefore recommends that the same system should
be applied to the other areas of Connaught Place to have effective parking management of the
whole area.
4.2.53  The Committee notes that the problem of vehicles getting improperly parked around the
Patiala House Court may be due to rush created by media when some important case is being heard
in the Court and the people may not find it practical to park their vehicle in the automated parking
facility opposite the High Court due to distance or lack of awareness about the availability of parking
facility. The Committee, therefore, recommends that separate designated parking for the Patiala
House Court be provided to address the problem of on- road parking around the area. The Committee
feels that due to ever increasing number of cars plying on road of Delhi for various places there is
a need to ensure designated parking facilities around prominent places like courts, hospitals,
commercial complexes, for use by visiting vehicles, either on sharing basis or exclusively for that
place.
4.2.54 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the authorities for construction of NMT
Lanes, cycle docking stations and providing cycles as an effort to provide last mile connectivity to
the metro stations.
4.2.55  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends to improve pedestrian path and cycling
zone in Delhi and NCR so as to increase non-motorized travel and reduce motor vehicles travel
which will not only help to reduce carbon but will also promote  healthy lifestyle and improve
physical activity.
Karol Bagh
4.2.56  Karol Bagh area is one of the most congested areas under the North Delhi Municipal Corporation.
Karol Bagh has both commercial as well as residential area.  The Committee was apprised of the plan made
to decongest the market area.

37
4.2.57  The Committee in its meeting held on 14 th December, 2018, took stock of the progress report on
Parking in Karol Bagh Area by the North District Municipal Corporation. The Report depicted the present
facilities provided in the area like Smart parking for 5392  car spaces and 2237 slots for scooter, magnetic-
cum-infrared sensor based parking to identify occupancy of each parking slots, LED screen to display
parking availability, entry and exit devices for tickets and payments, 8 smart cranes for enforcement,
mobile app  and web portal for parking availability, seven auto pay stations have been installed for payment.
Handheld devices and 265 cameras are connected with the command and control centre for online
monitoring.
4.2.58  In the presentation on creation of parking facilities in Karol Bagh area, Ministry of Home Af fairs
depicted short-term, medium-term and long-term plans for creation of parking facilities.
4.2.59  Regarding availability of parking, the Committee was informed that two surface parking systems are
running in Karol Bagh i.e one in the Shastri Park locality (parking plot area  4,807 sq. mtrs.), and the other
in the Rajendra Nagar (parking plot area  3,871 sq. mtrs.). The combined capacity of both parkings is
approximately 400 cars.  A plan has been made to augment the parking availability of the area by way of
multi-level parking for creating parking space for around 800 additional cars.
4.2.60  Regarding short-term measures, parking has been made available at three location viz. adjoining
office of income Tax Department Jhandewalan Ext. and at land near Jhandewalan Mata Mandir (parking for
the visitors of the temple). Parking for women and physically challenged persons was being provided
exclusively at MCD land on Bank Street, Karol Bagh. The Committee was informed that presently there are
parking spaces to accommodate 1204 cars and 49 two wheelers in the area.
4.2.61  As a medium-term measure, the plan to cover three more locations for single lane parking has been
proposed. The Committee was informed about single lane parking on a road having a length of 90 meters at
Jhandwalan Exten. near Income Tax Office having parking capacity for 36 ECS cars, another parking at
Bhulibhatiyari (Old Link Road) on a length of 250 meters with parking capacity for 100 ECS and one single
lane parking on 100 meters road at DDA, LSC Market, New Rajender Nagar having parking capacity of 40
ECS have been envisaged and that discussions with various stakeholders is being done to commence these
sites.
4.2.62  As a long-term measure, the proposal for development of a multi-level car parking complex at
Shastri Park and construction of multi-level parking in Old Rajendra Nagar has been envisaged.
4.2.63  In the meeting of 11
th October, 2019, the Committee was informed that pedestrianization, parking
management and decongestion plan has been devised for Karol Bagh area as a short-term measure.
4.2.64  The Committee was informed about the use of ‘Tactile Urbanism’ method which is applied as a
short-term measure to accomplish low-cost projects to advance long-term goals relating to street safety,
public space etc., on 1 Km. stretch at Ajmal Khan Road.  Other measures undertaken are to implement a plan
like imposition and relaxation of restriction viz. allowing vehicles and e-rickshaws after 9 PM to 11 AM and
providing pedestrian friendly facilities like installation of benches on the road stretches, making streets
disabled friendly, etc.
4.2.65  The Committee was briefed about the following 12 tasks and proposed timelines envisaged under the
plan:

38
Sl. No. Location Tar get date of completion
1. Operationalization of 4 # Parking lots (Bank Surface parking is operational.
street 200, Rajender Nagar-180, Ajmal Khan
Park-200, 22-Block-100)
2. Notification of Ajmal Khan pedestrianization Pending, Pertains to Transport Department and
and One-way Traffic circulation system by Traffic Police
Traffic Police
3. Implementation of signage for one-way traffic Provided.
movement
4. Cordoning off of Ajmal Khan Road from Implemented pedestrianization of the stretch from
Pusa Road to Arya Samaj Road and start Pusa Road to Arya Samaj Road from 01 May
of pedestrianization. 2019 and the stretch from Arya Samaj Road to
D.B. Gupta Road in June 2019. Further, benches,
dustbins, Tree Plants, 7 Golf Carts, 14 Uber points
in Karol Bagh have been provided.
5. Marking of parallel parking slots on 6 roads. Completed by PWD.
6. Implementation of one-way traffic system One way on Padam Singh Road, Hardhyan Singh
by Traffic Police Road and Pyare Lal Road has been introduced
with the help of Traffic Police.
7. IT-based Parking Management System for November 2019
Karol Bagh to manage on-street and off-
street parking by NDMC.
8. Installation and operationalizing of Uber, Ola November 2019
pick-up drop-off points
9. Drawings of Karol Bagh Roads to be provided Provided on 25th July 2019 by KP to MHA
to PWD
10. Publishing of Tenders for infrastructure November 2019
upgradation of 18km of Karol Bagh Roads
for Execution by PWD
11. Award of Work January 2020
12. Completion of execution of Roads of December 2020
Karol Bagh
4.2.66  Installation of benches was an instant hit and has proved to be a game changer. It discourages
parking of vehicles and provides additional facilities for vulnerable groups of society like toddlers, elderly
persons and women and also provides public space for all.
4.2.67  The Committee notes that work on some of the tasks envisaged under the plans like for the
stretch from Pusa Road to Arya Samaj Road and the stretch from Arya Samaj Road to D.B. Gupta

39
Road have been developed for the use of pedestrians while other works are at the implementation
stage.
4.2.68  The Committee recommends that the task pertaining to Ajmal Khan road pedestrianization
and One-way Traffic circulation system by Traffic Police for which action is pending on the part of
Transport Department and Traffic Police be expedited to ensure its completion in a time bound
manner.
Kamla Nagar Market
4.2.69  The Committee in its meeting held on 11 th October, 2019 was informed that Kamla Nagar market
parking area is being developed by the North Delhi Municipal Corporation. The Committee was informed
about two new projects which were off-shoot projects from the Karol Bagh Project. The Committee
considered the project for Kamla Nagar market i.e. “pedestrianization and decongestion plan for Kamla
Nagar market” and the other project for Krishna Nagar market viz. “pedestanization and decongestion plan
for Krishna Nagar market” in line with that of Karol Bagh.
4.2.70  The Committee was apprised of the plan for parking management and upgradation for the entire
market, approved by Environment Pollution Control Authority (EPCA). A comprehensive upgradation  of the
market has been envisaged for providing facilities like new footpaths, lighting and  public toilets along with
surface parking and reserving of three roads as ‘no parking’  with one street reserved for use by pedestrians.
4.2.71  The status on the Parking Management, Pedestrianization and Comprehensive Street Design in Kamla
Nagar is as under:
Sl No. Location Current Status
1. Kamla Nagar (North DMC) Parking Plan assistance provided by Knowledge Partner (KP)
Management, Pedestrianization and to MHA, submitted for trial runs. Plan for parking
Comprehensive Street Design plan management and upgradation of entire market area has
approved by Environment Pollution been approved by EPCA. File sent to Delhi Govt. for
Control Authority (EPCA) funding of  `20 crore which includes comprehensive
market upgradation with new footpath, lighting, public
toilet alongwith surface parking in Kamla Nagar area.
No parking on three roads and one pedestrian street is
proposed.
4.2.72  The North Delhi Municipal Corporation informed the Committee that it is being assisted by the
Knowledge Partner to MHA and the plan has been submitted for trial runs. The Committee also notes that the
project has been approved by the EPCA. The Committee notes that the allocation of funds for the project is
awaited.
4.2.73  The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued with the Delhi government
for expeditious allocation of funds for the project. The Committee appreciates the efforts made for
comprehensive upgradation of the market for providing facilities for the shoppers and the proposal
to reserve one street entirely for use by pedestrians.  However, the Committee strongly feels that
the three streets on which parking has been allowed should be freed. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that efforts should be made to identify space in the locality that could be developed as

40
a Multi-Level Parking to free the three streets and to meet the future parking demands of the
locality.
Krishna Nagar Market
4.2.74  Krishna Nagar Market falls under the jurisdiction of the East Delhi Municipal Corporation.  The
presentation on Pedestrianization and Decongestion Plan for Krishna Nagar Market highlighted the traffic
circulation, proposed pedestrianization, on-street parking and green areas for the locality.
4.2.75  The Committee was apprised about the following status of the plan:
Sl No. Location Tar get date of completion
1. Krishna Nagar (EDMC) Parking Plan assistance provided by Knowledge Partner to
Management and Pedestrianization MHA, submitted for trial runs.
plan approved by EPCA
2. On-street Parking provision Completed. 90 ECS
3. Multi-level Car Parking provision Completed. 250 ECS
4. Current Status Trial runs for pedestrianization are underway. On-street
Parking has been marked by EDMC. Off-street parking
lot has been operationalized. Plan discussed threadbare
with Market Associations and RWAs and regular
consultations being carried out. After successful trials,
actual implementation of the plan will follow.
4.2.76  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the EDMC in involving Market Associations
and RWAs in the implementation of the plan and holding regular consultations in their endeavor to
run the trial successfully.
4.2.77  The Committee recommends that innovative measures may be taken such as enhancing
parking charges for longer parking in line with parking rules in Central London and linking the
purchase of vehicles with the availability of Parking spaces in house/accommodation.
4.2.78  The Committee also recommends that for the areas where at-grade parking is not feasible,
a proposal for building underground parking on a large scale should be mooted to meet the parking
space requirement of these areas.
Drafting of Parking Rules
4.2.79  The Committee was informed that earlier due to non-existence of parking rules in Delhi, the buildings
plans were approved without having provisions for Parking inside the plots. The Committee notes that the
most of the colonies including posh colonies like Golf Links, Jor Bagh, Sunder Nagar, Greater Kailash had
been built without a provision for parking space.
4.2.80  Over time the buildings have become multistoried and also some floors have also been rented out.
The addition of floors to the existing buildings and renting of floors has resulted in adding more people and
vehicles with a rising demand for parking in these localities.

41
4.2.81  The Committee enquired about the status of “Delhi Maintenance and management of Parking Places
Rules, 2018” under consideration of the GNCTD. It was informed that the Delhi Parking rules were notified
in September, 2019.  About 70 to 80 per cent of parking in Delhi is under three MCDs viz. EMCD, North
MCD and East MCD, and their executive bodies viz. Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) have been authorized to
make parking rules under their jurisdiction.
4.2.82  The Committee notes that three MCDs, NDMC, DDA and Delhi Cantonment Board have been entrusted
with the responsibility for preparing and implementing the local area specific Area Parking Plans.  The
Committee notes that various issues have been elaborately dealt with in the parking rules like priority of
utilizing the on-street spaces, Parking fees and Conditions of Parking Contracts, parking for differently
abled persons, management of off-street and multi-level parking, parking at railway stations, airports and
Delhi Metro Station and parking in residential streets and lanes.  Also, the issue of a enforcement mechanism
to deal with the vehicles parked in non-parking zones like seizing, towing away and imposition of penalties
and over stay in authorized parking area have been dealt with. The rules also dwell upon encouraging the use
of electric vehicles by providing charging facilities and disposing of the junk vehicles.
4.2.83  The Committee hopes that the parking rules will be implemented by the urban local bodies
in right earnest to improve the worsening traffic situation and to fix the loopholes in the present
parking system of the city.
4.2.84  The Committee strongly recommends that provisions needs to be made to ensure that new
vehicles should be allowed on the road only if it has a parking space.
4.2.85  The Committee is aware of the Orders of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) that vehicles
(Diesel/Petrol) which are more than 10/15 years cannot ply on Delhi roads and are to be phased out.
The Committee expresses its displeasure and recommends strongly that effective enforcement is
needed to track and impound vehicles as per the orders of NGT.
4.3 Retrofitting of 100 Junctions and 77 Identified Corridors
4.3.1 The MHA in its Background note elaborated on retrofitting of 100 junctions and 77 identified corridors.
The MHA informed the Committee about constitution of 06 Task Force teams for each traffic range in the
NCT of Delhi by the Hon’ble Lt. Governor, Delhi and appointment of DCsP/Traffic Ranges as the convenors
of these Task Force teams with members from PWD, MCD, DDA (UTTIPEC) and the Transport Department,
GNCT of Delhi.
4.3.2  It was informed that 77 congested traffic corridors in Delhi have been identified by the Task Force
teams for undertaking improvement action through engineering improvements, traffic regulation and
enforcement action.  The Committee was apprised about the identification of 28 ‘A’ Category corridors
(Annexure-A) where targeted action was undertaken in association with the concerned road maintaining
agencies, local bodies and other concerned departments for decongestion and improvement in the flow of
traffic on these corridors to reduce travel time, reduce pollution and ensure smooth flow of traffic.   The
Committee was also apprised that the progress made on the tasks in the 11 corridors was being constantly
monitored by Lt. Governor of Delhi in review meetings held from time to time.
4.3.3 The Committee was informed about the removal of encroachments of  hawkers/vendors and
unauthorized parking of vehicles on the 29 major corridors/road stretches in WP(C) No. 4999/2017 – Manu
Mishra Vs. GNCT of Delhi and Ors. (these corridors are mainly from the same 28 ‘A’ category corridors

42
identified by the Task Force teams) is also being constantly monitored by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi
and  Lt. Governor, Delhi.   The Committee was informed that joint drives for removal of such encroachments
were being conducted regularly by the field functionaries of Delhi Traffic Police along with officials of
concerned Municipal Bodies and the ‘action taken reports’ in this respect are also being forwarded to the
Urban Development Deptt., GNCT of Delhi under intimation to other concerned Departments.
4.3.4 It was informed during the year 2017, a total of 45,705 challans were issued, 2726 vehicles were
impounded and ` 1.20 crore collected as compounding amount during special joint drives on these corridors.
4.3.5 During the presentation on 14
th December, 2018, it was informed that a Committee consisting of
traffic police officers, road owning agencies, civil agencies, etc. has been constituted to examine feasibility
for improving the existing road facilities by engineering to remove congestion. The Committee was informed
that 28 ‘A’ Category corridors, 30 ‘B’ Category corridors and 18 ‘C’ Category corridors had been prioritized
for retrofitting. The Committee was informed that 350 tasks in ‘A’ Category, 165 tasks in ‘B’ Category and
105 tasks in ‘C’ Category had been contemplated on 77 corridors and 70 per cent of the task was to be done
by the PWD out of which   117 tasks had been completed.
4.3.6 The Committee was informed that a endeavor has been made to complete the 192 tasks within six
months which includes extension of Foot Over Bridge (FOB) at ISBT, Anand Vihar, installation of iron grills
of eight-feet height on the central verge of entire MB Road from Khanpur T-point to Pul Prahladpur underpass,
widening of entire IGNOU road, at least, by 30-feet on both carriage ways and widening of slip road from
Dwarka to Najafgarh at Dwarka Mor. The Committee was also apprised about some of the identified
congestion points on Aurobindo Marg, Aurobindo Chowk to Andheria Mor and Rau Tula Ram Marg where
some civil works and some FOBs can be constructed to help decongest the traffic.
4.3.7  The Committee was also informed that the High Powered Committee in its second meeting held on
4
th April, 2019 considered and took stock of the progress made on the issue and noticed that 35% tasks have
been completed, 5% tasks involve issues like removal of encroachments etc., 10% tasks have been declared
not feasible by land owning agencies and 50% tasks are under process.  The matter is being taken up
regularly by the DCPs/Traffic Ranges, who are the conveners of the Task Forces for their respective areas
of jurisdiction, with the concerned agencies to undertake the identified tasks as per the specified timelines
indicated by the agencies.
4.3.8 As regards retrofitting of 100 junctions, the Committee was informed in its meeting held on 11
th
October, 2019 that they have an assurance from the PWD, GNCT that consultants for design of 100
junctions would be hired by the end of May, 2019 and progress will be monitored regularly.  It was informed
that endeavour would be made to complete the entire work of retrofitting of junctions by end 2020.
4.3.9 The Committee was updated on the progress made in retrofitting of 100 junctions and status on
various tasks at 77 corridors prioritized and categorized on the twin criteria of volume i.e. number of road
users utilizing the roads or corridors and the visibility i.e. importance of the location of the corridors having
demonstration effect of the intervention on sub arterial and other important roads.
4.3.10  The Committee notices the reasons for congestion on roads going towards Gurgaon and towards
airport on Rau Tula Ram Marg, on junction in front of Radisson Blu is due to heavy cross movement of
pedestrians with no zebra crossing, underpass or Foot over Bridge. The Committee considered the proposal
for introduction of ‘Stop Lines’ and signals and introduction of ‘At-Grade Zebra’ on clean lines of pedestrian

43
movement with necessary civil works, arrangements to reduce weaving of traffic to induce faster clearance
at green lights and make junctions safer for pedestrians.
4.3.11 The Committee was informed that slip roads had been constructed on Adchini T. Point and on both
sides of Press Enclave Marg touching the PTS Chowk which has resulted in reduction of queue length of
vehicles at the T.points which in turn has reduced delay caused at the intersections and ensured better
safety. The Committee was apprised of the progress made on Aurobindo Marg viz. relocation of CNG
Station opposite TB Hospital to remove obstruction due to queuing of vehicles for smooth flow of traffic,
Provision of iron grill on the median to avoid Pedestrian Jaywalking for safety of road users and relocation
of existing Bus Stop to avoid vehicular conflicts.
4.3.12  The Committee was informed about the following timeline for completion of the retrofitting of 100
junctions:
Sl. No. Action Items Target Date of Completion
1. Hiring of Consultants for design of 100 junctions. 18 th October 2019
Floating of Tenders to hire consultants.
2. Award of design work, Constitution of evaluation 18 th November 2019
committee.
3. Design of junction 31 st March 2020
4. Approval of UTTIPEC 30 th September 2020
5. Award of execution work 31 st December 2020
6. Completion of execution works June 2021
4.3.13  The Committee takes note of the work done at various locations like improvement at Adchini
T. Point, PTS Chowk like construction of slip roads, relocation of the CNG stations and installation
of iron grills and relocation of bus stops, etc.
4.3.14  The Committee recommends that as per the target dates fixed by the Ministry as mentioned
in the table above and the steps identified towards meeting that target, work should be completed.
4.4 Complete Street Design for Dwarka Streets
4.4.1 The Committee was informed that endeavor has been made to develop some stretches of Dwarka to
provide pedestrian facilities, non-motorized transport facilities and public amenities, on a pilot basis. The
DDA informed that a plan re-design street cross sections between Sector 12 and Sector 13 of Dwarka, near
the metro stations, measuring around 70 Kms. have been identified to make the streets compatible for the
use of pedestrians and non-motorized transport.
4.4.2 It was informed that 30.5 Kms. of the Streets in Dwarka area has been identified to make them more
amenable to use by non-motorized transporters, encouraging the use of cycles and making road crossing by
pedestrians better by December, 2020 on a pilot basis. It was informed that planning has been done to
construct cycle docking stations for  encouraging their use in that area by making pick and use arrangements
for cycles.

44
4.4.3 In this context, it was informed that initially, in Phase 1, eight kilometers of the street and 14 junctions
have been taken up for improvement. Detailed designing, approved by DDA, has been done for improvement
of road cross-sections.
4.4.4 The Committee was informed about the changes needed in the geometry of the intersections by
making large pedestrian crossings from island to island with refuge in the centre for waiting, raising slip
lanes for safe movement of vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists and to improve signage, road markings and
for  enforcing compulsory diversion to slip lane for left bound vehicles at the intersection.
4.4.5 The Committee was apprised of the following timelines for improvement of 70 Kms. of the streets in
Dwarka area:-
S. No. Item Target date of completion
1. Selection of implementation agency for construction of October 2019
bicycle tracks in Phase 1 streets (8km), which include
Sector 12 and 13 Metro stations.
2. Completion of implementation of 8km street length with July 2020
Cycle Tracks
3. Completion of implementation of 8km street length with July 2020
improved walkways inclusive of lighting and other details
4. Execution of 22km. of comprehensive NMT with cycle December 2020
tracks and improved pedestrian walkways
5. Execution of remaining 40km. of cycle tracks and pedestrian December 2021
walkways
4.4.6 The Committee was informed about a plan envisaged by Delhi Development Authority involving
development of infrastructure to encourage the use of non-motorized modes of transport over the motorized
forms of transport.  It was informed that as per the devised plan, endeavour will be made to improve the
roads providing facilities for pedestrian and non-motorized transport like cycles, cycle-rickshaws and for
providing public amenities. The Committee was informed that special focus on creating bicycle tracks and
encouraging people to use bicycles within that area is being made.
4.4.7 Parking and traffic movement plan proposing construction of multi-level parking, pedestrian entry
rationalization, etc. would be implemented in the area around Sector 12 and 13 metro station at Dwarka
Area, in lines with the plan proposed for Nehru Place.  The Committee was informed that the plan has been
approved by DDA Screening committee and the initiation of tendering process is pending.  It was informed
that the plan proposes for using the space under viaduct of metro stations for community activities like
building of Open Area Theatre (OAT), tot lots, small sports facility, and open gymnasium, etc..
4.4.8 The Committee understands the importance of non-motorized mode of transport in terms of
reducing pressure of vehicles on the roads. The Committee knows that in order to harness the
benefit of non-motorized transport, infrastructure has to be developed to encourage the non-
motorized mode of transport so that it can duly supplement the increasing pressure on the motorized
forms of transport.

45
4.4.9 The Committee notes the timeline provided for completion of retrofitting of 70 Kms. of
roads. The Committee observes that work was contemplated to be done in three phases. The
Committee notes that as per the timeline first phase has been started from October, 2019 and the
work would be completed by July, 2020.
4.4.10  The Committee is given to understand that the project is being taken on pilot basis and the
experience gained would be used in other parts of the City.  The Committee, therefore, suggests
that work should be done keeping in view the future demands.  The Committee was informed by
representative of IIT, Delhi  that in the past some flyovers had been constructed without making
correct assessment of the future demand and these flyovers are unable to meet the present traffic
demands hence are often clogged.
4.4.11 The Committee in its meeting held on 11
th October, 2019 took note of the fact about the
poor quality of work done on some flyovers. The Committee is anguished at the low quality of
work done on some flyovers like poor sound barriers, riders feeling bumps due to uneven surface.
The Committee therefore strongly recommends that there shoul d be regular check on the quality
of the work being done and a functional mechanism should be put in place to check the quality of
work.
Bicycle sharing Scheme
4.4.12  The Committee in its meeting held on 14 th December, 2018 was informed that a Bicycle sharing
scheme has been introduced in the NDMC area and Dwarka Area as an effort to introduce non-motorised
means of travel.
4.4.13  The Committee was informed about the bicycle sharing scheme started in NDMC under Private-
Public Partnership. It was informed that 50 locations had been identified for construction of cycle docks
where people can pick up the vehicles or pick up the bikes and then leave it at these locations. Cycles are
being provided by concessionaire Nextbike Consortium which is using the ‘smart bike’ brand.  The cycles
are GPS-controlled having GSM features. The work of constructing docks has been completed at 27
locations and the work on the remaining 23 will be completed.
4.4.14  The Com mittee was informed that 1000 bicycles will be inducted in a phased manner and in
Phase-1 and bicycle docks have been constructed at 27 stations and 200 cycles have been made avai lable
for use.
4.4.15  It was informed by DDA that a bicycle sharing scheme similar to NDMC has been planned for
the area around Sector 12 and 13 Metro Stations of Dwarka. The Committee in the meeting of 11
th
October, 2019, raised various queries on the ‘Bicycle Sharing Plan’ envisaged for the Dwarka Area.
The Committee was briefed about various features of the bicycles like installation of GPS location
devices and using non-standard parts for assembly, for security against theft.  It was also informed by
DDA that 250 stations at various locations in Dwarka area with a capacity of 2000 bicycles had been
planned.
4.4.16  The timelines for the Bicycle Sharing system for Dwarka area was communicated to the Committee
as under:

46
S. NO Item Time Scheduled
1. Tender floated and unsuccessful 14 th June 2019
2. Date of Re-Tendering 15 th  October 2019
3. Award of Tenders January 2020
4. Start of Cycle sharing services in Dwarka September 2020
4.4.17  The Committee takes note of the plan by the SDMC to develop 250 bicycle stations at various
locations in Dwarka area for accommodating 2000 bicycles having advance features like GPS, location
devices to ensure safety of the cycles against theft for use within the Dwarka Area. The Committee
hopes that the target date for introducing cycle sharing scheme i.e. September, 2020 should be met
without time and cost overrun.
4.5 Rationalization of Buses and Enhancing the Present Fleet of Buses
4.5.1 The Committee was informed by the representatives of the Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi
that presently Delhi has 5700 buses for commuters under the DTC and cluster scheme and around 25 lakhs
commuters are using buses in Delhi. Two initiatives are being contemplated by the Transport Department to
improve public transport i.e. route rationalizing of the existing buses as a short term measure and enhancing
the fleet as a medium term measure.
4.5.2 The DMRC informed the Committee that to improve public transport it has started a new last-mile
connectivity subsidiary company and is in the process of bidding out.  As per plan 500 electric and CNG
smaller buses would be taking a 5 Km. loop route around the metro stations to connect the residences or the
offices to the metro station. The Committee was further informed about creation of an app-based bus
scheme policy and a taxi aggregator regulation policy to control and regulate the traffic and that the measures
are under consideration at the higher levels of Government.
4.5.3 The Committee was apprised of the proposal of procuring 3,000 buses of three variants to augment
the present fleet of buses of which 1000 would be standard floor buses, 1000 low-floor CNG buses and
1000 low-floor electric buses in Cluster mode.
4.5.4 The GNCT of Delhi apprised the Committee about the status with regard to procurement of Buses for
Delhi:
Sl. No Type & Number of buses Action Taken Target date of completion
1. 1000 Standard Floor height Tender process completed. Roll out started in August, 2019. 250
Non-AC CNG buses A ward letter issued for 1000 buses shall be inducted by 3rd November,
buses. Agreement for lifts 2019. All 1000 Buses by 3 rd February,
for the disabled signed. 2020.
2. 1000 Low Floor height CNG 1. T ender process of 400 (i) Roll out for 2 clusters (400 buses)
AC buses Buses completed and to start in Dec, 2019 and to be
the Agreements signed. completed by June, 2020.
Supply to start in Dec, (ii) For 250 buses the Letter of
2019 and to be comple- Acceptance (LOA) has been

47
ted by June, 2020. annulled and the matter is sub-
2. Position of 600 buses judice. Induction for these buses
explained opposite shall depend on the outcome of the
court order.
(iii) For 350 Buses, being a single bid,
tender  had to be cancelled. Now it
is being retendered  after splitting
into 2 clusters (190+160).
Induction  expected to start in Sept.,
2020. Completion in 2021.
3. 1000 Low Floor height AC Tenders for first phase of Roll out to start in February, 2020.
Pure electric buses 385  electric  buses  was Completion by May, 2020. Induction of
floated. Technical evaluation 615 Buses depends upon availability of
completed and none of the land for depots and also depending on
bids was found responsive. the successful operation of first phase
Proposal   submitted   for buses.
retendering.
4. 1000 Buses by DTC DTC has floated tenders DTC has floated tenders for
for procurement of 1000 procurement of 1000 Buses in May
Buses in May 2019. Tech- 2019. Technical evaluation is under
nical evaluation is under process. Induction likely to start from
process. Induction likely February 2020.
to  start  from  February
2020.
5. 300 Electric Buses by DTC RFP in final stage to float RFP in final stage to float tender.
tender.
6. ONE DELHI App – A DIMTS  has  developed ONE DELHI app launched on 5th March
Common Mobility App for App on pro-bono basis. 2019; and made available on Google
Public Transport users in Play store.
Delhi
4.5.5 The Committee was informed that buses under the cluster scheme would run on the same Model in
which 1600-odd buses are already running in Delhi i.e. on a gross cost model. It was also informed that the
capital investment in these buses was to be made by the concessionaire and he would be paid on ‘per
kilometre’ basis as per the bids. The fare would be same as that of the DTC buses. The revenue from the
buses would come back to the Government and was not linked to the performance of the bus.  Regarding
modalities under the proposed scheme, it was informed that the routes would be given for plying of buses
and the depots would be allotted to the buses. It was further elaborated that every concessionaire would
be given a depot in an area. It was informed that the bus would originate from that depot covering cluster
of routes in that area and would go to different parts of the City. For instance, a bus allotted depot in
Dwarka, will have a cluster of routes which will originate from Dwarka and go to different parts of the
Sl. No Type & Number of buses Action Taken Target date of completion

48
city. It was assured that these buses would be op erational and will be on road between May and August
next year.
4.5.6 The Committee hopes that the timeline decided for 1000 Standard Floor height Non-AC CNG
buses would be met by the Government of Delhi.  Regarding, 1000 Low Floor height CNG AC buses,
the committee took cognizance of the difficulties being faced in the process of induction of 600
buses under cluster scheme viz. due to court case and not getting enough response from the bidder.
The Committee notes that the induction of 250 buses depends solely on the outcome of the cases.
The Committee also notes the efforts being made by the Government to make the scheme more
lucrative for the bidder by dividing the bid into two parts.  However, the Committee strongly feels
that in addition to dividing the bid into two parts, the terms of the bid should also be revised to
attract interest of the bidders.
4.5.7 The Committee notes that the attempt to initiate the process of induction of 385 electric
buses has failed as no bidder was found meeting the technical benchmarks and the tender process
is being reinitiated.  In this connection, the Committee fails to understand as to why the provision
for land for parking has not been thought out before setting a target of inducting 1000 electric
buses. The Committee feels that electric buses though may provide an alternative to fossil fuel but
also is viewed as one of the most difficult sustainable public transport.  So, the Committee strongly
feels that the Govt. should wait for the successful running of the initial phase and then start processes
involved in induction of remaining 615 buses.
4.5.8 The Committee notes that the process of induction of 1000 buses for DTC has started and the
tenders have been floated, the technical evaluation is under process and the induction of buses
depends upon successful technical evaluation of the proposals. The Committee hopes that the
timeline of February 2020 set for rolling out of the buses would be met.
4.5.9 When queries were raised on the viability of introducing electric buses in Delhi the Committee was
informed that there were only a few manufacturers of electric buses in India and being a new technology it
was being done for the first time. The Committed was informed that not much progress has been made in
the field of running of electric buses, the world over.  However, the electric buses were being run in a few
major metropolis in China.
4.5.10  The Committee was informed by the representative of Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi in the
meeting of 11
th October, 2019, that electric vehicles remain costly at present and it was being run only as
pilot projects in various cities of the world. The Committee was informed that with the introduction of BS-
VI (Bharat stage VI) emission standard the cost of running motor vehicles has increased substantially. At the
cost of an electric bus, five diesel or CNG buses can be procured. The Committee was informed about the
mobile app ‘ONE DELHI’, a common mobility app created for Public Transport users in Delhi developed by
the Govt.
4.5.11  The Committee takes note of the pilot projects for introducing electric vehicles. The
Committee feels that with the advancement of technology and economy of scales, electric buses will
become economically viable and sustainable in long run.
4.5.12  The Committee suggests that the ‘ONE DELHI’ app will be useful if it is applicable on multi-
modal basis covering all the public transports and providing the information on real-time basis.  The

49
Committee notes that the application uses mobile data and recommends that a strong data network
should be put in place for seamless usage of the application.
4.5.13  The Committee strongly recommends that shortage of 6000 buses in Delhi be filled up
expeditiously with good quality buses. The Committee hopes that with the introduction of these
6000 buses, pubic transport will improve considerably and loss of time in traffic jams and waiting for
pubic transport will be curtailed.
4.5.14  The Committee is of the view that though adding more vehicles to the public fleet is essential
as high dependable public transport lead to lesser use of personal vehicles. But, the Committee is of
the considered opinion that dependable public transports needs efficiency not only as how this
operates but also by people too who operate the system.
4.5.15  The Committee hopes that the plan to augment the strength of its existing fleet of buses
would reduce the private vehicular population on roads.
Fitting of security features like GPS and women helpline button in buses for safety of women
4.5.16  In the meeting held on 14 th December, 2018, the Committee was informed by representatives of
Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi about the proposal for installing GPS, CCTVs and Women  Helpline
Buttons in buses. All the cluster buses have been fitted with GPS devices and are traceable through a mobile
app “PoochhO’ by all passengers.
4.5.17  The Committee notices that DTC buses do not have such a facility and due to limited usage these
features are not being fully utilized.  The Committee raised queries on plans for installing of GPS in the DTC
buses along with cluster buses for seamless integration of these facilities after the Nirbhaya incident.  The
Committee took strong note of the fact that GPS facility has not been installed in DTC buses even in the
present times when this facility is available for buses running under the cluster scheme.
4.5.18  The Committee was informed by Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi in its meeting held on 14
th
December, that Cabinet approval has been granted and tenders have been floated for installing GPS devices,
panic buttons and CCTVs in all the buses on Delhi roads.
4.5.19  The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that installation of GPS devices is
being delayed. The Committee fails to understand when other public vehicles like private taxis,
cluster buses have the facility why the DTC buses have been left out.
4.5.20  The Committee takes note of the plan made for installation of GPS devices, panic button and
CCTV in all the buses for the safety of passengers. The Committee hopes that the work would be
completed in time bound manner. The Committee further recommends that in addition to the GPS
devises, panic button, CCTVs cameras should be installed in all the buses to ensure security of the
commuters including women and children.
4.5.21  The Committee feels that the implementation of pilot projects is not going to solve the
problem.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that regular assessment of number of
buses required in proportion to the increase in commuting population and upgradation of security
features should be taken up.
4.5.22  The Committee, therefore, recommends that some sort of mechanism needs to be developed

50
to rationalize the routes of the existing fleet, to assess the need for more buses and to decide on
procurement of buses on regular basis.
4.5.23  The Committee observes that use of public transport is the best suited and possible solution
to the present crisis of worsening traffic situation in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that considering demand of the time and people, mobile applications may be developed for providing
information about different transport services and real time information about availability of buses
at the bus stop. The concerned agency needs to ensure that the buses are GPS enabled, properly
maintained and are equipped with the latest technology for safety and security of the passengers.
The concerned agency should also ensure that other essential infrastructures like clean and properly
maintained bus stops should also be provided so that commuters are comfortable and safe while
waiting for bus.
4.6 IT Based Management of Traffic
Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) based on Signal Modernization Parking Application
with Parking Guidance System
4.6.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that a ITMS project has been envisaged
to provide technology based traffic solutions and enforcement. This will improve mobility, discipline and
safety on the roads of Delhi. The ITMS will be an intelligent system with a capability of Dynamic Control of
Traffic Signals by managing signal cycle times using Central Computer algorithms and will reduce overall
delays by automatically optimizing the signal timings at the intersections. It will regulate the traffic signal
timings based on the real time vehicle data (average speed in each direction, average volume, occupancy
level, etc.) collected by the field sensors using adaptive traffic technology based algorithms.
4.6.2 The Committee was also informed that the project will be covered under Central Sector Scheme for
which budgetary support will be provided by the Union Ministry of Home Affairs. The MHA has accorded
‘In-principle’ approval for the project and budget outlay which has been projected at  ` 948.54 crore.
4.6.3 The project would be taken up in three phases with definite timelines and that the project would
have the following major features:
(i) Optimized real time traffic signal control for better traffic management;
(ii) Surveillance camera to check junction behavior and violations viz red light, stop line, lane and
speed limits;
(iii) V ariable Message Sign Boards;
(iv) Centralized Command & Control Centre;
(v) Internet Protocol based Public Address system at traffic junctions; and
(vi) Traffic incident detection cameras.
4.6.4 The Committee was further informed that the ITMS has the following projected outcomes:-
(i) Better Road space traffic distribution based on Adaptive Traffic control to achieve real time
optimization of signal cycle time;
(ii) Improved Mobility with increased travel speed and less stoppage;

51
(iii) Real-time communication to commuters through user friendly messages on Variable Message
Sign Boards (VMS) and other information in real time with dynamic guidance for faster reaction
time for attending to incidents and accidents;
(iv) Effective enforcement through intelligent system based checking and monitoring to reduce
violations like Red Light jumping, Rash/Over speeding with less human intervention in prosecution
and improved compliance;
(v) Improving road safety; and
(vi) Integration to achieve collaboration and central control of existing, independent traffic sub-
systems.
4.6.5 The Committee was apprised about the timeline and the progress made towards realization of the
ITMS project:
Sl. No Item Time Scheduled
1. Hiring of Consultant, preparation and approval of May 2020
Detailed Project Report (DPR)
2. Hiring of System Integrator December 2020
3. Phase-wise implementation of the project
Phase 1 March 2021
Phase 2 June 2022
Phase 3 March 2023
4.6.6 With the increasing population and increasing number of vehicles in Delhi, it has become
very difficult to regulate the flow of traffic manually and therefore, the Committee strongly supports
incorporation of Intelligent Traffic Management systems (ITMS) for better management of traffic.
4.6.7 The Committee observes that computer-based Area Traffic Control System is operational in
many South East Asian countries since last three decades but is anguished to learn that Delhi does
not have any computer based system for managing the traffic on the Roads. For example in the
Philippines, for traffic management, a computer-based induction and sensor-based intersection system
was installed around 30 years ago.
4.6.8 However, the Committee feels that although ITMS projects have finally been envisaged for
Delhi, the Committee is deeply concerned at the very slow pace of progress being made in devising
the project and taking up just the pilot project.
4.6.9 The  Delhi Traffic Police in the Committee meeting held on 14
th December, 2018 stated that
implementation of ITMS would take longer period and in the meanwhile some smaller projects have been
planned and are being implemented on a pilot basis that would be inter-operable with the larger projects
envisaged under the ITMS. The Committee was informed about the work done on smaller projects. The
Committee was informed that under Project-I installation of 3D Radar based Red Light Violation Detection
Camera (RLVD) System at 24 junctions (96 Nos.) at an estimated cost of  ` 20 crore as also the installation
of Gantry-mounted Radar based Over Speed Detection System at 100 locations on major roads at an estimated
cost of ` 27 crore, have been completed.

52
4.6.10  The Committee was further informed that the purpose of Project-I is to identify vehicles violating
red light rules and violating the set speed limits on roads.  After implementation, the notices to violators
would be issued automatically through SMS for effective prosecution, disciplining of motorists and smooth
and safe flow of traffic. It will also control occurrence of road accidents due to over-speeding. The Committee
was further informed that work had been taken for setting up a Central Control Room and RLVD camera at
one junction and Speed Detection Cameras at 25 locations.
4.6.11  The Committee was informed that the Central Government has targeted expenditure of 40% of the
cost of the project by 31
st March, 2019 and the project would be completed by July, 2019.
4.6.12  The Committee was informed that under Project-II, installation of RLVD and Speed Check Camera
at 10 signalized junctions on Ring Road from Dhaula Kuan to Sarai Kale Khan under CSR project by Maruti
Suzuki Ltd was taken up and fully implemented at an estimated cost of 15 crore. This has made motorists
some disciplined.
4.6.13  The Committee was informed that under Project-III acquisition of Portable Tripod mounted fifty-
five Radar Speed Guns was envisaged and completed.  The Committee  was informed that twenty Laser
Guns were received on 16
th March, 2019 and the remaining thirty-five Laser Guns were received by 20 th
March, 2019.  It was also informed that the total cost of the project was about  ` 5.5 crores. It was also
informed that technical inspection for acceptance had to be undertaken.
4.6.14  The Committee was informed that under Project-IV, implementation of new E-challan System in
collaboration with NIC has been completed at a estimated cost of `19 crore.  The Committee was informed
that purpose of the project is real-time integration of Traffic Police challans with Sarthi and Vahan databases,
building of data base of repeat offenders, online facility for challaning officers to ascertain the previous
history of traffic violators and transparent prosecution of traffic violators.  It was informed that supply
order for Hand Held Devices (HHDs) and other accessories was placed by NIC on the vendor after the
tenders opened on 22
nd January, 2019. The Committee was informed that the work of customization of
software is under progress.
4.6.15  The Committee appreciates the technological interventions made in smooth movement of
traffic, checking road accidents and disciplining of motorists. However, the Committee cautions the
Government that a single yardstick should not be used for all the roads and intersections for limiting
the speed of the vehicles otherwise it is seen that speed limits of 50 Km/hr at a flyover will only
slowdown the traffic leading to congestion instead.
4.6.16  The Committee also appreciates the move for acquiring the portable tripod mounted Radar
Speed guns as it would ensure maintenance of discipline amongst the vehicle drivers on roads
where the Gantry-mounted Radar based Over Speed Detection System has  not been put in place.
The Committee, however, recommends that plan should be made to cover the area/roads where the
Gantry-mounted system has not been put in place to avoid accidents due to over speeding by drivers
on these roads.
4.6.17  Regarding capturing of mobile number of vehicle owners the Committee was informed, through
presentation that as per the orders of National Green Tribunal, 79 lakh registered vehicles (Diesel/Petrol)
which less than 10/15 years can ply on Delhi roads.  Following efforts are being made to capture the mobile
numbers of the owners of these vehicles:

53
(i) Draft Notification was issued on 24 th September, 2019, for compulsory providing of contact
details by the vehicle owner, at the time of Pollution Under Control (PUC) checking. Final
Notification in this regard will be issued to capture mobile numbers of all the vehicle owners by
November, 2020.
(ii) Transport Department, GNCTD has captured contact number of owners of 31,41,539 vehicles
from Pollution Under Control checking centers (as on 06
th October, 2019).
(iii)  As per the website of Ministry of Road, Transports and Highways, Vahan software is
conceptualized to capture the functionalities as mandated by Central Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
as well as State Motor Vehicle Rules and was developed by the NIC for vehicle registration of
all the States in State Registers and the National Register. The Vahan database has registered 28
lakh mobile numbers and NIC has so far verified 5,17,247 mobile numbers.
(iv)  Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) and Insurance Information
Bureau of India (IIB) have been examining the issue of linking insurance premium to the
violation and escalation of premium in case of violation of rules by the vehicle. A decision in
this regard is yet to be taken.
4.6.18  The Committee is aware that significant changes have been introduced by implementation
of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 and hopes that it will help in reducing road accidents
and will also improve road discipline among the drivers of all ages and types.  The Committee
recommends that quantum of penalties should be relooked/revisited/rationalised so that the Motor
Vehicle (Amendment) Act, 2019   is efffectively observed and has wider public acceptance.
4.6.19  The Committee notes the efforts of T ransport Department, GNCTD in capturing the mobile
numbers of 79 lakh vehicles and issuing of draft notification and plan to issue a final notification  in
November, 2020.  The Committee also notices that 28 lakh mobile numbers are to be verified by the
NIC.   The Committee is aware that the project is being taken up on a pilot basis and success of the
project is entirely based on the collection of mobile numbers for effective monitoring. The Committee
is concerned at the slow pace at which mobile numbers are being verified.
4.6.20  The Committee notes the proposal of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of
India (IRDAI)/Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB) for linking of insurance premium to
the rule violation and finds that such steps would act as a deterrent and a check for violation of
traffic rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that insurance premium should be linked to
traffic rule violation and an increase in premium should be made in case of violation of rules by the
vehicles when the vehicle is either driven or occupied by the owner or is run under a contract.
4.6.21  The Committee strongly recommends that issuance of final Notification for making it
mandatory to capture contact details of the vehicle owners at the time of pollution checking be
ensured by the timeline of November, 2020.  The Committee also recommends that all Vahan
databases should be linked to all the possible sources through which the mobile numbers of the
vehicles can be captured.  The Committee specifically suggests to the Government to take up the
issue with Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI)/ Insurance
Information Bureau (IIB) for capturing the mobile number of the vehicle owners and linking of the
same with the Vahan Database.

54
4.6.22  The Committee was informed that under Project-V, study and implementation of “One-Way” Schemes
on selected roads in association with World Resource Institute (WRI), have been implemented to improve
flow of traffic and reduction of congestion and to discipline traffic (Annexure-B).
4.6.23  The Committee observes that “One-Way” scheme on 17 roads have been identified on the
basis of a joint study carried out in association with the World Resource Institute. The Committee
hopes that the pilot project will be successful and the timeline of December, 2019 for completion of
the project will be met.
4.7 Efforts on Reducing Number of Vehicles on Roads
Reducing the Number  of Registration of Vehicles
4.7.1 The Committee was informed by the CRRI that Delhi has the largest number of vehicles on the roads
vis-à-vis any other Indian city.  As per the Transport Demand Forecast Study (TDFS) undertaken by the
Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and approved by the Unified Traffic and
Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) in 2011, it was observed that
between 2001 and 2008, private motor vehicle trips have increased from 28% to 35% and non-motorized
vehicle trips from 9% to 15%.
4.7.2 In the meeting held on 11 th October, 2019 the Committee raised the concern that on an average at
present more than 1700 vehicles are getting registered per day and in two to three  years  time, it could be
around 3000-4000 per day. It was further pointed out that in India there is no scrapping of old vehicles and
the new ones keep coming.  In Singapore, it is not possible for a new car to enter Singapore, unless it is
registered first and when it is registered the user must prove that the car owned by her/him before is not in
use now. This process is compulsory for all and without this no one can buy a new car or even bring a new
car.  Import tax is also very high, which acts as a deterrent.
4.7.3 The Committee in its meeting held on 14
th December, 2018 also raised concerns about houses not
having  parking spaces of their own and as a result vehicles belonging to a household remains parked on the
roads next to the houses which leads to traffic congestion on these roads of the colonies. The Committee
was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that this subject has been transferred to the GNCT of Delhi.
The Government of Delhi on 23
rd September, 2019 notified the “Delhi Maintenance and Management of
Parking Places Rules, 2019”which inter-alia states that to discourage long-duration parking on streets, the
new policy has increased the fees by incremental amounts. The Committee took into consideration the news
reports that local bodies will develop open spaces near the colonies as parking lots on payment basis.
Regular shuttle services is proposed to be prescribed as a part of a parking facility and the fees for this will
be included in the parking fee. The owners of vacant plots in the residential colonies and commercial areas
should be authorised to use these plots as parking places against parking fees. On getting permission from
the competent authority to use such vacant plots for multi-level parking under building by-laws, such plots
can be used for parking.
4.7.4 The Committee notes that the Government of NCT of Delhi has notified a parking policy
“Delhi Mainten ance and Management of Parking Places Rules, 2019” that prohibits parking on
footpaths and allows municipal bodies to chalk out a plan for parking cars within residential
areas.
4.7.5 The Committee observes that in many cases the old cars are used very rarely by the owner

55
and are abandoned and remain parked.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Ministry
should explore the possibility of registering a new vehicle only when the scrapping/disposal of the
old vehicles have been done by the owner of the car and a certificate to that effect that s/he does not
own any other car may be obtained from the competent authority for the same. The Committee
further recommends that the Ministry should also take up the issue with the concerned authorities
to make it mandatory for the occupant of the house to have a parking space so that the new car
purchased does not remain parked on the road.
Contribution of Metr o in Reducing Vehicles on Roads
4.7.6 Delhi Metro rail has been instrumental in ushering in a new era in the sphere of mass urban transportation
in India. The Delhi Metro has completely revolutionized the mass transportation scenario in the National
Capital Region. Apart from providing comfortable public transport options it is also contributing significantly
towards controlling pollution as well as reducing vehicular congestion on the roads.
4.7.7 The Delhi Metro project has been implemented phase-wise viz. Phase-1, II and phase III. Phase –I
and Phase-II are completely operational while phase-III is partially operational.  Phase-II of the network
includes Airport Express Line and NCR extension which were commissioned in the year 2011 while Phase-
III including NCR extension is being opened and has been operationalized from 2014.
4.7.8 Presently, the length of Delhi Metro Rail Network is about 389 Km with 285 stations (including
NOIDA-Greater NOIDA Corridor and Rapid Metro, Gurugram), crossing the boundaries of Delhi to reach
NOIDA and Ghaziabad in Uttar Pradesh, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Bahadurgarh and Ballabhgarh in Haryana.
Delhi Metro has covered through its network NOIDA - Greater NOIDA by Aqua Line and Rapid Metro
connecting Delhi Metro network at Sikanderpur station by Yellow Line, providing connectivity within the
satellite city of Gurugram.
4.7.9 A verage ridership of the Delhi Metro network from 2007-2008 to 2017-18 is as under:
Y ear Average. Daily Ridership
2007-08 5,97,569
2008-09 7,22,583
2009-10 8,42,278
2010-11 12,59,244
2011-12 16,60,282
2012-13 19,25,888
2013-14 22,07,723
2014-15 24,02,850
2015-16 26,15,050
2016-17 28,00,792
2017-18 25,87,271

56
4.7.10  The Committee notes that over the years there is an incremental trend in the daily ridership
of the Metro Rail. The Committee feels that this had made a positive impact on easing of the traffic
congestion on the roads as more and more people are preferring to travel by Metro Rail due to
comfort and viability thereby reducing the number of private cars on the roads.
4.7.11  The Committee acknowledges the contribution of the Delhi Metro in reducing the number of
private vehicles on the Delhi roads and recommends that metro network needs to be extended to
cover those areas in Delhi which have no connectivity to public transport or public transport is not
the viable option forcing the people to use cars for their daily travel.
4.7.12  The Committee observes that the metro have been attracting only the population near the
stations. This is largely due to lack of last mile connectivity. The Committee therefore, recommends
that DMRC should provide subsidized transport service for bringing people to its stations from upto
3-4 Kms. Further DMRC needs to reduce its parking rates at metro stations for metro commuters.
The revenue thus lost may then be compensated through other sources like advertisements, amenities
etc., at its parking places, train coaches, metro stations and on metro rails.
Impact of Odd-Even scheme on Delhi Roads
4.7.13  Representative of Delhi Traffic Police informed the Committee vide its communication dated
25th October, 2018 that the Scheme to restrict plying of motor vehicles according to registration number of
motor vehicles (Odd-Even) with certain exemptions was planned and launched by the Government of NCT
of Delhi on two occasions in Delhi i.e. 1st January, 2016 to 15 th January, 2016 and 15 th April, 2016 to 30 th
April, 2016 and most recently for the period 4 th November, 2019 to 15 th November, 2019.
4.7.14  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a study should be conducted at the
earliest on the impact of Odd-Even Scheme on easing congestion on roads of Delhi and on  pollution,
if no such study has been conducted.
Diversion of non Delhi bound vehicles from entering Delhi
4.7.15  It was informed to the Committee by CRRI about the study conducted by it in the year 2018 i.e.
“Megacity Logistics: Metrics, Tools and measures for sustainability”, according to which the number of
vehicles entering Delhi everyday from other States were 6,19,946. While the exiting vehicles of Delhi on
road every day were 6,13,797. The corresponding figure, in the year 2009 was 4,72,852 and 5,50,841,
respectively. Hence, there has been an average growth of 3 % in overall vehicular movement on the roads of
Delhi in the last decade. Also, during the year 2018, 21.35% of the freight vehicles entering Delhi used the
roads just to bypass through Delhi. Though a plan has been devised for taking the freight and other vehicle
movement passing through the roads of Delhi i.e. in the form of Eastern Peripheral roads and Western
Peripheral roads but there is no plan as of now to regulate or restrict the to and fro vehicular movement from
the neighbouring States to Delhi.
4.7.16  The CRRI informed the Committee that the NCT of Delhi itself generates far more trips than what
can easily be accommodated by the city transport infrastructure. Certain measures have been taken by the
Environment Pollution Control Authority for banning entry to the goods vehicles which originate and terminate
outside the City. As per the evaluation done by CRRI for EPE in 2019, with the opening of Eastern Peripheral
Expressway (EPE) and Western Peripheral Expressway (WPE) in 2018 the traffic passing through Delhi
has been reduced.

57
4.7.17  The Committee notes that there is to and fro movement of more than 12 lakh vehicles
everyday from neighbouring States of Delhi.  The Committee observes that less than one fourth of
the total vehicular movement is attributed to the freight vehicles. The Committee also observes
that the volume of both personal and freight vehicles is gradually increasing. The Committee is
also aware of the fact that the addition of vehicles on the Delhi roads consumes not only road spaces
but also affect the environment i.e. the emission from vehicles exhaust and their noise increases
air and noise pollution in the area. The Committee is surprised to note that there is no planning to
regulate or restrict the vehicular movement from the neighbouring States when the roads of the
City are already reeling under heavy stress because of traffic congestion and other related issues.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that there is an urgent need to formulate plan/policy to
regulate the entry of the inbound traffic and ensure smooth exit of the outbound traffic by diverting
the vehicles using Delhi roads only for bypassing via peripheral and ring roads.
4.7.18  The Committee was informed that  decongesting heavy vehicles coming from Chandigarh side and
Gurgaon side, are being diverted to KGB and KMP. The Committee was also informed that for regulating the
traffic on National Highway-44, CCTV cameras on 20 locations are being installed. The Committee also
considered the proposal of patrolling by joint teams from Delhi and Haryana to decongest traffic jams.
4.7.19  The Committee recommends restricting entry of freight vehicles to Delhi during peak traffic
hours and vehicles which need to reach other destinations and passing through the roads of Delhi
should be strictly diverted to take the peripheral and ring roads instead of entering Delhi. The
Committee further recommends to categorise roads on the basis of “prohibit, regulate and restrict”
to regulate the movement of traffic and to prevent congestion of roads within the limits of Delhi.
The Committee further recommends that the proposal of patrolling of the border area by joint
teams of Delhi and Haryana traffic police at the Delhi-Haryana border and at Delhi-Uttar Pradesh
border by Delhi and Uttar Pradesh traffic police should be encouraged for better management of
traffic in these areas.
4.8 Multi-Modal Integration and Management of Traffic and Parking at Metro Stations
4.8.1 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has network grid across Delhi and provides a viable option to commuters
to travel to different locations of Delhi. It is often observed that situations of conflict of various mode of
transport occur around these metro stations causing traffic congestion on the roads which slows down
vehicular movement and causes inconvenience to the pedestrians. In order to address the issues, Multi-
Modal Integration (MMI) and Management of Traffic and Parking have been envisaged to integrate Metro
with other modes of transport and to ensure equitable distribution of space for every mode of transport. The
MMI Plan includes provisions for pedestrian zones around the stations for easy and safe dispersion of
commuters towards bus stops, NMT lanes, Three-Seater auto Rickshaw (TSR) and cycle stands, dedicated
bays for three wheelers, e-rickshaws and feeder buses for seamless connectivity, drop-off facilities and
pedestrian crossing facilities, road junction improvement for better visibility and traffic calming measures
by creating table top with synchronized traffic signals.
4.8.2 The Committee in its meeting held on 14
th December, 2018, was informed that 59 stations of Phase-
III of metro network were approved for multi-modal integration.  It was informed that MMI plans were
finalized by UTTIPEC in consultation with all the stakeholders, like road-owning agencies such as DDA,
PWD, MCD and Traffic Police. Some of the stations where MMI is being implemented are Vishweshwariah

58
Moti Bagh, Durgabai Deshmukh South Campus Station, Vinod Nagar West, Kashmere Gate and Dhaula
Kuan, etc.
4.8.3 The Committee in its meeting held on 11 th October, 2019 was informed by the MHA that for each
metro station, certain requirements have been identified that need to be in place like implementation status of
UTTIPEC Plan, footpath/plaza/park, pick-up drop off and pre-paid system, road marking and signage,
encroachment and illegal parking, road and junction improvement, cycle stand, public toilets and hawking
and drainage/sanitation/ electrical service.
4.8.4 The Committee was also informed that Chief Secretary, GNCT of Delhi in the meeting held on 17 th
January, 2019 directed the MCDs to form Committees under the chairmanship of Deputy Commissioners of
various zones alongwith officials from DMRC, PWD, Traffic Police, DDA and Knowledge Partner to MHA
to assess requirement of MMI and Parking Management at metro stations in their respective zones.
4.8.5 The Committee was apprised about the status of identified works around some metro stations. The
Committee was informed that most of the identified work was yet to be completed. In this regard, status of
work around East Azad Nagar falling under the jurisdiction of East MCD was elaborated. The Committee
was informed that work on issues of footpath/plaza/park, pick-up/drop off and road marking and signage
was scheduled to be completed at this station, have not been completed.
4.8.6 The Committee was informed that no progress has been made on Work as per audit carried out under
the Committees chaired by Zonal DCs of respective MCDs, by DMRC, DDA, Transport Department,
BSES, PWD, MCDs, NDMC, Traffic Police and Delhi Police. It was informed that more meetings are
required and the tentative date for completion by June, 2020 was fixed.
4.8.7 It was informed that out of thirty stations, work in one station i.e. Chhattarpur has been completed
while MMI plans for Kashmere Gate have been reviewed and found drawings are under preparation by M/
S DIMTS. It was also informed that for remaining twenty eight stations, two DDCs have been appointed
and concept designs are under finalization thereafter for implementation by respective land owning agencies
including DMRC.
4.8.8 It was also informed that MMI work within the station area of sixty stations   has been implemented
and for outside station area, within the 300 metre radius zone, GFC drawings are being prepared by DMRC
for implementation by PWD, DDA and other land owning agencies. For the purpose, three DDCs have been
engaged by DMRC. After reviewing the existing MMI plan of sixty stations, the concept plans are being
revised by the DDCs.
4.8.9 It was also informed that the revised concept plans of twenty stations have been sent to UTTIPEC on
30
th September, 2019 and for remaining forty stations revised concept plan has been submitted to UTTIPEC
on 31st December, 2019. After receiving the approval of UTTIPEC, GFC drawings shall be prepared for
implementation by respective land owning agencies. Expected date of issuance of GFC drawings is 31 st
December, 2019.
4.8.10  The Committed is of the opinion that the tasks of these types of multitude level need advance
and continuous planning and monitoring. The Committee is of the opinion that with the expansion
of metro rail network the cascading effects come into play which in many ways affect the social
surroundings. The better facilities at the metro rail network, multi-modal integration and parking
facilities for vehicle at the metro stations encourage commuters to opt for public transports and

59
discourage the use of private vehicle for long distances. The infrastructure development around the
metro stations for facilitating the metro rail users like making provision of pedestrian skywalks to
connect markets plazas, etc., goes a long way in decongesting the roads as it provides better and
comfortable option to commute in comparison to the use of personal vehicles.
4.8.11  The Committee, therefore, recommends that special lanes and areas away from the main
roads should be demarcated for picking and dropping of the passengers near metro station. Similarly,
places near/under the bridges should be identified and shelter areas should be created for temporary
sheltering of two wheelers and pedestrians so that main roads remain free for smooth movement of
traffic.
4.9 Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments of
Driver Training Schools
4.9.1 The Committee takes notes of data on challans provided by the Delhi Traffic Police in the background
note regarding sharp increase in traffic rules violations. The Committee notices exorbitant number of challans
issued during the year 2015, 2016 and 2017 on account of various offences particularly riding without
helmet, red light jumping and over-speeding, dangerous driving, not fastening seat belt and improper parking
has failed to deter vehicles from violating the traffic rules.
4.9.2 The representatives of Transport Department, NCT of Delhi informed the Committee that it is planning
to improve driving and fitness capacity of the vehicles. The Committee was informed about the proposal to
construct automatic test tracks across the city for testing driving skills of driver of all the vehicles in the
proposed eleven automatic test tracks.
4.9.3 The Committee was also informed about the establishment of automatic fitness centres for all types
of vehicles in Delhi and that the one at Jhuljhuli has become operational and tendering process for establishment
of one more centre at Burari has been initiated and the tender has been floated.
4.9.4 The Committee was further informed that to improve the driving skills of the drivers establishment of
40 driving training schools which are privately licensed institutes have been set up and that separate driving
schools for private and commercial vehicle drivers have been earmarked. The driver of private vehicles may
undergo training from private driving school.
4.9.5 The Transport Department of the NCT of Delhi further informed the Committee about their proposal
to construct a big Government driving training school at Burari. The Transport Department also emphasized
on creating tough test tracks to test new drivers so that before getting driving license, proper training and
knowledge of driving are imparted to new drivers.
4.9.6 The drivers of commercial vehicles are required to undergo specialized training for heavy vehicles
used for freight carriage. The Committee was informed that three centres have been exclusively set up for
the purpose and it is mandatory for the drivers of commercial vehicles to undergo training in such centre for
getting driving license issued or renewed. The Committee was further informed that three commercial
training centers have been named, Institute of Driving and Traffic Research (IDTR) and are operated by
automobile companies viz. two by Maruti Suzuki and one by Ashok Leyland. It was informed that these
centres have been set up in Loni road, Sarai Kale Khan and Burari.
4.9.7 The Committee on the option of linking the incident of traffic rules violations by the drivers to the
cancellation of their driving license observed that it is a very sensitive issue and needs thorough examination.

60
4.9.8The Committee appreciates the endevour to construct automated driving track to test the
driving skills of the drivers of various types of vehicles. The Committee, however, observes that
while designing these test tracks the actual vehicular movement on the roads and other traffic
conditions prevailing thereon should be kept in mind as it will be helpful in reducing the number of
road accidents. The Committee is of the opinion that fitness of vehicles is one of the most important
factors that can impact the traffic flow as well as ensure safety on the roads.  The Committee
believes that fit vehicles on the roads reduce the number of breakdowns and hence, helps in the
smooth flow of traffic.
4.9.9The Committee notes that privately running driving training schools are preparing the learner
drivers for the driving test for issuance of driving license by the concerned authority. The Committee
therefore, recommends that Government should at the earliest set up driving schools under the
jurisdiction of license issuing authorities across Delhi. The Committee further recommends that
proper monitoring of these privately owned driver training schools needs to be ensured so that
adequate and quality training can be imparted to the drivers learning driving skills from these
centers.
4.10  Freight Management Plan
4.10.1  The Committee considered the gravity of the worsening traffic situation that has cropped up due
to absence of any plan for freight movement. The Committee was informed by GNCT of Delhi that
they are in the process of drafting freight management plan for Delhi and the issue is being taken up
with the traffic police and market associations and other concerned agencies to evolve a better
management.
4.10.2  The Committee in its meeting held on 22nd October, 2019 was informed about the finding in a study
conducted by CRRI in the year 2009 and found the contribution of freight traffic on the Delhi roads as
under:
Inner Area: Freight Share is only 2 %
Car42%Two Wheeler34%Auto15%Buses4%LCV2%HCV0%SMV3%Inner Area

61
4.10.3  The Committee express its strong displeasure on the fact that freight management plan for
Delhi has not been formulated till now.
4.10.4 The Committee observers that freight traffic on Delhi roads contribute more than 18 % of
the total vehicular volume on Delhi Roads. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
after due study and assessment of management of freight traffic in other major cities, Government
of Delhi along with other agencies should formulate a suitable plan for the freight traffic management
in Delhi and NCR and this must be done keeping in mind the fact that least burden is felt during
peak hours. The Committee therefore, recommends that infrastructure of suitable nature to
Middle Area: Freight Share is 4 %
Outer Area: Freight Share is about 12 %
Car41%Two Wheeler34%Auto7%Buses2%LCV5%HCV7%SMV4%Outer Area


62
commute, transport and dedicated places for boarding and de-boarding of freight materials needs to
be earmarked on a priority basis and the timing of freight movement should be regulated/fixed
keeping in mind the material being carried by it like whether it is perishable item like food or
vegetables or building materials, etc,.
4.10.5  The Committee recommends the MHA to have a holistic approach by taking into consideration
all the factors including restricting the number of vehicles registered, restricting the entry of vehicles
in Delhi, managing the number of private and public vehicles which would have a major impact over
the flow of traffic.  The Committee strongly recommends that a suitable and sustainable freight
transport policy needs to be devised on urgent basis.
4.11  Medium Term Plan
4.11.1  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the works scheduled to be
covered under short-term plan will be completed by the year 2020. The Committee was further informed
that traffic problem in Delhi is an intractable problem essentially because any action spans a number of
agencies and that the short-term plan has been envisaged to achieve selected goals through common unified
approach towards traffic among all the relevant agencies. The various measure taken up during the short
term plan on pilot basis like improving the parking situation in left out parts of Delhi, retrofitting of corridors
and intersection, developing infrastructure for non motorized transport, construction of bicycle tracks and
introduction of the bicycle sharing scheme, rollout of ITMS, freight management, construction of under
and over bridges, etc. have positive impact on traffic situation.
4.11.2  The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that to address larger issues
a medium-term plan has been envisaged and the implementation of the plan will go upto the year 2025. The
experience gained in implementation of the short-term plans would be utilized in medium term plans to
implement the project through the roads and areas of Delhi. The Committee was further informed that to
take up medium term planning in the entirety of things, there is a need to look into various aspects including
land use planning, transit-oriented development and that a complete acquisition of the public fleet may be
required, etc.
4.11.3  The following timeline for implementation under medium term plan (for 2021-2025) has been
envisioned:
Public Transport Improvements
Sr. No., Project Agency Timeline
1. Trip Generation Manual for TOD-based and Land DDA 2021
Use-Transport Master Planning
2. Procurement of 11.000 CNG/EV buses Transport Deptt., 2021
GNCTD
3. Develop Bus Priority Lanes/Transit Corridors at 50
intersections as well as signal management including PWD, Traffic Police 2021
bus overtaking lanes.
4. Implement 3 priority Regional Rapid Transit Corridors, NCR TC 2025
including their MMI plans

63
a. Delhi - Meerut
b. Delhi - Manesar - SNB
c. Delhi - Panipat
5. Improvement of 3 Interstate Bus Terminals, including their Transport Deptt., 2025
MMI plans. GNCTD
a. Bijwasan, Dwarka
b. Anand Vihar
c. Sarai Kale khan
6. Improvement of 30 local DTC terminals. including MMI Transport Deptt., 2021
integration GNCTD
7. Develop integrated Transit Management Centre for Buses + Transport Deptt., 2021
Auto rickshaws + DTC + E-rickshaws + any other mod e of GNCTD
pubic transport, Develop intermodal connectivity.
8. Develop intermodal connectivity at key points
a. Linking of Magenta Metro line with Blue Line Metro DMRC 2023
b. Linking Aero city station/T3 with T1 terminal DMRC 2023
c. Metro Phase - 4 DMRC 2023
Roll out of ITMS
Sr. No., Project      Agency        Timeline
1. Develop Integrated Traffic Management and Traffic Data Traffic Police 2021
Analytics Centre. Implement Active Traffic Management
with signal modernisation ( adaptive signal system, VMS,
CCTV , enforcement ate).
2. Implement Congestion Pricing in five Areas Transport Deptt. 2023
GNCTD,
Traffic Police
NMT and Parking improvements
Sr. No., Project     Agency        Timeline
1. Implement 600km of Walkways and Cycle Tracks including DDA. PWD, 2022
junction improvements on the selected roads  MCDs
2. Streetscaping and Parking Management and Circulation Plan MCDs, PWD, 2023
of Urban Centres and Markets - Gandhi Nagar, Kamla nagar, DDA
Sarojini Nagar, Vikas Marg, Laxmi Nagar, Jasola, INA Market,
Greater Kailash, Rohtak Road, lnderlok, Tilak Nagar, Sarai Rohilla,
Sr. No., Project   Agency       Timeline

64
Old Delhi, Paharganj, Karol Bagh (Ph.2), Lajpat Nagar (Ph,2),
Shahadra.
3. Implementation of Greenways (integrated mobility corridors DDA. PWD, 2021
along natural drains) - Palam, TD2, Najafgarh Drain, Barapulla MCDs, I&FC,
Drain DJB, DUSIB,
Transport Deptt.
4. Implementation of Bicycle Sharing System with 15,000 SDMC, EDMC, 2021
bicycles and an integrated common mobility card NDMC
Junction improvements
Sr. No., Project     Agency        Timeline
1. Intersection Geometry Improvements of 600 junctions PWD 2022
2. Geometric Improvement of 17 corridors - Mathura Road, PWD 2023
Najafgarh Road, NH8, MG Road, Aurobindo Marg, GT Road,
Rohtak Road, Ring Road, Outer Ring Road, Vikas Marg, 201
Dwarka, 205 Dwarka,
Freight Management
Sr. No., Project     Agency        Timeline
1. Development of Parking spaces for Trucks in cay DDA 2021
2. Development of Loading/Unloading locations DDA, PWD, 2021
Traffic Police
3. Development of Freight Information System DDA, Traffic  Police 2021
4. Development of Integrated Freight Complex at Dwarka DDA 2023
& Narela
Under and over Bridges
Sr. No., Project     Agency        Timeline
1. Development and Implementation of 20 Road Under-Pass PWD, Railways 2024
2. Development and implementation of 25 Bridges over drains PWD, I&FC 2024
4.11.4  The Committee notes that the plan envisaged for the short-term plan will be completed by the year
2020 and that for the medium term planning for traffic management in Delhi, the timeline has been fixed
upto the year 2025.
4.11.5  The Committee strongly believes that a plan is not good unless it has clear outcomes and
clear timelines. Further, the experience gained in implementation of the short-term plan would
Sr. No., Project     Agency        Timeline

65
pave a way for more efficient implementation of the medium term plan as the Committee observes
that at present there is near complete lack of co-ordination among different agencies involved in
the improvement of traffic situation in Delhi/NCR.
4.11.6  The Committee, therefore, recommends that for the efficient and time bound achievements
of the goals set under the two plans, the High Powered Committee (HPC) constituted under the
Chairmanship of Home Secretary, should very closely monitor the progress of the works. The HPC
should meet with all the agencies involved for completion of the projects at regular intervals as this
will provide a common platform resulting in better co-ordination among all the agencies to sort out
the problems/issues being faced by them in implementation of the plan. The Committee needs to be
apprised by the HPC about the progress made on the short term plan scheduled to be completed by
the year 2020 as also about the Medium term plan on regular basis.

CHAPTER-V
STUDIES BY IIT DELHI AND CENTRAL ROAD RESEARCH INSTITUTE
5.1 Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
5.1.1 The Committee in its meeting held on 22 nd October, 2019 heard the representatives of the IIT, Delhi
and CRRI undertook a study visit to view the models developed by IIT, Delhi regarding traffic management.
In the meeting, the Committee was briefed on different models for unhindered and smooth flow for different
traffic at intersections and rotaries developed by IIT Delhi like RAIDS design, space saving designs of
flyovers, Segregated Integrated Grade-Separated Multimodal Amalgamation (SIGMA) system for integration
of multi-modal transport, etc.
5.1.2 The representative from the IIT, Delhi informed the Committee about standard device called the
Automotive Industry Standard 140 (AIS-140) that has a panic button and a GPS recording system and is
already installed in all cabs in Delhi. It was further informed to the Committee that IIT Delhi has further
improved upon the AIS-140 which includes the tamper-proof women safety device, compliant monitoring,
panic switch box, video recording, driver authentication with finger print scanner, key board and LCD
display, buzzer box. It was further informed that the panic button of the AIS-140 developed by has provisions
to be monitored centrally by an agency by which the position of every vehicle which has this device can be
monitored on a real time basis. When a panic button is pressed, all such devices get flagged and all those
devices can be tracked on a real time basis in the control room.  The Committee was further informed about
a system of sound alert in case of emergency in which a speaker with a very loud sound will alert everybody
in the vicinity up to a distance of 100 metres.
5.1.3 The representatives of IIT, Delhi informed the Committee about specific low-cost solutions based on
innovative technology for specific stretches in Delhi and Noida and that the indigenous technology which
will ensure free-flow of vehicular traffic with specific focus on pedestrian and vulnerable road-users and
inter-linking all the facilities. The Committee was further informed that by using this  innovative technologies,
the cost of complex clover roof designs will be cut down from `300 crore to `30 crore and this designs will
also help to overcome urban space crunch since these are innately space saving.
5.1.4 The IIT, Delhi informed the Committee about the modifications done by them on various intersections
and flyovers for smooth and uninterrupted flow of traffic. Regarding the issue of drainage in these designs
during rainfall the Committee was informed that drainage can be improved by adding a conventional pump
& sump system which is durable and cost effective or water can be transferred to a drain where lower
invert level is available is much more likely as the depth is reduced to 1.5 mtrs only.
5.1.5 Regarding multi-model integration, IIT Delhi apprised the Committee that they are making an interchange
on a flyover for a bus, it has to go up to a height of 5-7 metres and accordingly a very long ramp length is
required to be constructed.  But for smaller vehicles, if a rickshaw- wala has to go up that ramp, on that
flyover, it becomes very difficult and that’s why IIT Delhi has created a Segregated Integrated Grade-
Separated Multimodal Amalgamation (SIGMA) strategy which segregates smaller vehicles and larger vehicles
and have a lesser height clearance for the smaller vehicles and a larger height for the bigger vehicles which
will help in smooth and uninterrupted flow of traffic. The IIT, Delhi further elaborated that  in Delhi, at a
number of places, pedestrian over-bridges, foot-over bridges subways or pedestrian underpasses are very
infrequently used because most of the users do not want to climb 50 steps and come down fifty steps
particularly women, pregnant ladies, ladies with small children, people with knee problems and so on.  In
66

67
addition to that, there is security risk also. That is why the pedestrian should be going at grade and they need
a clearance of only about three metres to cross over.  These small interventions can make pedestrian flow
much better and at the same time, if they are needed, they can even improve the vehicular flow in that
region. The IIT, Delhi also apprised the Committee that they have developed innovative solutions for the 35
stretches in Delhi.
5.1.6 The IIT, Delhi also informed the Committee that government agencies like Ministry of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highway Authority of India should give research funding
to IIT Delhi for examining traffic, mobility, public transport in different cities, developing quantitative
mechanism for evaluating mobility solutions, etc. The IIT, Delhi also suggested that an invention centre
should be setup in the institute which will promote collaboration between government agencies like Indian
Institute of Technology, Central Road Research Institute, School of Planning and Architecture, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, private innovators which will in turn promote innovation in the country.
Also there are many institutes and individuals working on multiple solutions of an existing problem, with
collaboration decision makers will get more options to consider and this formal mechanism for exchange of
technologies will make it easier for various agencies to rope in both public and private partners for various
projects which in turn will boost innovation.
5.1.7 The Committee appreciates various models prepared by IIT, Delhi regarding decongestion
and smooth movement of traffic. The Committee notes that there is lack of coordination among
different agencies to the extent that the executing agencies are totally unaware of the research
work done by institutes like IIT, Delhi. The Committee strongly recommends that central coordinating
and various agencies should carefully consider the research works done by premier research institutes
like the IIT, Delhi while framing policies for traffic management in Delhi.
5.1.8 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should also convene
a meeting of all institutions and nodal agencies to create an institutional mechanism for coordination
and cooperation so that results of research work done by various institutions like IITs, CRRI etc.,
can be used towards finding solutions to the problems related to traffic management.
5.1.9 The Committee also notes that when a policy decision is taken, research institutions are not
involved in the decision making. The Committee recommends that research institutions and other
knowledge partners must be invited to meetings where a policy decision is being considered so that
their suggestions and feasibility of their models could also be carefully examined at the apex level
of knowledge sharing and decision making.
5.2 Central Road Research Institute (CRRI)
5.2.1 The CRRI informed the Committee about the congestion on Lal Bahadur Shastri Marg, the erstwhile
BRT Corridor at the Chirag Delhi intersection which is one of the busiest intersections, it can have segregated
u-turns for segregating smaller vehicles and bigger vehicles because buses are expected to have longer
radius as compared to a car and for that the land needs to be available.
5.2.2 The Committee was further informed that while moving forward from AIIMS or approaching AIIMS,
a u-turn has been created which is so congested and narrow that the vehicles have to move by turns and the
obstructs the vehicles which have to go straight as the space available is extremely small.
5.2.3 The Committee sought to know about any study being done on ‘Vehicle Kilometers on the Road

68
Network’ by the CRRI. The CRRI informed that they have not done such study but are proposing to
conduct that study. The Committee was further informed that for city traffic and transportation study in a
holistic manner which is called as Comprehensive Mobility Plan Study which was done in 2007 and after
that, no study has been done for the entire Delhi till today. In 2007, metro operation was hardly 130 kms
which has now expanded. The CRRI also informed the Committee that a comprehensive mobility plan for
Ghaziabad is being done by them and a notification is also there for Greater Noida too. The CRRI also
informed the Committee that there is a need to have traffic management centres at regional levels. As ITMS
technologies are available in the market there should be a monitoring mechanism at the network level. IIT
Delhi also volunteered to be the innovation partner in the proposed study and that it can suggest low cost
specific innovative solutions for various stretches in Delhi and NCR.
5.2.4 The Committee is pained to learn that no study has been done for the entire Delhi after the
last Comprehensive Mobility Plan Study that was done in the year 2007. Thereafter, the Capital has
expanded manifold, traffic has increased and metro operation has increased. There has been a
massive change in the kind of travel patterns that Delhi is experiencing. The Committee strongly
recommends that there is an urgent need to get comprehensive mobility plan study done for Delhi
and if needed, for the entire NCR.
5.2.5 The Committee also notes that all stakeholders should be involved as policies cannot be made
in isolation so there is a need to follow the principle of inclusion. As different organizations are
inter-connected like where NDMC area ends, other municipal corporation area starts; where that
corporation ends, another corporation area starts; where a border ends, either U.P. or Haryana
comes in. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends to  involve all the stakeholders like
various Municipal Corporations of Delhi, DDA, MORT&H, Haryana Government, U.P. Government,
IIT Delhi, CRRI, other research institutes and knowledge partners while making plans to manage
traffic in Delhi and NCR.
5.2.6 The Committee further observes that there has been manifold increase in the registration of
vehicles in the City of Delhi. There is also cross movements of traffic between Delhi and adjoining
cities like Gurugram, Noida, Ghaziabad, etc., but there is hardly any expansion of the roads and
there is urgent need to construct new flyovers to carry the traffic. The time has come when redundant
service lanes needs to be developed as a measure to expand the existing roads to carry the increased
volume of traffic and there is an urgent need to find low cost, space saving,  innovative solutions to
decongest the roads of Delhi and NCR.
5.2.7 The Committee observes that the agencies are lacking in efforts for providing viable traffic
related facilities for differently abled people of the society and this is severely affecting their daily
life as a commuter. There is an urgent need to safeguard the interests of the vulnerable Sections of
the Society, therefore, while planning for any solution the interests of the vulnerable Sections of
the Society must be taken into account.
5.2.8 The Committee understands that Delhi being the capital City of India has special issues
related to traffic but due to negligence on part of the concerned agencies things have gone worse
and if the issues are not addressed in time it will become very tough to address the problem of
traffic mismanagement in Delhi. The Committee further observes that innovations and designs of
research institutes like IITs, CRRI, etc. have not been solicited in the decision making process
while formulating plans for traffic management in Delhi. The Committee therefore, feels that the

69
efforts made by the MHA and concerned agencies in managing traffic issues in Delhi are not enough
and there is an urgent need to form a central coordinating agency with an institutional mechanism
to prepare holistic plan for traffic management in Delhi which should be inclusive, innovative,
sustainable and futuristic.
5.3 General Observations/recommendations
5.3.1 Some of the major issues with the management of the burgeoning traffic in Delhi are shortage
of adequate road space, land not readily available for at-grade and multi-level car parking,
inadequate pedestrian pathways & plazas, multi-modal transport mix, huge number of freight
vehicles and personal vehicles entering and exiting Delhi from the NCR. A holistic traffic management
plan has not been drawn up due to lack of coordination between a plethora of agencies who are
directly and indirectly involved. Road spaces in proximity to Metro stations and markets are clogged
with a variety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Traffic management presently is a difficult task
with hardly any elbow room for planning and execution. Traffic discipline is at a premium with
improvement measures too slow to keep pace with increase in vehicles and pedestrian population.
Many areas in Delhi have large open spaces some owned by the Government and agencies working
under it. If some of these spaces could be freed up then comparatively low-cost solutions for
improvement of intersection geometrics, widening of roads & lanes and automatic multi-level car
parking & underground car parking could be taken up. In the end analysis land would be the key
and many public sector organisations and institutions may be required to part with the excess land
being held by them. There may be hurdles in executing such a plan but a beginning should be made
based on an objective survey.
5.3.2 Besides, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for more disciplined lane driving in
Delhi. For this the width of lane to some extent seems to be responsible. There are situations when
in a three lane road four vehicles run together. In this connection, the Committee recommends
that there should be standardization of lane width. If required, situation prevailing in some other
countries may also be studied.
5.3.3 The Committee strongly recommends that special provisions such as sign boards, ramps,
special parking badges, passes should be made for person with special ability so as to have complete
universal road infrastructure in Delhi and NCR.
5.3.4 Free movement of emergency vehicles is not available at present as emergency vehicles such
as ambulances, police cars, fire engines, etc. get stuck in traffic jam and delayed in reaching their
destination. It leads to avoidable loss of valuable lives and property. The Committee recommends
that the MHA should coordinate with concerned agencies to create dedicated lane/corridor that
ensures free passage to emergency vehicles.  In case of non availability of dedicated lane/corridor,
vehicles on roads must give free passage to ambulances and other emergency vehicles.
5.3.5 In Delhi, number of two wheelers is huge and when they run parallel to the four wheelers the
situation becomes dangerous. Therefore, Committee feels that feasibility study of having separate
lanes for two wheelers may be undertaken.
5.3.6 The Committee also finds it puzzling that sometimes traffic on roads are left without any
signal and before flyovers traffic gets crowded because of merging traffic. It may be because of lack
of lane driving and sometimes more lanes merge into fewer lanes. For this concerned agency needs

70
to think out of the box solutions. The role of road designing agencies/Research institutes becomes
very important in this connection.
5.3.7 The Committee feels that the traffic coming from neighbouring States has fewer approach
roads for entering into Delhi like there is only one road i.e. old Rohtak Road for entering into Delhi
from North East side. This is for traffic coming from Bahadurgarh side and for going to East, North
and Central Delhi. Similarly, there is no approach road for traffic coming from Jhajjar/Badli, Haryana
side. The traffic gets struck in Najafgarh as there is no outer/by-lane road to bypass the Najafgarh
old city. The Committee therefore, recommends that there is urgent need for a outer road in
Najafgarh for smooth passage of traffic entering Delhi. Many more bridges are needed on Najafgarh
drain for smooth entry of traffic from that side.
5.3.8 The Committee appreciates that immediately after Committee took this subject for
examination, the Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted a High Power Committee (HPC) under
the Chairmanship of Home Secretary for co-ordinating, finalizing and implementing meaningful
and effective action points. The HPC in its meeting on 9
th October, 2018 shortlisted six short term
plans to be completed during 2019-20. The Committee feels that since Home Secretary has number
of other important jobs to handle, the HPC should concentrate on finalizing the policy decisions and
periodic monitoring of the implementation of the project. The nitty-gritty of bringing all concerned
departments/agencies together for finalizing action points should be handled by officers of the rank
of Special Secretary/Additional Secretary of MHA. The approach of HPC should be to see that all
departments/agencies work in tandem with full knowledge and support of one another. It should
work as one point forum for resolving differences and taking a final view after taking all the inputs
into considerations.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Role, Response and Shortcomings of Various Stakeholders Dealing with the Management of
Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
The Committee notes that HPC is headed by the Home Secretary and observes that he has
other crucial responsibilities and his presence is required for many urgent issues/matters involving
the internal security situation and other matters concerning several departments of MHA and
other State Governments. The Committee feels that the Home Secretary cannot devote much
time towards achieving the mandate of HPC. The Committee therefore, recommends that the
High Powered Committee should be headed by some other senior officer of the Ministry of Home
Affairs other than Home Secretary.  The Committee further recommends that a representative
from the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRB) should be included in the HPC as its
member. (Para 3.2.5 of 222
nd Report)
DELHI TRAFFIC POLICE
The Committee observes that Delhi Traffic Police is mainly focusing and putting in efforts on
regulating traffic at red-lights and intersections and little attention is paid towards violation of
traffic rules on roads like not driving in the proper lane, changing lanes without indication,
overspeeding, dangerous driving, etc., and enforcement of the various traffic rules at other places
on roads of Delhi.  The Committee therefore recommends that Delhi traffic Police should attach
equal importance to enforcement related aspects on roads too and not restrict itself only to regulation
of traffic at traffic signals. (Para 3.3.5 ibid)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING & URBAN AFFAIRS (MoH&UA)
However, the Committee observes that due to lack of coordination amongst agencies like
DDA, DMRC the project on Non Motorized Transport (NMT) on the Delhi roads has not materialised.
There is absence of dedicated bicycle tracks on most of the Delhi roads and intersections have not
been retrofitted to make them safe and suitable for use by the NMT.  Therefore, the Committee
recommends that there remains an urgent necessity to strengthen the existing coordination
mechanism so that necessary infrastructure like dedicated bicycle tracks, pick and use cycle stations;
and interventions at important intersections be developed. (Para 3.4.3 ibid)
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS (MoRT&H) AND NATIONAL HIGHWAY
AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI)
The Committee feels that the Government should not act hastily in planning as the automobile
sector at the present stage should have the right balance. At this juncture, dependence on petrol
and diesel vehicles cannot be eliminated.  Rather, there remains an urgent necessity to go for clean
diesel which Europe and other countries are doing.  The Committee cautions that any proposal of
completely switching over to EVs, if accepted, the entire automobile sector may collapse, since it
has already started showing a down trend in terms of production and sales. The Committee therefore
strongly recommends that the Ministry should take a holistic view; adopt a pragmatic approach and
maintain the right balance of all type of vehicles which run on different fuels. (Para 3.5.5 ibid)
71

72
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION
The Committee is of the view that although Delhi metro has expanded rapidly but still lots of
work needs to be done to ensure last mile connectivity to Metro stations. The DMRC needs to
undertake multi-modal integration measures at all metro stations. Furthermore, to address the
rapidly increasing population and urbanization around Delhi, the  DMRC also needs to take measures
like increasing fleet of metro trains, increasing frequencies of trips, rationalization of ticket rates,
raising awareness among people to use metro as it is the best  available alternate mode of public
transportation in Delhi. (Para 3.6.4 ibid)
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI
The Committee expresses its concern that no procurement of buses has taken place since
2010. A huge demand and supply gap has emerged due to increased population during the said
period as there has been no addition of buses to the existing fleet . The Committee feels that this is
a serious lapse on the part of the Transport Department which has failed in procuring new buses
during the last 10 years. The situation is further aggravated by the fact that many buses that were
operational have also become obsolete. In view of the directions of the National Green Tribunal (NGT)
to ban plying of diesel vehicles which have outlived their span of 10 years, the Committee strongly
recommends to identify the obsolete and polluting buses and replace those with new ones, as also to
fast track the procurement of new buses to meet the demand-supply gap. (Para 3.7.5 ibid)
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
The Committee strongly recommends that the Public Works Department undertake simple
alterations to junctions and corridors, which have so far remained a much neglected area of its activity
but these can qualitatively impact the traffic situation in a positive manner. (Para 3.8.2 ibid)
The Committee observes that in the absence of proper guidelines, road signage are placed on
pedestrains footpaths, thus obstructing the free flow of pedestrians movement. This forces pedestrains
to walk on the road which hinders the free flow of traffic. The Committee feels that putting road
signage at parking places is vital for the smooth flow of traffic. The Committee therefore recommends
that the MHA may take up with the PWD to place adequate and appropriate signage at proper places
and frame guidelines in this regard. (Para 3.8.3 ibid)
MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS/COUNCIL OF DELHI
The Committee recommends that the NDMC should increase the capacity of existing
infrastructure and road network ensuring safe movement of pedestrians, cyclists, women and provide
universal accessibility. Integration of different modes of transport should also be taken up by NDMC.
The Committee observes that most of the important persons reside in and around Lutyen’s Delhi
which is under NDMC but there is no provision of separate lane to facilitate easy and free flow of
traffic resulting in traffic jams and also security concerns.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
that MHA should coordinate with Transport Department, PWD of Government of Delhi and Delhi
police to ensure free and safe movement of important persons in the area and also to avoid any
inconvenience to the commuters. (Para 3.9.11 ibid)
Further, there has been ongoing redevelopment of many colonies in the area hence, the
NDMC should make provisions to address the increase in traffic load in near future. The Committee

73
also recommends that NDMC provides necessary interventions at the rotaries in the NDMC area
like at Tughlaq road, which is small, and cannot take heavy traffic. (Para 3.9.12 ibid)
The Committee is concerned that parking projects undertaken by North DMC will not be
enough to address the parking issues in the area. Further, the North DMC needs to run regular
drives for removal of permanent and temporary encroachments in the commercial area of the
region. (Para 3.9.13 ibid)
The Committee observes that parking spaces planned by SDMC are not enough given the
rapidly increasing population and number of vehicles.  It, therefore, recommends that SDMC make
provisions for creation of additional parking spaces to address the problem of parking crunch in the
foreseeable future. To promote non-motorized transport and multi-modal integration, SDMC should
increase the number of e- rickshaws, pay and use bicycles, etc. in the area. (Para 3.9.14 ibid)
The Committee recommends that EDMC make decongestion plans for other commercial
areas of the region and search spots for multi-level car parking to take out vehicles parked on
roads both in commercial and residential areas. (Para 3.9.15 ibid)
DELHI DEVELOPMENT OF AUTHORITY (DDA)  AND UNIFIED TRAFFIC AND
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE (PLANNING & ENGINEERING) CENTRE (UTTIPEC)
The Committee is of the view that the implementing agency needs to be more diligent and
stringent. The accountability for implementing decisions with regard to removal of encroachments
should be fixed by the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Police and officers of other concerned
agencies entrusted with the work. (Para 3.10.8 ibid)
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB)
The Committee observes that there is lack of coordination between the State Governments
of Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other concerned agencies in the NCR in management of
traffic. The Committee recommends that the institutional mechanism should be further strengthened
and representatives from the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) and Planning Boards
from concerned States should be included as Members in the High Powered Committee functioning
under the MHA. (Para 3.11.4 ibid)
Another important issue which remains unsolved is the taxation policy for inter-State
movement of vehicles as States have failed to form a uniform taxation policy for seamless movement
of vehicles in the region. Further, the States have failed to create high level of connectivity through
ring and peripheral roads to prevent traffic from entering Delhi which is one of the biggest reasons
for traffic congestion in Delhi. There is also an urgent need to promote affordable, fast, eco-
friendly modes of transport to address the twin problem of traffic congestion and pollution in the
region. (Para 3.11.5 ibid)
SOLUTIONS
Improvement in Parking
The Committee notes that one of the major causes of traffic congestion at market/commercial
places is because of difficulties faced by commuters to park their vehicles due to shortage of parking
space and lack of information on availability of parking slots and knowledge of designated place for

74
the same, especially when an unknown and new vehicle enters the market place. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that a proper and visible signages should be placed for guiding vehicles to
the designated parking lot and Light Emitting Diode (LED) screens should be installed  to give real
time availability of parking slots at various parking venues. (Para 4.2.3 ibid)
The Committee is aware that technology and innovation in the niche industry space of
automated and multilevel parking systems (MLCPs) may address the problem of clogging parking
spaces. The concept of MLCP refers to the system of automatically parking and retrieving vehicles
using an extensive intelligent system of lifts, pallets, and sensors. Delivering advantages such as
time and fuel savings, space saving, and safety, MLCPscan be solution to parking and traffic
management problems. (Para 4.2.4 ibid)
However, the Committee feels that time taken in parking vehicles in Multi-level Car Parking
(MLCP) is little more than parking at surface parking.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
that MLCP should be made less time consuming. Even the automated ones like MLCP at Sarojini
Nagar needs to be modified to make it attractive. (Para 4.2.8 ibid)
The Committee observes that improper parking, non planned expansion of infrastructure,
buildings and encroachments of roads often lead to increasing bottlenecks on the roads and pathways
leading to severe congestion and traffic snarls. The Committee strongly recommends that effective
parking regulation and management plans for existing facilities and a comprehensive approach for
planning for future facilities by assessing future demand should be prepared to combat this issue.
Provision of Park-and-Ride facilities at public transport terminals will also make public transport
system a better choice for the users. (Para 4.2.9 ibid)
LAJPAT NAGAR (MARKET AREA AND RESIDENTIAL AREA)
The Committee appreciates that South Delhi Municipal Corporation has devised the plan to
utilize the streets and places of common utilities like school, hospitals and commercial complexes
to meet the demand for parking space in the area.  The Committee however  feels that efforts are
concentrated only on utilizing the street spaces for parking spaces, whereas efforts should also be
made for enhancing the number of parking spaces by constructing more Multi-level Car parking
(MLCPs). (Para 4.2.20 ibid)
 The Committee notes that Lajpat Nagar area encompasses both market area as well as
residential areas. It also notes the various measures undertaken by the SDMC for easing the
worsening traffic situation in both the areas.  The Committee appreciates the move of the SDMC to
engage the Lajpat Nagar Market Association in its efforts to ease out the traffic congestion in the
Lajpat Nagar Market.  The Committee feels that this move will cast positive impact on the grim
situation as it will result in better management of the parking spaces, curbing the illegal parking
mafia and providing facilities to the commuters and shopkeepers like e-rickshaw facility and free
valet Parking facility. (Para 4.2.23 ibid)
The Committee notes the measures taken by the SDMC towards implementation of the Parking
Area Management Plan for developing 700 on-surface parking spaces.  One hundred fifty parking
places have been added on a land handed over by DMRC near Lajpat Nagar metro station for
providing free valet parking to shopkeepers. The Committee recommends that parking Area

75
Management Plan should also be strictly implemented for the added spaces to utilize the space
efficiently. (Para 4.2.24 ibid)
The Committee notices that Multi-level Car Parking for around 250 car spaces has been
envisaged as a medium-term plan as it would take time for completion and implementation as
many stages are involved  in the process.  The Committee recommends that the timeline decided
for completion should be strictly adhered to and audit should be done at regular intervals to monitor
the status of completion of the MLCP. (Para 4.2.25 ibid)
The Committee is deeply concerned at the huge gap in demand and availability of parking
spaces as it was reported that more than 1572 cars had to be parked outside on the roads/back-lane
of the plots. The Committee observes that taking on board the trend of exponential increase in
vehicle volumes with passage of time, this gap between the stagnant number of parking space and
increasing demand for parking space will widen.  The Committee also feels that there will be a
requirement of more parking spaces to meet the future demand for parking. The Committee strongly
recommends that efforts should be made to complete the construction of the proposed multi-level
parking at the earliest in order to meet the ever growing demand. (Para 4.2.26 ibid)
The Committee appreciates the plan for better vehicular circulation and parking whereby,
some roads have been identified and earmarked for easy movement of vehicles in case of emergency.
However, the Committee earnestly feels that carriageways, roads, streets and back-lane of the
plots in the localities should not be used for parking purpose as it results in reduction of space for
easy movement of traffic, induces congestion and restricts free movement of vehicles in case of
emergency. (Para 4.2.27 ibid)
Keeping in view of the various aspects placed before it, the Committee feels that a pragmatic
approach to tackle the situation has to be taken.  Although, the short term plan may be implemented
for easing the present traffic situation, a broad and well visioned approach taking into account all
the factors should be contemplated. The Committee recommends that concerted and continuous
efforts should be made towards easing the present traffic situation. Every option must be explored
for constructing multi-level automated parking to meet the future demand of Lajpat Nagar market
area. (Para 4.2.28 ibid)
NEHRU PLACE
The Committee notes that the locality has insufficient space for traffic dispersal and all the
open spaces have been taken over by parking and therefore vehicular movement in the area has
been severely affected. (Para 4.2.34 ibid)
The Committee notes that request for proposals for both the stages have been issued and the
agencies to carry out the work envisaged in Phase-1 and Phase-2 have been selected. The Committee
recommends that regular monitoring of the work and concerted efforts should be made at appropriate
level so that the plan would be completed as per the timelines. (Para 4.2.35 ibid)
BHIKAJI CAMA PLACE
The Committee notes that the locality is highly congested and due to on-street and at-grade
parking, the vehicular movement in the locality was obstructed. (Para 4.2.42 ibid)

76
Regarding general up-gradation plan, the Request For Proposal (RFP) for hiring agency has
been received and referred to competent authority for allowing negotiations, as quoted rates are
high. A time gap of more than six months has been kept for selection of the agency.  The Committee
recommends that the process of selection of agencies should be completed in shortest possible time
so as to reduce the target. (Para 4.2.43 ibid)
Regarding construction of multi-level parking in Phase-2, the Committee notes that issuance
of RFP for hiring of agency has been issued and process of selection of work is likely to be completed
in three months i.e. by February, 2020.  The Committee recommends that the construction of
multi-level parking in phase-2 should be completed without time and cost over run.  The Committee
feels that freeing the streets and lanes of the locality is necessary for the easy movement of vehicles
especially in case of emergency. (Para 4.2.44 ibid)
The Committee recommends that the work of construction of multi-level parking be taken
up on priority basis and revised schedule to pre-pone the construction of multi-level parking should
be made so that the parking  facilities in the area could be augmented which in turn will have a
positive effect on the overall traffic situation in the area. (Para 4.2.45 ibid)
CONNAUGHT PLACE
The Committee observes that due to paucity of land in the Connaught place area, the addition
of more parking space by way of building Multi-level Parking is less probable. The Committee
recommends the possibility of underground parking for the area at a suitable location should be
explored. (Para 4.2.51 ibid)
The Comm ittee appreciates the work done by NDMC in managing the available parking
facilities in the area. The Smart Parking Management System being implemented in the North of
Rajpath is working efficiently. The Committee therefore recommends that the same system should
be applied to the other areas of Connaught Place to have effective parking management of the
whole area. (Para 4.2.52 ibid)
The Committee notes that the problem of vehicles getting improperly parked around the
Patiala House Court may be due to rush created by media when some important case is being heard
in the Court and the people may not find it practical to park their vehicle in the automated parking
facility opposite the High Court due to distance  or lack of awareness about the availability of
parking facility. The Committee, therefore, recommends that separate designated parking for the
Patiala House Court be provided to address the problem of on- road parking around the area. The
Committee feels that due to ever increasing number of cars plying on road of Delhi for various
places there is a need to ensure designated parking facilities around prominent places like courts,
hospitals, commercial complexes, for use by visiting vehicles, either on sharing basis or exclusively
for that place. (Para 4.2.53 ibid)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the authorities for construction of NMT
Lanes, cycle docking stations and providing cycles as an effort to provide last mile connectivity to
the metro stations. (Para 4.2.54 ibid)
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends to improve pedestrian path and cycling
zone in Delhi and NCR so as to increase non-motorized travel and reduce motor vehicles travel

77
which will not only help to reduce carbon but will also promote healthy lifestyle and improve
physical activity. (Para 4.2.55 ibid)
KAROL BAGH
The Committee notes that work on some of the tasks envisaged under the plans like for the
stretch from Pusa Road to Arya Samaj Road and the stretch from Arya Samaj Road to D.B. Gupta
Road have been developed for the use of pedestrians while other works are at the implementation
stage. (Para 4.2.67 ibid)
The Committee recommends that the task pertaining to Ajmal Khan road pedestrianization
and One-way Traffic circulation system by Traffic Police for which action is pending on the part of
Transport Department and Traffic Police be expedited to ensure its completion in a time bound
manner. (Para 4.2.68 ibid)
KAMLA NAGAR MARKET
The Committee recommends that the matter should be pursued with the Delhi government
for expeditious allocation of funds for the project. The Committee appreciates the efforts made for
comprehensive upgradation of the market for providing facilities for the shoppers and the proposal
to reserve one street entirely for use by pedestrians.  However, the Committee strongly feels that
the three streets on which parking has been allowed should be freed. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that efforts should be made to identify space in the locality that could be developed as
a Multi-Level Parking to free the three streets and to meet the future parking demands of the
locality. (Para 4.2.73 ibid)
KRISHNA NAGAR MARKET
The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the EDMC in involving Market Associations and
RWAs in the implementation of the plan and holding regular consultations in their endeavor to run
the trial successfully. (Para 4.2.76 ibid)
The Committee recommends that innovative measures may be taken such as enhancing parking
charges for longer parking in line with parking rules in Central London and linking the purchase of
vehicles with the availability of Parking spaces in house/accom modation. (Para 4.2.77 ibid)
The Committee also recommends that for the areas where at-grade parking is not feasible, a
proposal for building underground parking on a large scale should be mooted to meet the parking
space requirement of these areas. (Para 4.2.78 ibid)
DRAFTING OF PARKING RULES
The Committee hopes that the parking rules will be implemented by the urban local bodies in
right earnest to improve the worsening traffic situation and to fix the loopholes in the present
parking system of the city. (Para 4.2.83 ibid)
The Committee strongly recommends that provisions needs to be made to ensure that a new
vehicles should be allowed on the road only if it has a parking space. (Para 4.2.84 ibid)
The Committee is aware of the Orders of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) that vehicles
(Diesel/Petrol) which are more than 10/15 years cannot ply on Delhi roads and are to be phased out.

78
The Committee expresses its displeasure and recommends strongly that effective enforcement is
needed to track and impound vehicles as per the orders of NGT. (Para 4.2.85 ibid)
RETROFITTING OF 100 JUNCTIONS AND 77 IDENTIFIED CORRIDORS
The Committee takes note of the work done at various locations like improvement at Adchini
T. Point, PTS Chowk like construction of slip roads, relocation of the CNG stations and installation
of iron grills and relocation of bus stops, etc. (Para 4.3.13 ibid)
The Committee recommends that as per the target dates fixed by the Ministry as mentioned
in the table above and the steps identified towards meeting that target, work should be
comp leted. (Para 4.3.14 ibid)
COMPLETE STREET DESIGN FOR DWARKA STREETS
The Committee understands the importance of non-motorized mode of transport in terms of
reducing pressure of vehicles on the roads.  The Committee knows that in order to harness the
benefit of non-motorized transport, infrastructure has to be developed to encourage the non-
motorized mode of transport so that it can duly supplement the increasing pressure on the motorized
forms of transport. (Para 4.4.8 ibid)
The Committee notes the timeline provided for completion of retrofitting of 70 Kms. of
roads. The Committee observes that work was contemplated to be done in three phases. The
Committee notes that as per the timeline first phase has been started from October, 2019 and the
work would be completed by July, 2020. (Para 4.4.9 ibid)
The Committee is given to understand that the project is being taken on pilot basis and the
experience gained would be used in other parts of the City.  The Committee, therefore, suggests
that work should be done keeping in view the future demands.  The Committee was informed by
representative of IIT, Delhi  that in the past some flyovers had been constructed without making
correct assessment of the future demand and these flyovers are unable to meet the present traffic
demands hence are often clogged. (Para 4.4.10 ibid)
The Committee in its meeting held on 11
th October, 2019 took note of the fact about the
poor quality of work done on some flyovers. The Committee is anguished at the low quality of
work done on some flyovers like poor sound barriers, riders feeling bumps due to uneven surface.
The Committee therefore strongly recommends that there should be regular check on the quality
of the work being done and a functional mechanism should be put in place to check the quality of
work. (Para 4.4.11 ibid)
BICYCLE SHARING SCHEME
The Committee takes note of the plan by the SDMC to develop 250 bicycle stations at various
locations in Dwarka area for accommodating 2000 bicycles having advance features like GPS, location
devices to ensure safety of the cycles against theft for use within the Dwarka Area. The Committee
hopes that the target date for introducing cycle sharing scheme i.e. September, 2020 should be met
without time and cost overrun. (Para 4.4.17 ibid)
RATIONALIZATION OF BUSES AND ENHANCING THE PRESENT FLEET OF BUSES
The Committee hopes that the timeline decided for 1000 Standard Floor height Non-AC CNG

79
buses would be met by the Government of Delhi.  Regarding, 1000 Low Floor height CNG AC buses,
the committee took cognizance of the difficulties being faced in the process of induction of 600
buses under cluster scheme viz. due to court case and not getting enough response from the bidder.
The Committee notes that the induction of 250 buses depends solely on the outcome of the cases.
The Committee also notes the efforts being made by the Government to make the scheme more
lucrative for the bidder by dividing the bid into two parts.  However, the Committee strongly feels
that in addition to dividing the bid into two parts, the terms of the bid should also be revised to
attract interest of the bidders. (Para 4.5.6 ibid)
The Committee notes that the attempt to initiate the process of induction of 385 electric
buses has failed as no bidder was found meeting the technical benchmarks and the tender process
is being reinitiated.  In this connection, the Committee fails to understand as to why the provision
for land for parking has not been thought out before setting a target of inducting 1000 electric
buses. The Committee feels that electric buses though may provide an alternative to fossil fuel but
also is viewed as one of the most difficult sustainable public transport.   So, the Committee strongly
feels that the Government should wait for the successful running of the initial phase and then start
processes involved in induction of remaining 615 buses. (Para 4.5.7 ibid)
The Committee notes that the process of induction of 1000 buses for DTC has started and the
tenders have been floated, the technical evaluation is under process and the induction of buses
depends upon successful technical evaluation of the proposals.  The Committee hopes that the
timeline of February 2020 set for rolling out of the buses would be met. (Para 4.5.8 ibid)
The Committee takes note of the pilot projects for introducing electric vehicles. The Committee
feels that with the advancement of technology and economy of scales, electric buses will become
economically viable and sustainable in long run. (Para 4.5.11 ibid)
The Committee suggests that the ‘ONE DELHI’ app will be useful if it is applicable on multi-
modal basis covering all the public transports and providing the information on real-time basis.
The Committee notes that the application uses mobile data and recommends that a strong data
network should be put in place for seamless usage of the application. (Para 4.5.12 ibid)
The Committee strongly recommends that shortage of 6000 buses in Delhi be filled up
expeditiously with good quality buses. The Committee hopes that with the introduction of these
6000 buses, pubic transport will improve considerably and loss of time in traffic jams and waiting for
pubic transport will be curtailed. (Para 4.5.13 ibid)
The Committee is of the view that though adding more vehicles to the public fleet is essential
as high dependable public transport lead to lesser use of personal vehicles. But, the Committee is of
the considered opinion that dependable public transports needs efficiency not only as how this
operates but also by people too who operate the system. (Para 4.5.14 ibid)
The Committee hopes that the plan to augment the strength of its existing fleet of buses
would reduce the private vehicular population on roads. (Para 4.5.15 ibid)
FITTING OF SECURITY FEATURES LIKE GPS AND WOMEN HELPLINE BUTTON IN BUSES
FOR SAFETY OF WOMEN
   The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that installation of GPS devices is

80
being delayed. The Committee fails to understand when other public vehicles like private taxis,
cluster buses have the facility why the DTC buses have been left out. (Para 4.5.19 ibid)
The Committee takes note of the plan made for installation of GPS devices, panic button and
CCTV in all the buses for the safety of passengers. The Committee hopes that the work would be
completed in time bound manner. The Committee further recommends that in addition to the GPS
devises, panic button, CCTVs cameras should be installed in all the buses to ensure security of the
commuters including women and children. (Para 4.5.20 ibid)
The Committee feels that the implementation of pilot projects is not going to solve the problem.
The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that regular assessment of number of buses required
in proportion to the increase in commuting population and upgradation of security features should
be taken up. (Para 4.5.21 ibid)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that some sort of mechanism needs to be developed
to rationalize the routes of the existing fleet, to assess the need for more buses and to decide on
procurement of buses on regular basis. (Para 4.5.22 ibid)
The Committee observes that use of public transport is the best suited and possible solution
to the present crisis of worsening traffic situation in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that considering demand of the time and people, mobile applications may be developed for providing
information about different transport services and real time information about availability of buses
at the bus stop. The concerned agency needs to ensure that the buses are GPS enabled, properly
maintained and are equipped with the latest technology for safety and security of the passengers.
The concerned agency should also ensure that other essential infrastructures like clean and properly
maintained bus stops should also be provided so that commuters are comfortable and safe while
waiting for bus. (Para 4.5.23 ibid)
IT BASED MANAGEMENT OF TRAFFIC
Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) based on Signal Modernization Parking Application
with Parking Guidance System
With the increasing population and increasing number of vehicles in Delhi, it has become
very difficult to regulate the flow of traffic manually and therefore, the Committee strongly
supports incorporation of Intelligent Traffic Management systems (ITMS) for better management
of traffic. (Para 4.6.6 ibid)
The Committee observes that computer-based Area Traffic Control System is operational in
many South East Asian countries since last three decades but is anguished to learn that Delhi does
not have any computer based system for managing the traffic on the Roads. For example in the
Philippines, for traffic management, a computer-based induction and sensor-based intersection system
was installed around 30 years ago. (Para 4.6.7 ibid)
However, the Committee feels that although ITMS projects have finally been envisaged for
Delhi, the Committee is deeply concerned at the very slow pace of progress being made in devising
the project and taking up just the pilot project. (Para 4.6.8 ibid)
The Committee appreciates the technological interventions made in smooth movement of

81
traffic, checking road accidents and disciplining of motorists. However, the Committee cautions the
Government that a single yardstick should not be used for all the roads and intersections for limiting
the speed of the vehicles otherwise it is seen that speed limits of 50 Km/hr at a flyover will only
slowdown the traffic leading to congestion instead. (Para 4.6.15 ibid)
The Committee also appreciates the move for acquiring the portable tripod mounted Radar
Speed guns as it would ensure maintenance of discipline amongst the vehicle drivers on roads
where the Gantry-mounted Radar based Over Speed Detection System has  not been put in place.
The Committee, however, recommends that plan should be made to cover the area/roads where the
Gantry-mounted system has not been put in place to avoid accidents due to over speeding by drivers
on these roads. (Para 4.6.16 ibid)
The Committee is aware that significant changes have been introduced by implementation
of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 and hopes that it will help in reducing road
accide nts and will also improve road discipline among the drivers of all ages and types.  The
Committee recommends that quantam of penalties should be relooked/revisited/rationalised so
that the Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act, 2019   is efffectively observed and has wider public
acceptance. (Para 4.6.18 ibid)
The Committee notes the efforts of Transport Department, GNCTD in capturing the mobile
numbers of 79 lakh vehicles and issuing of draft notification and plan to issue a final notification  in
November, 2020.  The Committee also notices that 28 lakh mobile numbers are to be verified by the
NIC.   The Committee is aware that the project is being taken up on a pilot basis and success of the
project is entirely based on the collection of mobile numbers for effective monitoring. The Committee
is concerned at the slow pace at which mobile numbers are being verified. (Para 4.6.19 ibid)
The Committee notes the proposal of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of
India (IRDAI)/Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB) for linking of insurance premium to
the rule violation and finds that such steps would act as a deterrent and a check for violation of
traffic rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ins urance premium should be linked
to traffic rule violation and an increase in premium should be made in case of violation of rules
by the vehicles when the vehicle is either driven or occupied by the owner or is run under a
contract. (Para 4.6.20 ibid)
The Committee strongly recommends that issuance of final Notification for making it mandatory
to capture contact details of the vehicle owners at the time of pollution checking be ensured by the
timeline of November, 2020.  The Committee also recommends that all Vahan databases should be
linked to all the possible sources through which the mobile numbers of the vehicles can be captured.
The Committee specifically suggests to the Government to take up the issue with Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI)/ Insurance Information Bureau of India
(IIB) for capturing the mobile number of the vehicle owners and linking of the same with the
Vahan Database. (Para 4.6.21 ibid)
 The Committee observes that “One-Way” scheme on 17 roads have been identified on the
basis of a joint study carried out in association with the World Resource Institute. The Committee
hopes that the pilot project will be successful and the timeline of December, 2019 for completion of
the project will be met. (Para 4.6.23 ibid)

82
EFFORTS ON REDUCING NUMBER OF VEHICLES ON ROADS
Reducing the Number of Registration of Vehicles
The Committee notes that the Government of NCT of Delhi has notified aparking policy
“Delhi Mainten ance and Management of Parking Places Rules, 2019” that prohibits parking on
footpaths and allows municipal bodies to chalk out a plan for parking cars within residential
areas. (Para 4.7.4 ibid)
The Committee observes that in many cases the old cars are used very rarely by the owner
and are abandoned and remain parked.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Ministry
should explore the possibility of registering a new vehicle only when the scrapping/disposal of the
old vehicles have been done by the owner of the car and a certificate to that effect that s/he does not
own any other car may be obtained from the competent authority for the same. The Committee
further recommends that the Ministry should also take up the issue with the concerned authorities
to make it mandatory for the occupant of the house to have a parking space so that the new car
purchased does not remain parked on the road. (Para 4.7.5 ibid)
CONTRIBUTION OF METRO IN REDUCING VEHICLES ON ROADS
The Committee notes that over the years there is an incremental trend in the daily ridership
of the Metro Rail. The Committee feels that this had made a positive impact on easing of the traffic
congestion on the roads as more and more people are preferring to travel by Metro Rail due to
comfort and viability thereby reducing the number of private cars on the roads. (Para 4.7.10 ibid)
The Committee acknowledges the contribution of the Delhi Metro in reducing the number of
private vehicles on the Delhi roads and recommends that metro network needs to be extended to
cover those areas in Delhi which have no connectivity to public transport or public transport is not
the viable option forcing the people to use cars for their daily travel. (Para 4.7.11 ibid)
The Committee observes that the metro have been attracting only the population near the
stations. This is largely due to lack of last mile connectivity. The Committee therefore, recommends
that DMRC should provide subsidized transport service for bringing people to its stations from upto
3-4 Kms. Further DMRC needs to reduce its parking rates at metro stations for metro commuters.
The revenue thus lost may then be compensated through other sources like advertisements, amenities
etc., at its parking places, train coaches, metro stations and on metro rails. (Para 4.7.12 ibid)
IMPACT OF ODD-EVEN SCHEME ON DELHI ROADS
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a study should be conducted at the
earliest on the impact of Odd-Even Scheme on easing congestion on roads of Delhi and on  pollution,
if no such study has been conducted. (Para 4.7.14 ibid)
DIVERSION OF NON DELHI BOUND VEHICLES FROM ENTERING DELHI
The Committee notes that there is to and fro movement of more than 12 lakh vehicles
everyday from neighbouring States of Delhi.  The Committee observes that less than one fourth of
the total vehicular movement is attributed to the freight vehicles. The Committee also observes
that the volume of both personal and freight vehicles is gradually increasing. The Committee is
also aware of the fact that the addition of vehicles on the Delhi roads consumes not only road spaces

83
but also affect the environment i.e. the emission from vehicles exhaust and their noise increases
air and noise pollution in the area. The Committee is surprised to note that there is no planning to
regulate or restrict the vehicular movement from the neighbouring States when the roads of the
City are already reeling under heavy stress because of traffic congestion and other related issues.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that there is an urgent need to formulate plan/policy to
regulate the entry of the inbound traffic and ensure smooth exit of the outbound traffic by diverting
the vehicles using Delhi roads only for bypassing via peripheral and ring roads. (Para 4.7.17 ibid)
The Committee recommends restricting entry of freight vehicles to Delhi during peak traffic
hours and vehicles which need to reach other destinations and passing through the roads of Delhi
should be strictly diverted to take the peripheral and ring roads instead of entering Delhi. The
Committee further recommends to categorise roads on the basis of “prohibit, regulate and restrict”
to regulate the movement of traffic and to prevent congestion of roads within the limits of Delhi.
The Committee further recommends that the proposal of patrolling of the border area by joint
teams of Delhi and Haryana traffic police at the Delhi-Haryana border and at Delhi-Uttar Pradesh
border by Delhi and Uttar Pradesh traffic police should be encouraged for better management of
traffic in these areas. (Para 4.7.19 ibid)
MULTI-MODAL INTEGRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING AT METRO
STATIONS
The Committed is of the opinion that the tasks of these types of multitude level need advance
and continuous planning and monitoring. The Committee is of the opinion that with the expansion
of metro rail network the cascading effects come into play which in many ways affect the social
surroundings. The better facilities at the metro rail network, multi-modal integration and parking
facilities for vehicle at the metro stations encourage commuters to opt for public transports and
discourage the use of private vehicle for long distances. The infrastructure development around the
metro stations for facilitating the metro rail users like making provision of pedestrian skywalks to
connect markets plazas, etc., goes a long way in decongesting the roads as it provides better and
comfortable option to commute in comparison to the use of personal vehicles. (Para 4.8.10 ibid)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that special lanes and areas away from the main
roads should be demarcated for picking and dropping of the passengers near metro station. Similarly,
places near/under the bridges should be identified and shelter areas should be created for temporary
sheltering of two wheelers and pedestrians so that main roads remain free for smooth movement of
traffic. (Para 4.8.11 ibid)
Improving Driving Capacity and the Fitness Capacity of the Vehicles and Establishments of Driver
Training Schools
The Committee appreciates the endevour to construct automated driving track to test the
driving skills of the drivers of various types of vehicles. The Committee, however, observes that
while designing these test tracks the actual vehicular movement on the roads and other traffic
conditions prevailing thereon should be kept in mind as it will be helpful in reducing the number of
road accidents. The Committee is of the opinion that fitness of vehicles is one of the most important
factors that can impact the traffic flow as well as ensure safety on the roads.  The Committee
believes that fit vehicles on the roads reduce the number of breakdowns and hence, helps in the
smooth flow of traffic. (Para 4.9.8 ibid)

84
The Committee notes that privately running driving training schools are preparing the learner
drivers for the driving test for issuance of driving license by the concerned authority. The Committee
therefore, recommends that Government should at the earliest set up driving schools under the
jurisdiction of license issuing authorities across Delhi. The Committee further recommends that
proper monitoring of these privately owned driver training schools needs to be ensured so that
adequate and quality training can be imparted to the drivers learning driving skills from these
centers. (Para 4.9.9 ibid)
FREIGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN
The Committee express its strong displeasure on the fact that freight management plan for
Delhi has not been formulated till now. (Para 4.10.3 ibid)
The Committee observers that freight traffic on Delhi roads contribute more than 18 % of
the total vehicular volume on Delhi Roads. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
after due study and assessment of management of freight traffic in other major cities, Government
of Delhi along with other agencies should formulate a suitable plan for the freight traffic management
in Delhi and NCR and this must be done keeping in mind the fact that least burden is felt during
peak hours. The Committee therefore, recommends that infrastructure of suitable nature to
commute, transport and dedicated places for boarding and de-boarding of freight materials needs to
be earmarked on a priority basis and the timing of freight movement should be regulated/fixed
keeping in mind the material being carried by it like whether it is perishable item like food or
vegetables or building materials, etc,. (Para 4.10.4 ibid)
The Committee recommends the MHA to have a holistic approach by taking into consideration
all the factors including restricting the number of vehicles registered, restricting the entry of vehicles
in Delhi, managing the number of private and public vehicles which would have a major impact over
the flow of traffic.  The Committee strongly recommends that a suitable and sustainable freight
transport policy needs to be devised on urgent basis. (Para 4.10.5 ibid)
MEDIUM TERM PLAN
The Committee notes that the plan envisaged for the short-term plan will be completed by
the year 2020 and that for the medium term planning for traffic management in Delhi, the timeline
has been fixed upto the year 2025. (Para 4.11.4 ibid)
The Committee strongly believes that a plan is not good unless it has clear outcomes and
clear timelines. Further, the experience gained in implementation of the short-term plan would
pave a way for more efficient implementation of the medium term plan as the Committee observes
that at present there is near complete lack of co-ordination among different agencies involved in
the improvement of traffic situation in Delhi/NCR. (Para 4.11.5 ibid)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that for the efficient and time bound achievements
of the goals set under the two plans, the High Powered Committee (HPC) constituted under the
Chairmanship of Home Secretary, should very closely monitor the progress of the works. The HPC
should meet with all the agencies involved for completion of the projects at regular intervals as this
will provide a common platform resulting in better co-ordination among all the agencies to sort out
the problems/issues being faced by them in implementation of the plan. The Committee needs to be

85
apprised by the HPC about the progress made on the short term plan scheduled to be completed by
the year 2020 as also about the Medium term plan on regular basis. (Para 4.11.6 ibid)
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, DELHI
The Committee appreciates various models prepared by IIT, Delhi regarding decongestion
and smooth movement of traffic. The Committee notes that there is lack of coordination among
different agencies to the extent that the executing agencies are totally unaware of the research
work done by institutes like IIT, Delhi. The Committee strongly recommends that central coordinating
and various agencies should carefully consider the research works done by premier research institutes
like the IIT, Delhi while framing policies for traffic management in Delhi. (Para 5.1.7 ibid)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should also convene
a meeting of all institutions and nodal agencies to create an institutional mechanism for
coordination and cooperation so that results of research work done by various institutions like
IITs, CRRI etc., can be used towards finding solutions to the problems related to traffic
manage ment. (Para 5.1.8 ibid)
The Committee also notes that when a policy decision is taken, research institutions are not
involved in the decision making. The Committee recommends that research institutions and other
knowledge partners must be invited to meetings where a policy decision is being considered so that
their suggestions and feasibility of their models could also be carefully examined at the apex level
of knowledge sharing and decision making. (Para 5.1.9 ibid)
CENTRAL ROAD RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CRRI)
The Committee is pained to learn that no study has been done for the entire Delhi after the
last Comprehensive Mobility Plan Study that was done in the year 2007. Thereafter, the Capital has
expanded manifold, traffic has increased and metro operation has increased. There has been a
massive change in the kind of travel patterns that Delhi is experiencing. The Committee strongly
recommends that there is an urgent need to get comprehensive mobility plan study done for Delhi
and if needed, for the entire NCR. (Para 5.2.4 ibid)
The Committee also notes that all stakeholders should be involved as policies cannot be made
in isolation so there is a need to follow the principle of inclusion. As different organizations are
inter-connected like where NDMC area ends, other municipal corporation area starts; where that
corporation ends, another corporation area starts; where a border ends, either U.P. or Haryana
comes in. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends to  involve all the stakeholders like
various Municipal Corporations of Delhi, DDA, MORT&H, Haryana Government, U.P. Government,
IIT Delhi, CRRI, other research institutes and knowledge partners while making plans to manage
traffic in Delhi and NCR. (Para 5.2.5 ibid)
The Committee further observes that there has been manifold increase in the registration of
vehicles in the City of Delhi. There is also cross movements of traffic between Delhi and adjoining
cities like Gurugram, Noida, Ghaziabad, etc., but there is hardly any expansion of the roads and
there is urgent need to construct new flyovers to carry the traffic. The time has come when redundant
service lanes needs to be developed as a measure to expand the existing roads to carry the increased
volume of traffic and there is an urgent need to find low cost, space saving,  innovative solutions to
decongest the roads of Delhi and NCR. (Para 5.2.6 ibid)

86
The Committee observes that the agencies are lacking in efforts for providing viable traffic
related facilities for differently abled people of the society and this is severely affecting their daily
life as a commuter. There is an urgent need to safeguard the interests of the vulnerable Sections of
the Society, therefore, while planning for any solution the interests of the vulnerable Sections of
the Society must be taken into account. (Para 5.2.7 ibid)
The Committee understands that Delhi being the capital City of India has special issues
related to traffic but due to negligence on part of the concerned agencies things have gone worse
and if the issues are not addressed in time it will become very tough to address the problem of
traffic mismanagement in Delhi. The Committee further observes that innovations and designs of
research institutes like IITs, CRRI, etc. have not been solicited in the decision making process
while formulating plans for traffic management in Delhi. The Committee therefore, feels that the
efforts made by the MHA and concerned agencies in managing traffic issues in Delhi are not enough
and there is an urgent need to form a central coordinating agency with an institutional mechanism
to prepare holistic plan for traffic management in Delhi which should be inclusive, innovative,
sustainable and futuristic. (Para 5.2.8 ibid)
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Some of the major issues with the management of the burgeoning traffic in Delhi are shortage
of adequate road space, land not readily available for at-grade and multi-level car parking,
inadequate pedestrian pathways & plazas, multi-modal transport mix, huge number of freight
vehicles and personal vehicles entering and exiting Delhi from the NCR. A holistic traffic management
plan has not been drawn up due to lack of coordination between a plethora of agencies who are
directly and indirectly involved. Road spaces in proximity to Metro stations and markets are clogged
with a variety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Traffic management presently is a difficult task
with hardly any elbow room for planning and execution. Traffic discipline is at a premium with
improvement measures too slow to keep pace with increase in vehicles and pedestrian population.
Many areas in Delhi have large open spaces some owned by the Government and agencies working
under it. If some of these spaces could be freed up then comparatively low-cost solutions for
improvement of intersection geometrics, widening of roads & lanes and automatic multi-level car
parking & underground car parking could be taken up. In the end analysis land would be the key
and many public sector organisations and institutions may be required to part with the excess land
being held by them. There may be hurdles in executing such a plan but a beginning should be made
based on an objective survey. (Para 5.3.1 ibid)
Besides, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for more disciplined lane driving in
Delhi. For this the width of lane to some extent seems to be responsible. There are situations when
in a three lane road four vehicles run together. In this connection, the Committee recommends
that there should be standardization of lane width. If required, situation prevailing in some other
countries may also be studied. (Para 5.3.2 ibid)
The Committee strongly recommends that special provisions such as sign boards, ramps,
special parking badges, passes should be made for person with special ability so as to have complete
universal road infrastructure in Delhi and NCR. (Para 5.3.3 ibid)
Free movement of e mergency vehicles is not available at present as emergency vehicles

87
such as ambulances, police cars, fire engines, etc. get stuck in traffic jam and delayed in reaching
their destination. It leads to avoidable loss of valuable lives and property. The Committee
recommends that the MHA should coordinate with concerned agencies to create dedicated lane/
corridor that ensures free passage to emergency vehicles.  In case of non availability of dedicated
lane/corridor, vehicles on roads must give free passage to ambulances and other emergency
vehicles. (Para 5.3.4 ibid)
In Delhi, number of two wheelers is huge and when they run parallel to the four wheelers the
situation becomes dangerous. Therefore, Committee feels that feasibility study of having separate
lanes for two wheelers may be undertaken. (Para 5.3.5 ibid)
The Committee also finds it puzzling that sometimes traffic on roads are left without any
signal and before flyovers traffic gets crowded because of merging traffic. It may be because of lack
of lane driving and sometimes more lanes merge into fewer lanes. For this concerned agency needs
to think out of the box solutions. The role of road designing agencies/Research institutes becomes
very important in this connection. (Para 5.3.6 ibid)
The Committee feels that the traffic coming from neighbouring States has fewer approach
roads for entering into Delhi like there is only one road i.e. old Rohtak Road for entering into Delhi
from North East side. This is for traffic coming from Bahadurgarh side and for going to East, North
and Central Delhi. Similarly, there is no approach road for traffic coming from Jhajjar/Badli, Haryana
side. The traffic gets struck in Najafgarh as there is no outer/by-lane road to bypass the Najafgarh
old city. The Committee therefore, recommends that there is urgent need for a outer road in
Najafgarh for smooth passage of traffic entering Delhi. Many more bridges are needed on Najafgarh
drain for smooth entry of traffic from that side. (Para 5.3.7 ibid)
The Committee appreciates that immediately after Committee took this subject for
examination, the Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted a High Power Committee (HPC) under
the Chairmanship of Home Secretary for co-ordinating, finalizing and implementing meaningful
and effective action points. The HPC in its meeting on 9
th October, 2018 shortlisted six short term
plans to be completed during 2019-20. The Committee feels that since Home Secretary has number
of other important jobs to handle, the HPC should concentrate on finalizing the policy decisions and
periodic monitoring of the implementation of the project. The nitty-gritty of bringing all concerned
departments/agencies together for finalizing action points should be handled by officers of the rank
of Special Secretary/Additional Secretary of MHA. The approach of HPC should be to see that all
departments/agencies work in tandem with full knowledge and support of one another. It should
work as one point forum for resolving differences and taking a final view after taking all the inputs
into considerations. (Para 5.3.8 ibid)

MINUTES

91
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M on Monday, the 2 nd April, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh
3. Shri R.K. Sinha
LOK  SABHA
4. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
5. Shri S. Selvakumara Chinayan
6. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
7. Shrimati Kirron Kher
8. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
9. Shri Kaushal Kishore
10. Shri P. Nagarajan
11. Shri Baijayant “Jay” Panda
12. Shri Bheemrao B. Patil
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
5. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2.0 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, *** *** ***.
3.1 * * *
3.2 * * *
3.3 * * *
4.1 ***      ***       ***. He also referred to the meeting of the Committee on  the Demands for Grants
held earlier wherein the worsening situation of traffic was broached up.
4.2 * * *
4.3 After brief deliberation, the Committee decided to take up, for detailed examination, the following
three subjects:
*** Relates to other matter.

92
(i) * * *
(ii) W orsening Traffic Management in Delhi; and
(ii) * * *
4.4 The Committee then directed the Secretariat to seek background notes on these three subjects from
the Ministry of the Home Affairs.
5.0 A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
6.0 The Committee then adjourned at 4.53 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

I - A
FIRST - A
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th October, 2018 in Room No. 62, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
3. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy
LOK  SABHA
1. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
2. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
3. Shri Faizal P.P . Mohammed
4. Shri Nagarajan P.
5. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
6. Shri S. Selvakumarachinayan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Desh Deepak Verma, Secretary-General
2. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
4. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
5. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
6. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. N.K. Sinha, Economic Adviser
3. Shri D.P. Tripathi, Director
Representatives of Government of NCT, Delhi
1. Ms. Varsha Joshi, Transport Commissioner
2. Shri K. K. Dahiya, Special Transport Commissioner
3. Shri Umesh Mishra, Engr-in-Chief, PWD
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Amulya Patnaik, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri Taj Hassan, Special CP (Traffic)
3. Shri Arun Kampani (Joint CP , Traffic Opr.)
4. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint CP (Traffic- HQ)
5. Shri Ravinder Soni, ACP (Traffic Engg.)
93

94
2. At the outset, the Chairman, this being the first meeting after Committee’s reconstitution, welcomed
the re-nominated Members and the four new Members, Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy from Rajya Sabha
and Shri Harish Chandra Meena, Shri Jagdambika Pal, and Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati from Lok
Sabha to the first sititng of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members about the agenda, i.e., to
hear the presentation of the Delhi Police and the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject ‘Worsening Traffic
Management in Delhi’, to consider and adopt the Draft 214 th and 215 th Reports of the Committee, and to
decide the future programme of the Committee.
3. * * *
4. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs, the Commissioner
(CP), Delhi Police and other officers of Delhi Police. The Chairman then requested the CP, Delhi Police to
make the presentation of the subject highlighting the problems being faced in managing the traffic and the
actions that are required to be taken to overcome those problems. The Chairman also requested the CP,
Delhi Police to inform the Committee about the steps already taken and the steps proposed to be taken to
ensure smooth flow of traffic and coordination mechanism between various agencies concerned.
5. The CP, Delhi Police gave a brief account of the measures taken by the Delhi Police to address the
traffic problems in Delhi and then requested the Special CP (Traffic) to make a presentation on the subject.
The presentation highlighted the reasons for traffic congestion in Delhi, enforcement measures undertaken
by the Delhi Police, and the road engineering measures proposed to various road owning agencies for
improving the flow of traffic. Thereafter, the Special CP (Traffic) informed the Committee about the road
safety education and awareness campaigns conducted by the Delhi Police, utilisation of modem technologies
for strengthening the traffic management system in Delhi. During the presentation, some Members of the
Committee raised issues such as large inflow of vehicles to Delhi form adjacent cities, lack of adequate
parking, and priority corridors that have been identified.
6. The Chairman asked the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs to apprise the Committee
about the measures undertaken by MHA to improve traffic management in Delhi. The representatives of
MHA then explained various aspects of the Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) project, which
has been approved by the MHA. He also informed the Committee that the MHA, recognizing the multi-
stakeholder nature of the problem of traffic in Delhi, recently formed a committee, under the Chairmanship
of the Home Secretary, comprising of all the stakeholders concerned to evolve short-term solutions that can
be implemented within a period of about six months to address the problem of traffic management.
7. The Chairman then solicited the views of the representatives of the Delhi Government on the subject.
The Transport Commissioner informed the Committee about the efforts made by the Transport Department
for procurement of buses to increase the availability of buses. However, she informed that issues like court
case and failure of a tender had affected their efforts. On being asked about the number of buses procured
during the last three or four years, the Transport Commissioner informed that no bus could be procured
during this period.
8. The Transport Commissioner also informed the Committee about the ongoing exercise of route
rationalisation of all the existing bus routes including the creation of special routes for last-mile connectivity.
She also informed the committee about the efforts made by the Delhi Metro to improve last-mile connectivity
*** Relates to other matter.

95
and the measures taken by the Transport Department to control and regulate the traffic. One of the Members
then asked about the impact of odd-even scheme on traffic regulation and pollution control and whether an
impact assessment had been done. The representatives of MHA and the Delhi Government submitted that
the government had made no assessment of impact of the odd-even scheme.
9. Some Members of the Committee then raised queries pertaining to fictitious driving licenses, challans,
construction of parking facilities, and improper town planning. Thereafter, a brief discussion was held on
best traffic management practices in other countries. Another Member then asked about the impact of Delhi
Metro and cab aggregators like Uber and Ola for reducing the traffic congestion and whether an assessment
has been done to this end. The representatives of Delhi Government admitted that no such assessment had
been done.
10. Another Member highlighted the necessity of controlling the entry and exit points of Delhi, and
providing smooth flow of traffic in areas where there were important offices, residences of VIPs, and
schools. The Chairman then observed that the Delhi did not have a traffic management plan nor there is any
planning to make a plan and pointed out how delay in devising an effective traffic management plan was
gradually worsening the problem.
11. The Chairman then summarising the discussion highlighted the lack of any plans for restricting the
number of vehicles that are registered in Delhi, reducing the number of vehicles entering Delhi, freight
management, construction of adequate parking space, scientific assessment of traffic management schemes
like odd-even, and impact assessment of metro and non-personal cars like cabs.
12. The Chairman then asked the representatives of all the agencies to prepare specific short-term, medium-
term, and long-term plans with fixed outcomes and timelines and apprise the Committee about these plans.
The Committee’s next meeting on the subject will be decided thereafter.
13. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
14. The Committee then adjourned at 5.52 
P.M.

II-A
SECOND - A
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 14th December, 2018 in Room No. 62, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Chidambaram   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
3. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK  SABHA
4. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
7. Smt. Kirron Anupam Kher
8. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
9. Shri Ashok Gajapathi Raju Pusapati
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
3. Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Additional Director
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
5. Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary (UT)
2. Dr. N. K. Sinha, Economic Adviser (UT)
3. Shri Shreeshail Malge, Director (Delhi Police)
Representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
Shri M. K. Sinha, OSD (UT) & Ex-oficio JS
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Shri Abhay Damle, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Government of NCT, Delhi
1. Smt. Varsha Joshi, Secretary-cum-Commissioner, Transport Department
2. Shri K. K. Dahiya, Special Secretary
3. Shri O. P. Mishra, Special Secretary (Home)
96

97
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Amulya Patnaik, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri Taj Hassan, Special CP (Traffic)
3. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint CP (Traffic- HQ)
4. Shri Ravinder Soni, ACP (Traffic Engg.)
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Shailendra Sharma, Engineer Member, DDA
2. Shri Manish Kumar Verma, Director (UTTIPEC) Plg.
3. Shri Deepankar Singh, Sr. Architect
Representatives of DMRC
Shri Vikas Kumar, Executive Director
Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Corporation
Shri Naresh Kumar, Chairman
Representatives of East Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Dr. Puneet Kumar Goel, Commissioner
2. Shri Devendra Singh, Chief Engineer
3. Dr. Brijesh Singh, Additional Commissioner
Representatives of North Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Shri Madhup Vyas, Commissioner
2. Shri Pradeep Bansal, Chief Engineer
3. Dr. B.M. Mishra, Additional Commissioner
Representatives of South Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Dr. Puneet Kumar Goel, Commissioner
2. Shri Prem Shankar Jha, Deputy Commissioner
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and informed that
on the subject of ‘Worsening Traffic Management in Delhi’, the Committee had already heard the views of
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Delhi Police on 4th October, 2018. Today’s sitting has
been called to further hear the views of MHA, Delhi Police and other stakeholders like Ministry of Housing
and urban Affairs, Government of NCT of Delhi, Delhi Development authority, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
& urban local bodies of Delhi on the subject. The Chairman further informed the Members that the Home
Secretary had sought leave of absence as he has to attend a meeting on security issues to be chaired by
Home Minister and in his place Additional Secretary (UT) along with other officers concerned would attend
the meeting.
{At this stage witnesses were called in}
3. The Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary (UT), MHA and officials of other Ministries,
representatives of Delhi Police, Govt. of CT of Delhi and representatives of other local bodies/agencies to
the sitting of the Committee.

98
4. The Chairman recalled that in the last sitting of the Committee on the subject, the Ministry was asked
to furnish specific short-term, medium-term and long-term plans on seven points viz. (i) restricting the
number of vehicles being registered per day in Delhi; (2) restricting the number of vehicles entering Delhi
every day; (3) Plan for freight Management; (4) Plan for building more multi-storey parking facilities;
(5) Impact assessment of Delhi metro in easing traffic situation; (6) Impact of non-personal cars and taxi on
the flow of traffic; and (7) Plan to induct new buses for public transport and implementation of Intelligent
Traffic Management System (ITMS) Project to improve traffic management in Delhi. The Chairman further
informed that in today’s meeting only short term measures taken, will be discussed.
5. The Additional Secretary (UT), MHA informed the Committee that the mandate of the Ministry of
Home Affairs on the subject is to coordinate with various agencies, as the subject under consideration is a
multi-dimensional and concerns a number of departments/agencies in Delhi. A High Powered Committee for
Traffic Management in Delhi has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Home Secretary. He informed
that the said Committee has identified six points for short term and medium term planning to make decisive
impact on the traffic situation in Delhi.
6. The Commissioner, South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) then briefed the Committee about
the steps undertaken to ease the traffic situation in Lajpat Nagar area. It was also informed that on week-
ends there is manifold increase of vehicle. To discourage vehicles coming there, market association has
started free last-mile connectivity from Lajpat Nagar Metro Station for the commuters by providing free
e-rickshaw facility. He also informed the Committee about the plan of SMCD for construction of multi-level
car parking (MLCP) at various locations under its jurisdiction.
7. The Committee was then apprised about the development of area and parking by Delhi Development
Authority (DDA) at Nehru Place and Bhikaji Cama place. It was also informed by the representative of DDA
that DDA plans to develop Parking spaces for 820 Equivalent Car Space (ECS) at Nehru Place and 360
capacity multi-level parking in Bhikaji Cama Place.
8. The Additional Commissioner, North Delhi Municipal corporation (NDMC) apprised the Committee
about the plan for creation of multi-level parking for additional 800 car spaces on both sides of the existing
two surface parking in Shastri Park (4807 sq. mtrs.) and Rajendra Nagar (3,871 sq. mtrs) in Karol Bagh
within one year i.e. by 2020.
9. The Chairperson, New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) informed that in Connaught Place areas
specifically in North of Rajpath, a technology-driven Smart Parking Management System (SPMS) is in
place for providing information regarding availability of slots to the public through mobile application on real
time basis. The Committee was also informed about the measures taken by the authorities to discourage
people from parking their vehicles on the roads. Steps taken in this regard include fixing the parking charges
on higher side, lifting and issuing challans to illegally parked vehicles etc. He further apprised the Committee
that the NDMC will extend Smart Parking Management System project to the remaining parts of the NDMC
area for 3000 parking slots.
10. The Chairman then raised the issue of notification of parking rules and sought the response of the
Government on that. The Secretary-Cum-Commissioner, Transport Department, Government of NCT of
Delhi informed the Committee that draft notification on parking rules is pending with the Government
(Ministry of Transport, since July). The Additional Secretary (UT), MHA then submitted that the three

99
MCDs, which control almost 70 to 80 per cent of parking in Delhi, and their executive bodies, are authorized
to make parking rules within their jurisdiction.
11. The Committee then discussed the parking situation in non-market places. The Committee noticed
that building plans for old houses had been approved at a time when there was no requirement for parking
spaces, the vehicles owned by those houses remained parked on the roads. One of the Members suggested
that as a short term measure when the owner change the car after the existing car has lived its life of 10
years or 15 years as per extant rule for diesel and petrol vehicles, if the person cannot show parking space,
he or she should not be permitted to buy a new car.
12. One of the Member sought to know whether any MOU has been signed between Government of
India and London on the issue of traffic Management, the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways answered in affirmative.
13. The Special C.P. (Traffic), Delhi Police while explaining the short-term plan informed that the Lieutenant
Governor had constituted a Committee consisting of traffic police officers, road owning agencies, civil
agencies, etc., to examine places where the existing road facilities can be improved. He further informed
that the said Committee had identified 350 tasks in 28 corridors for category-A, 165 tasks in 30 corridors
for Category-B and 105 tasks in 18 corridors for category-C areas for improvement in existing road facilities
through engineering improvement, for removal of congestions. He informed that the work in this regard is
being done by road constructing agencies and PWD in coordination with Traffic Police. The Committee
was apprised that 192 tasks would be completed in six month and 49 tasks within one year and the rest
would take more than two years. The Committee was also apprised about the identification of 107 non-
feasible task by the joint survey conducted for the purpose.
14. The Committee was given to understand that currently agencies have identified 37 junctions falling
under 77 corridors where some civil works could be done to decongest the road like construction of a Foot
Over bridge (FOB) in Yusuf Sarai Market, construction of free left passes in Malavaiya Nagar and near
Adhchini area, etc.
15. On the issues like assessment of the progress made, the time frame by when tasks would be completed,
parameters to identify the congested corridors, impact of such identification on traffic movement etc.,
raised by Members on the said 77 corridors, the Special C.P (Traffic) promised to furnish details later in
writing. The Chairman pointed out that there was no plan for completion of tasks at 100 intersections which
were to be completed by 2019. The Additional Secretary (UT), MHA assured the Committee to provide an
updated information on the number of tasks that would be completed in the year 2019.
16. The Committee was then informed about the street design, creation of pedestrian sidewalks and
facilities for non-motorized transport (NMT) and public amenities for 70 KM of Dwarka streets. The Additional
Secretary (UT), MHA apprised the Committee about the plan to incentivize the use of non-motorized transport
to reduce vehicular pressure. Efforts are focused on creating bicycle tracks and encouraging people to use
bicycles within that area. Representatives from DDA, informed about the changes made in the street design
in 30 KM stretch for improving cross-sections to make this stretch more useful for non-motorized transporters.
It was also informed that a five kilometer area near Dwarka Sector 12 and Sector 13 Metro stations is being
developed on a pilot basis with designing and improvement of road cross-sections, building docking stations
and encouraging its use.

100
17. The Chairman, New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) apprised the Committee about cycle
scheme under Private-Public Partnership being implemented in NDMC Area. Under the Scheme 200 Smart
bikes named ‘Nextbike’, that are GPS controlled with GSM facility, have been docked at 27 Stations.
Representative from DDA also informed the Committee that similar schemes would be extended to other
parts of Delhi.
18. The Secretary-Cum-Commissioner, Transport Department, Government of NCT of Delhi informed
the Committee that there is a proposal to add 1000 standard floor CNG buses, 1000 low-floor buses and
1000 electric buses to the existing fleet under the Cluster Scheme. She further informed that the buses will
be given to private concessionaire under the Cluster Scheme and would be operated on Gross Cost Model
whereby the revenue would come to the Government and the operators would be paid on ‘per kilometer’
basis. Feasibility report for induction of 1000 electric buses is being examined.
19. The Chairman sought the status report on ongoing work of installation of GPS, CCTVs and women
Helpline button, in all the DTC and cluster buses which were contemplated after the Nirbhaya incident. The
Committee was informed that 1600 buses running under cluster scheme have been fitted with GPS equipments
and mobile application “Poochho’ for use by the public. The Secretary-cum-Commissioner clarified that
GPS data being used in the application has been put up on open data platform and any developer or researcher
can use it to build a better App. than this.
20. The Committee was informed by the Commissioner, North Delhi Municipal Corporation that Special
Task Force (STF), have been constituted by Supreme Court under the Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman,
DDA, to monitor the work of removal of both permanent and temporary encroachments in Delhi.
21. While considering Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS), Special CP (Traffic) informed the
Committee that it is a long term project, however, hiring of consultant for the purpose would be done by
August, 2019. This would be supported by following other projects being taken up as short-term measures
that would be completed in the year 2019 like:
(a) installation of violation detection cameras at 24 junctions, 3D Radar, Gantary-Mounted Radar,
Speech check etc.
(b) automatic issuance of notices to traffic violators etc.
(c) implementation of ‘one way’ road scheme for 17 roads.
(d) E-challan System
22. The Special C.P. (Traffic) further apprised the Committee that after feasibility analysis, opinion of
technical experts on the vehicle bearing capacities of the road would be sought and Work Resource Institute
(WRI) which has expertise on traffic, Environment etc., would also be consulted. Thereafter a final notification
would be issued regarding declaring a particular street as one way street.
23. Executive Director, DMRC informed the Committee that 59 stations have been identified under the
Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) Plan in
consultation with all the stakeholders. He further informed the Committee that these stations would have
separate pedestrian Zones around them for safe dispersion of commuters towards bus stop, NMT lanes,
Three-Seater auto Rickshaw (TSR) and cycles stands besides having dedicated base for three wheelers, e-
rickshaw and feeder buses for seamless connectivity.

101
24. When the Chairman sought to know the specific stations where the said Model has been implemented,
it was informed that the said model exists at Moti Bagh Station, South Campus Station, Dhaula Kuan, Vinod
Nagar, Kashmiri Gate, Nehru enclave, etc.
25. The Committee was also apprised about the direction by Supreme Court regarding impounding the
driver license for three months and the procedure followed in cases when the vehicles are involved in
serious traffic rules violation resulting in accidents and crimes.
26. One of the Member then queried about vehicles impounded for traffic rules violations and whether it
leads to clogging of area around police stations. The Committee was apprised by the Ministry that the
vehicles are released on a Superdari, after completion of the formalities. However, the unclaimed vehicles
due to various reasons like insurance claims, accidental-related cases remain dumped. It was further informed
that a drive has been launched to create a facility of a ‘Centralised Malkhana’ in different parts of Delhi. So,
the police stations are not clogged.
27. The Additional Secretary (UT), MHA also assured the Committee that the Ministry would flash out
the details of the short-term plan and chalk out the Medium-term and Long-term plans within a month.
28. The Chairman then decided to convene the next meeting on the subject after two months approximately.
29. * * *
30. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting of the Committee was kept.
31. The Committee then adjourned at 5.37 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 11 th October, 2019 in Room No.074, PLB, New
Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya
4. Shri Manish Gupta
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
7. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
8. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
9. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
11. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
12. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Additional Secretary (UT)
2. Shri N.K. Sinha, Economic Advisor (UT)
3. Shri Shreeshail Malge, Director (Delhi Police)
4. Shri Anuj Malhotra, Knowledge Partner, High Powered Committee
Representatives of Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs
Shri K. Sanjay Murthy, Additional Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
1. Shri Abhay Damle, Joint Secretary (Transport)
2. Shri Manoj Kumar, CGM (NHAI)
102

103
Representatives of Government of NCT of Delhi
1. Shri Rajeev Verma, Pr. Secretary-cum-Commissioner (Transport),
2. Shri K.K. Dahiya, Spl. Commissioner (Transport),
3. Shri Mohd. Azimul Haque, Spl. Secretary
4. Shri R.S. Parmar, Dy. Secretary, Urban Development Department
5. Shri Raajiv Yaduvanshi, Principal Secretary (PWD),
6. Shri P .K. Vats, Engineer-in Chief (PWD),
7. Shri Manoj Kumar, Managing Director (DTC)
Representatives of Delhi Police
1. Shri Amulya Patnaik, Commissioner of Police
2. Shri Taj Hassan, Special CP (Traffic)
3. Shri N.S. Bundela, Joint CP (Traffic/HQ)
4. Ms. Meenu Choudhary, Joint CP (Traffic/Ops.)
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Shailendra Sharma, Engineer Member
2. Shri Sachidanand Singh, Chief Engineer
3. Shri Arun Kumar, Superintendent Engineer (Dwarka)
Representatives of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
1. Shri Vikas Kumar, Executive Director (Operations)
2. Ms. Papiya Sarkar, Chief Architect
Representatives of New  Delhi Municipal Council
Ms. Rashmi Singh, Secretary
Representatives of East Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Dr. Brajesh Singh, Addl. Commissioner
2. Shri Aman Rajput, Assistant Commissioner
Representatives of North Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Smt. Varsha Joshi, Commissioner
2. Ms. Ira Singhal, Deputy Commissioner
3. Shri Pradeep Bansal, Chief Engineer
Representatives of South Delhi Municipal Corporation
1. Shri Gyanesh Bharti, Commissioner
2. Shri Prem Shankar Jha, Deputy Commissioner
Representatives from National Capital Region
1. Shri Deepak Ratan, IGP/Traffic, Uttar Pradesh
2. Shri Shyam Narayan Singh, S.P. Traffic, Ghaziabad

104
3. Shri Anil Kumar Jha, S.P. Traffic, Gautam Budh Nagar
4. Dr. Rajshri Singh, IGP Traffic & Highways (H), Karnal
5. Shri Omvir Singh, SP Traffic & N.H. Kamal
6. Shri Amandeep Kapur, S.P ., Bhiwadi, Rajasthan
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Rollan, Joint Transport Commissioner, Rajasthan
8. Shri Abhijeet Samanta, Dy. Director, NCR Planning Board (NCRPB)
9. Shri Himanshu Garg, DCP Traffic Gurugram
10. Shri Narendra Gautam, Director, New Delhi Municipal Council
11. Shri Ashok Kumar, J.T.C., Haryana
12. Smt. Rani Jain, RTO, Alwar (Rajasthan)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting of the Committee
and informed them that in the first meeting of the reconstituted Committee, the Committee had decided to
continue with the subject of ‘Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’ and this meeting has
been convened to have the updated status on the various projects/tasks shortlisted in different phases for
completion by the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Delhi Police, Government of NCT of Delhi
and other allied agencies.
On arrival of Witnesses
3. The Chairman welcomed the senior officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Affairs, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the representatives and senior officials of
the Government of NCT of Delhi, the Commissioner of Delhi Police, officials of DDA, DMRC, NDMC,
EDMC, SDMC, NCRPB and representatives from State Governments of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
Haryana to the meeting of the Committee.
4. The Chairman then requested the officials to give a brief introduction on the subject and inform the
Committee of the present status on the actions proposed to be taken in the short-term, whether the time lines
have been achieved for those projects which were due for completion in different phases, the budgetary
allocations which have been made along with the bottlenecks or delays, if any, in their implementation and
the progress made so far in Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS).
5. The Additional Secretary, MHA then informed the Committee that MHA has constituted a Committee
on Traffic Management in Delhi under Home Secretary to bring together the possible stakeholders on the
issue of traffic. He then made a brief presentation on the subject. Representatives of various agencies
responsible for carrying out the work also briefed the Committee about the work being done by them.
6. Discussions were held on various issues including proliferation of shops in the MCD areas, traffic
flow to Gurugram, quality of works being done, parking Issues, Electric buses, Intelligent Traffic Management
System (ITMS), management of traffic at metro stations, Lajpat Nagar parking system, encroachments,
status of levying a congestion tax during peak hours, impact of recent amendments in the Motor Vehicles
Act, coordination in the NCR on vehicular movement/congestion, system to deal with road traffic education,
connectivity between the metro stations and bus stand, movement of ambulance, reservations in the multi-
level car parking for the disabled, etc.

105
7. The Chairman thanked each agency/organization/department for comprehensive presentation and
also appreciated their efforts.
8. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.14 
P.M.

IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2019 at Room No. 62, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri P. Bhattacharya
4. Shri Rakesh Sinha
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
8. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
9. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
10. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
11. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
13. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Additional Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Home Affairs:
1. Dr. N. K. Sinha, Economic Advisor (UT)
2. Shri Shreeshail Malge, Director (Delhi Police)
3. Shri Anuj Malhotra, Knowledge Partner, High Powered Committee
Indian Institute Technology, Delhi:
1. Prof. Anoop Chawla, Coordinator, Transportation Research and Injury Prevention Programme
(TRIPP)
2. Shri Fani Bhushan,Collaborator
3. Shri Nimish Sethi, Project Scientist
4. Shri Girish Branda, Collaborator
106

107
Central Road Research Institute, Delhi:
1. Dr. S. Velmurugan, Sr. Principal Scientist, Traffic Engineering & Safety Division
2. Dr. Ch. Ravisekhar, Principal Scientist, Transportation Planning Division
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the fourth meeting of the
Committee and informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. presentation on the ‘Management
of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’ by Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi and Central Road
Research Institute (CRRI), Delhi.
On arrival of Witnesses
3. The C hairman then welcomed representatives of Indian Institute of Technology, (IIT) Delhi,
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) and Officers of Ministry of Home Affairs to the meeting of the
Committee.
4. The Chairman, then asked Professor Anoop Chawla, Coordinator, Transportation Research and Injury
Prevention Programme (TRIPP), IIT Delhi to apprise the Committee about their research on development
of indigenous technology and processes for free flowing vehicular/ pedestrian traffic and interlinking of
facilities, ultra-low-cost solutions with regard to specific stretches in Delhi and Noida, safe mobility for
women, etc.
5. Shri Chawla, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi made a presentation regarding Traffic
Management in Delhi which inter-alia included their research on device AIS-140 (Automotive Industry
Standard), development of indigenous technology and process for free-flowing vehicular traffic with specific
focus on pedestration and vulnerable road-users, interlinking of facilities, low-cost solutions based on innovative
technology, designing of cost and space saving flyovers, Segregated Integrated Grade-Seperated Multimodal
Amalgamation (SIGMA) strategy for multi-modal integration, low-cost innovative solutions to 35 stretches
in Delhi.
6. Discussions were held on various related issues including functionality of device AIS-140, panic
button and warning lights in public transport, vehicle segregation, safe mobility for women, flyover design,
multi-modal integration, road construction project in Patna, co-ordination among various agencies in planning
and implementation of traffic management projects, number of buses, pedestrians, e-rickshaws, bicycles,
two wheelers plying everyday in Delhi, etc.
7. Prof. Chawla, IIT Delhi, invited the Committee for a study visit to its campus to have a spot study of
the models prepared by them on Traffic Management in Delhi. The Chairman assured Prof. Chawla that the
Committee will consider his request.
8. The Chairman, then asked Dr. S. Velmurugan, Sr. Principal scientist, Central Road Research Institute
(CRRI) to apprise the Committee of its view regarding construction, maintenance and management of roads
and airport runways, road design and Traffic Management, etc.
9. Then, Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) made a presentation on present status of the traffic
scenario in Delhi, proposals regarding sustainable traffic plan and transportation system for Delhi City,
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) etc.
10. Discussions were held on issues like solutions on traffic management, road design, comprehensive
mobility plan study, increasing population of Delhi and Traffic Management, Delhi Master Plan, traffic

108
management projects for satellites cities around Delhi and NCR, solutions to address traffic congestion at
Lal Bahadur Shastri Marg, Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor at Chirag Delhi, comprehensive mobility plan
study, Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning & engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC), Delhi
Master Plan, Traffic movement in National Capital Territory (NCT) and National Capital Region (NCR),
Integrated Transport System (ITS), etc.
11. A Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 04:00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th December, 2019 in G-074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Manish Gupta
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
8. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
9. Shri Adhir Ranjan Choudhary
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shrimati Kirron Kher
13. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
14. Shri Raja Amreshwara Naik
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
19. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
20. Shri Pothuganti Ramulu
21. Dr. Satyapal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Additional secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Additional Director
Shri Pritam Kumar, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt the following three draft Reports of the Committee:-
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
109

110
(iii) Draft 222nd Report on ‘Management of Worsening Traffic Situation in Delhi’.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft 222
nd Report for consideration and adopted the same
without any change.
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors, if necessary
and also decided for presentation/laying of the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 11 th December,
2019.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A Verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

ANNEXURES

113
ANNEXURE-A
List of these 28 Corridors of ‘A’ Category
Sl. No. Corridor S tretch (From & To) Range Distance
(Approx.)
1. Aurobindo Marg Aurobindo Chowk to Andheria More Southern 10.9 Kms
2. Mathura Road Neela Gumbad to Badarpur Flyover Southern 11 Kms
3. Savitri Flyover Chirag Delhi Crossing to Savitri Flyover Southern 1 Km
4. Mehrauli Lado Sarai Red light to Pul Prahladpur Southern 11.2 Kms
Badarpur Road Underpass
5. IGNOU Road M.B. Road cut to IGNOU Chowk Southern 2.5 Kms
6. Kalindi Kunj Road Sarita Vihar Red light to Kalindi Kunj Southern 4.6 Kms
(Road No. 13 A) Flyover
7. Mehrauli Gurgaon CDR Chowk to Petrol Pump, Dera More Southern 7.1 Kms
Road
8. Shantipath – Moti Bagh Railway Flyover  to RTR Southern 3.5 Kms
RTR Marg Flyover
9. Dhaula Kuan Dhaula Kuan Flyover to GGR Flyover, Southern 3.8 Kms
Sanjay T-Point
9.A Sardar Patel Marg 11 Murti to Dhaula Kuan Central 4 Kms
10. Kamal Attaturk Bhinder Point to R/A Samrat Hotel Central 1 Km
Marg
11. DB Gupta Road Pahar Ganj Flyover to R/A Jhandewalan Central 3 Kms
12. New Rohtak Road Idgah Crossing to Kamal T-Point Central 2.5 Kms
13. Patel Road R/A Pusa to Moti Nagar Chowk Western 5.6 Kms.
14. Najafgarh Road Zakhira Moti Nagar Chowk to Dwarka Western 19 Kms.
More upto Najafgarh
15. New Rohtak Road Rampura to Mundka Western 19 Kms.
16. Pankha Road Uttam Nagar to Sagar Pur Western 5.6 Kms.
17. Outer Ring Road Hanuman Setu to Chandgi Ram Akhara Northern 3 Kms
18. Road No. 43 Britania Chowk to Anukampa Chowk Outer 5 Kms.
19. Ring Road Vijay Nagar to Burari Outer 4 Kms.
20. Outer Ring Road Bhalaswa Road to Upto Sanjay Gandhi Outer 2.5 Kms.
Transport Nagar

114
21. GT Karnal Road Palla Red Light Chowk to Singhu Outer 6.4 Kms.
Border Chowk
22. Sahid Jagat Netaji Subhash Place to Madhuban Outer 3.2 Kms.
Naryan Marg Chowk
23. Dr. Medavar Marg Haider Pur to Sector-18 Rohini T-Point Outer 8.5 Kms.
24. Maharaja Agarsen MCD  School Chowk to PS Shalimar Bagh Outer 2 Kms.
Marg Shalimar
Bagh
25. Vikas Marg ITO Chungi to Karkari More Eastern 7 Kms
26. GT Road Yamuna Flyover Kashmere Gate to Eastern 16 Kms
Apsara Border
27. 66 Feet Road Seelam Pur T-Point to Gokul Puri T Point Eastern 3.7 Kms
Extension
28. Pusta Road Khajuri Chowk to Chilla Border via Eastern 20 Kms
(Khajuri Pusta) Shastri Park
Sl. No. Corridor S tretch (From & To) Range Distance
(Approx.)

115
ANNEXURE-B
List of identified roads for implementation of “One Way” Scheme
Sl. No. Road/ area From To Area
1. Patparganj Road Ami Chand Chowk DDA Market, Mayur East
Vihar Phase-I
2. Zorawar Singh Marg Mori Gate Road crossing Lothian Road – GPO North
(Hamilton Road) crossing
3. Faiz Road R/A Bagga Link Faiz Road- New Central
Rohtak Road crossing
4. Road   connecting Vivekanand Marg Africa Avenue South
Vivekanand Marg to
Africa Avenue  via
Passport   office
behind Bhikaji Cama
Place
5. Ring Road E-Block cut near Nallah Andrews Ganj South
(Chetna Marg)
6. Internal Road, Girdhari All around Girdhari All around Girdhari West
Lal Goswami Park, Lal Goswami Park Lal Goswami Park
East Patel Nagar clockwise direction clockwise direction
7. Moti Lal Nehru Marg South Fountain, R/A Sunheri Masjid New Delhi
Vijay Chowk
8. Abai Marg San Martin Marg T-Point Sardar Patel Marg New Delhi
9. Kushak Road R/A Teen Murti Rajaji Marg New Delhi
10. Babar Road Ranjit Singh Flyover Bengali Market New Delhi
11. Purana Quila Road Mathura Road C-Hexagon New Delhi
12. Kamal Ataturk Marg Bhinder Point Roundabout Tughlak New Delhi
Road
13. Sector-12 Metro Station Radisson Hotel Chowk City Centre, Sector-12, Dwarka
North Road, Dwarka Dwarka
14. Sector-12  Metro S tation City Centre, Sector-12, Radisson Hotel chowk Dwarka
South Road, Dwarka Dwarka
15. Rana Pratap Bagh Bank Road No. D-I Road No. C-3/2 North-West

116
Sl. No. Road/ area From To Area
16. Pole Star Budh Vihar Market Outer Ring Road Outer
17. AL Market, Shalimar Saheed Udham Singh Richi Rich Banquet, Outer
Bagh, Maharishi Marg Ring Road
Dayanand Marg