PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 107
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 12  DECEMBER, 2003)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12  DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED- SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 12 TH DECEMBER, 2003)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-205

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—11
4. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 13—37
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 39— 64

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Motilal V ora
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri Lalu Prasad
10. Shri Drupad Borgohain
11. Shri Ram Jethmalani
∉12. Shri Pramod Mahajan
#13. Shri A. V ijayaraghavan
*14. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
15. Shri Adhi Sankar
16. Begum Noor Bano
17. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
18. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
19. Shri M.O.H. Farook
20. Shri Rajen Gohain
21. Shri Vinay Katiyar
22. Shri K. Karunakaran
23. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
24. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
25. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
26. Shri P.H. Pandian
27. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
28. Shri Subodh Roy
(i)
∉ Nominated w.e.f. 27th, February, 2003.
# Nominated w.e.f. 5th May, 2003.
* Nominated w.e.f. 27th July, 2003.

(ii)
29. Shri Anadi Sahu
30. Shri P.A. Sangma
31. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
32. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
33. Shri Manabendra Shah
34. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
35. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
36. Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
37. Sardar Buta Singh
38. Shri Ramjilal Suman
39. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
40. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
41. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
42. Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
£43. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
ν44. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
£ Nominated w.e.f.  27th February, 2003.
ν Nominated w.e.f.  7th April, 2003.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred-seventh Report of the Committee on the Citizenship (Amendment)
Bill, 2003*.
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the
Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 9 May, 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee for
examination and report.
3. The Committee considered the Bill in six sittings held on 25 June, 15 July, 15 and 29
October and 2 and 10 December, 2003.
3.1 In its sitting held on 25 June, 2003 the Committee heard the oral evidence of the Home
Secretary and a senior officer of the Home Ministry on the Bill.
3.2 The Committee heard the views of Dr. L.M. Singhvi, MP (RS) and Chairman of High
Powered Committee on Indian Diaspora on the Bill in its sitting held on 15 July, 2003.
3.3 The Committee held in-house discussion on the Bill in its sittings held on 15 and
29 October, 2003.
3.4 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its sitting held on
2 December, 2003.
3.5 The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill in its sitting held on
10 December, 2003.
4.0 In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers/
documents:—
(i) Background note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Home Affairs;
(ii) Citizenship Act, 1955;
(iii) Report of P.C. Jain Commission on Review of Administrative Laws;
(iv) Report of the High Level Committee on Indian Diaspora;
(v) Comments of Ministry of Home Affairs on the points raised in the letters of Dr. L.M.
Singhvi, MP (Rajya Sabha);
(vi) Comments/Replies of Ministry of Home Affairs on the points raised by the Chairman
and Members in the sittings of the Committee; and
(vii) Memoranda received from a cross-section of society.
* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated 9 May, 2003.
** Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No.40690, dated 30 May, 2003.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
10 December, 2003. Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 ( Annexure-I ) seeks to amend the Citizenship
Act, 1955 to make provisions for the grant of dual citizenship and to introduce a scheme for the
compulsory registration of every citizen of India, and for this purpose to issue national identity
cards. To achieve these objectives, the proposed amendment, inter alia, seeks to provide for:
(i) making acquisition of Indian citizenship by registration and naturalisation more
stringent;
(ii) preventing illegal migrants from becoming eligible for Indian citizenship;
(iii) simplifying the procedure to facilitate the re-acquisition of Indian citizenship by
persons of full age who are children of Indian citizens and former citizens of
independent India;
(iv) providing for the grant of overseas citizenship of India to persons of Indian origin
belonging to specified countries and Indian citizens who choose to acquire the
citizenship of any of these countries at a later date;
(v) providing for the compulsory registration and issue of national identity card to all
citizens of India;
(vi) enhancing the penalty for violation of its provisions as well as the rules framed under
it; and
(vii) omitting all provisions recognizing or relating to the Commonwealth citizenship from
the Act.
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill, states that the Citizenship Act, 1955 which
provides for the acquisition of citizenship, after the commencement of the Constitution by birth,
descent, registration, naturalisation and incorporation of territory under certain circumstances, and also
provides for the termination and deprivation of citizenship, was among the 109 Central Acts identified
for a review by the Commission on Review of Administrative Laws constituted by the Central
Government under the Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in 1998. Followed by that, the Report of the High
Level Committee on Indian Diaspora constituted by the Central Government under the Chairmanship of
Dr. L.M. Singhvi, inter alia, recommended the amendment of this Act to provide for the grant of dual
citizenship to persons of Indian origin belonging to certain specified countries.
2.1 In the light of the above, the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 9 May, 2003. It was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs on 28 May, 2003 for examination with an instruction to report by the
first week of the 199th session (Monsoon Session) of the Rajya Sabha.
2.2 However, while considering the Bill, in its meeting held on 15 July, 2003, the Committee
felt that it would not be possible for it to complete the consideration of the Bill and report thereon
to Parliament within the stipulated time, keeping in view the range of discussions held, issues
involved and the number of memoranda received. Accordingly, the Committee sought an extension
of time upto first day of the last week of 200th Session (Winter Session) of Rajya Sabha from
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajay Sabha. The extension was granted by the Hon’ble Chairman.
3. Keeping in view the public importance of the Bill, the Committee in its meeting held on
28 May, 2003 decided to invite views/suggestions from individuals/organisations thereon.

2
It, accordingly, authorised the Secretariat to issue a press advertisement for inviting views/
suggestions.
3.1 In response to the press advertisement issued on 6 June, 2003 which was published in the
major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country on 21 June, 2003,
a large number of representations/memoranda were received. The list of individuals and
organisations from whom Memoranda were received is at Annexure-II.
3.2 The major points raised in the Memoranda were as follows:
1. Indian citizenship should be granted to Bangladeshi and Pakistani minority refugees.
National identity cards should also be issued to these refugees.
2. Granting of Indian citizenship to migrants who entered India in the wake of 1971
war should be considered.
3. Interests of displaced persons should also be considered.
4. Dual citizenship should be granted on selective basis.
5. Refugees, who entered India after 25 March, 1971, should be treated as legal migrants.
6. Strictness should be observed in the matter of grant of citizenship and National
Identity Cards.
7. Dual citizenship should not be granted to NRIs.
8. Citizenship should not be available to Bangladeshi minorities.
9. Citizenship should be granted only to Bangladeshi minority refugees and not to
refugees belonging to majority community.
10. Tibetan refugees should also be considered for grant of citizenship.
11. Dual citizenship should be restricted to NRIs only.
12. Every citizen should be given a national identity card.
13. Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 should be deleted to solve the problem of
foreign nationals.
14. National identity cards should be provided free of cost.
15. China, Srilanka, Fizi, Kenya, Malaysia, Singapore, Uganda, South Africa, West Indies
and Zimbabwe should be included in the Fourth Schedule to the Citizenship Act.
16. Mandatory period of stay in India for re-acquiring Indian citizenship should be of six
months only.
17. There should be relaxation in the eligibility criteria for re-acquiring Indian citizenship
by distinguished persons.
18. Citizenship certificate should also indicate the religion of the cardholder.
4. The Committee first took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on
25 June, 2003. It heard the oral evidence of the Home Secretary and Joint Secretary (F) in the
Ministry of Home Affairs in the same meeting.
4.1 The Joint Secretary briefly traced the background of the present Bill, the main provisions
of the Act as it existed, the reasons for the proposed amendments and the amendments required
in the Bill.

3
4.2 He explained that in exercise or  the powers vested by Article 11 of the Constitution, the
Citizenship Act was legislated by Parliament in 1955. The Act dealt with acquisition, determination
and termination of Indian citizenship. There were four ways by which a person could acquire
Indian citizenship, i.e. birth, descent, registration and naturalisation. Section 3 provided for
citizenship by birth, Section 4 governed citizenship by descent, Section 5 provided for citizenship
by registration, Section 6 provided for citizenship by naturalisation and Section 9(1) provided for
termination of citizenship.
4.3 He also mentioned that before 31st March, 1986, powers were delegated to the District
Collectors to grant citizenship to persons but after 1st April, 1986 citizenship could only be granted
by the Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.4 He further explained that the proposal for amending the Citizenship Act, 1955 was based
on an internal review undertaken by the Ministry itself while implementing the Act. Besides, the
Central Government had set up a Commission in 1998 known as P.C. Jain Commission, which had
also suggested for a review of certain administrative laws including the Citizenship Act.
4.5 He further stated that the Government had set up a High Level Committee on Indian
Diaspora under the Chairmanship of Dr. L.M. Singhvi. That Committee made several
recommendations, amongst which one was pertaining to the grant of dual citizenship. On that basis
the Government decided to grant dual citizenship in a limited form with limited rights and to
specific countries by making suitable amendments in the Citizenship Act. He also made a reference
to the scheme of issuance of multipurpose identity cards by the Government and stated that
enabling provisions were proposed under the Citizenship Act for the issue of national citizenship
identity cards. He dwelt upon the various provisions of the Bill in detail such as clause 4 (1A)
which provided for the cessation of Indian citizenship on minor citizens on their attaining of full
age, if the person made an application for registration as an overseas citizen, and till such time his
application for the purpose is not disposed of by the Central Government. This in effect, amounted
to a person holding citizenship of India as well as of another country which was not the
Government’s intention. The Joint Secretary clarified that the real idea was that if a person
acquired the citizenship of a foreign country, he would automatically cease to be a citizen of India.
Accordingly, an amendment was proposed in the Bill to give six months time to such minor citizens
after attaining full age to make an application for grant of overseas citizenship. Similarly, about
clause 9, he stated that if a person was holding the citizenship of any other country or if he
voluntarily acquired it, and he also applied for registration as an overseas citizen of India, the
provision as contained would allow him to retain both the citizenship. Since this provision also did
not reflect the true intention of the Government, it was also proposed to be omitted.
4.6 As regards clause 12 pertaining to the issuance of National Identity Cards, he stated that
it was basically related to the procedure and for the purpose corresponding changes would be made
in clause l(a) of sub-section (2) of Section 18. The Home Secretary clarified that by amending the
clause the Government wanted to do away with the requirement of application by a person and
make it automatic to issue a card to such person.
5. In its meeting held on 15 July, 2003, the Committee invited the Chairman of the Committee
on Indian Diaspora, Dr. L.M. Singhvi, MP (RS) and heard his views on the various provisions of
the Bill.
5.1 Dr. Singhvi stated that the need for building stronger bridges with the people of Indian
origin was, in his opinion, a new ‘Setubandhan’ in our time. He informed that many countries
accepted the dual citizenship without obliterating the identity of the people. He stated that many
countries where people of Indian origin lived did not want dual citizenship especially South Africa
where such people were interested only in stronger cultural contacts. He pointed out that nationality

4
was the principal link between individuals. He stated that the question as to whether a person was
possessing the nationality of a particular country shall be determined in accordance with the laws
of that country. Article 9 of the Constitution empowered the Parliament to enact a comprehensive
legislation on citizenship and provided that any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration
or otherwise voluntarily acquired or had at any time between the 26th day of January, 1950 and
the commencement of the Citizenship Act, 1955 voluntarily acquired the citizenship of another
country shall, upon such acquisition or such commencement, as the case may be, cease to be a
citizen of India. He identified a number of Commonwealth countries to be fit for being included
in the proposed Fourth Schedule to the Act for conferment of dual citizenship. He informed that
French laws permitted dual nationality and that the demand had also come from persons of Indian
origin living in Portugal for dual citizenship where dual citizenship was accepted. Hence, these two
countries as well as several other countries in respect of which he had sent a detailed
communication to the Government of India must be considered for granting dual citizenship to
persons of Indian origin.
5.2 He made a mention of the two exceptional islands Reunion and Guadalupe which were
French territories to illustrate the strong cultural links with India. The Indian diaspora there has
French citizenship and wanted stronger cultural ties. There, the people of Indian origin sustained
the economy and made the islands prosperous. They did not want dual nationality but wanted more
intimate cultural relations as they wanted to reclaim their language, culture, dance, etc. He stated
that many first or second-generation immigrants in the Western countries wanted dual nationality
as they believed in forging strong links with India and preserve their Indian heritage.
5.3 Further, he referred to the various patterns of dual nationality in America and the problems
faced by the British with regard to the renunciation of their citizenship when someone became an
American citizen. Several provisions were made thereafter in the U.K. which worked effectively.
He also dwelt upon the scheme of PIO cards introduced earlier by the Government of India which
gave many benefits that would accrue from dual citizenship. He stated that although, there were
various concessions extended for foreign investments, opening of accounts etc. for People of
Indian Origin yet the scheme was not quite successful, as it was not properly projected. However,
the provisions of the Bill, he stated, would be a kind of psychological incentive for people to relate
themselves with India, to make investments, to make technology transfers and such like things and
emphasised that these should be implemented in tandem with other recommendations of the
Committee on Indian Diaspora. He further mentioned about the experiences of other diasporas like
British, and Chinese which were studied by him and are reflected in the Report of the High Level
Committee. He added that the advantage of the dual citizenship will be largely psychological and
that he did not expect the floodgates to open for dual citizenship after the legislation was enacted.
He also said that fears and apprehensions regarding security were not well founded.
5.4 To Conclude, he stated that the present Bill should be seen in the light of the principle being
that dual citizenship may be granted where there was certain reciprocity of acceptance of the idea
of dual nationality or a strong linkage and demand from the Indian diaspora. He also mentioned that
he was not in favour of overseas Indians having voting rights in India or being allowed to hold
high constitutional offices and expressed that the less directly they were embroiled in the politics
of the country the better it  would be for them as well as the country.
5.5 During the course of deliberations in the Committee apprehensions were raised by the
Members on several provisions of the Bill as well as on other related issues such as illegal
migrants/refugees, etc. on which a Member of the Committee, who headed the High Powered
Committee on Indian Diaspora gave his clarifications. He stated that the neighbouring countries
were not included in his list for obvious reasons and said that the Government had not been able
to prevent unauthorised influx. He also said that those who were persecuted in those countries

5
constituted a special class who deserved favourable consideration as distinguished from others who
migrated to India for economic reasons.
6. The issue of constant influx of refugees from the neighbouring countries due to civil
commotion and religious persecution was raised in the Committee. The Committee had received a
large number of representations from different organizations particularly from West Bengal and
certain parts of North-Eastern region expressing apprehensions that those who migrated to India
from neighbouring countries like Bangladesh and Pakistan due to atrocities committed on the
minorities by the theocratic rulers, would now be detected and deported under the proposed law.
It was pleaded by the petitioners for grant of citizenship and other facilities to such migrants by
the Government of India. The religious persecution of minorities in those countries which resulted
into mass exodus of people from their ancestral lands particularly from Bangladesh was emphasized
in the Committee. While expressing sympathies for such refugees, Members were of the view that
instead of granting citizenship to these refugees, it would be better if this problem was tackled as
per the international law and convention. Adoption of a two-pronged strategy to deal with the
problem was favoured. On the one hand, Members were for extending all humanitarian assistance
to such refugees while on the other, they wanted the Government to put pressure through
diplomatic channels on the Governments of the countries from where these refugees were coming,
either as a result of religious persecution or civil commotion, to create conducive atmosphere in
their countries for early return of the refugees. Members expressed the view that the commitment
made by the national leaders at the time of partition was to facilitate the entry of Hindus from
Pakistan to India with a view to save them from religious persecution because Pakistan had
proclaimed itself as a theocratic nation. This commitment, they felt depended on circumstances but,
was, however, not an unending or open-ended one. They believed that it would be extremely
difficult for India to accommodate such refugees as its own citizens were feeling the pinch of
growing population, poverty and unemployment. At the same time those Members were of the view
that the Government should not completely forget the commitment of our national leaders at the
time of partition and it should keep into account the plight of those displaced persons who were
uprooted from their homes due to failure of their sovereign governments to protect them in the
wake of certain developments. Insofar as the migration of people from neighbouring countries to
India due to economic reasons, Members were of the view that such migrants should be sternly
dealt with as per the law of the land.
6.1 In response to the views expressed in the Committee, the Ministry of Home Af fairs has
replied that as regards grant of citizenship to the refugees who are in India, the Ministry has
already agreed to the cut-off date of 25 March, 1971. Those who entered on or after the above
cut-off date are to be detected and deported to their home countries. As per the international
practice on refugees, refugees are taken by other countries due to well-founded fear of persecution
in that country. Once the problems in their own country are settled, the refugees are normally
returned to their country or origin. The Ministry, however, allayed the apprehension that all those
who entered India due to civil disturbances and political developments in the neighbouring
countries, would be forcibly sent back to their homelands. In that context it was clarified that each
case or a group of cases would be considered on merit. Refugees, who have come to India on
or after 25 March, 1971 due to religious and political reasons, would be dealt with under the
relevant provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946.
6.1.1 The Ministry also stated that the situation, which prevailed in 1971 was completely different
from the present situation in India. India has large population and land-population ratio has
decreased over the period of time. Employment opportunities are not available due to increase of
population manifold. In such a situation, the country is unable to undertake additional burden of
refugees from other countries. Keeping in view the economic and population reasons, citizenship
cannot be granted to the refugees who have come on or after 25 March, 1971.

6
6.1.2 The Ministry further stated that it is pertinent to mention that in the recent years people
from neighbouring countries are coming to India more for economic reasons rather than as
refugees. Since people are coming as illegal migrants for economic reasons, there is no justification
to grant them citizenship in India.
7. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on
2 December, 2003 as under:
Clause 2
7.1 Clause 2 seeks to amend Section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 to substitute the existing
clauses (b), (c) and the proviso to clause (c) by new clause (b) to define the term ‘illegal migrant’,
insert new clauses (ee) defining ‘overseas citizen of India’ and (gg) defining ‘specified country’.
7.1.1 Clause 2 (iii) (gg) defines “specified country” as a country specified in the Fourth
Schedule for the purpose of grant of dual citizenship to persons of Indian origin residing
in those countries. In the first instance Government included eight countries, namely,
Australia, Canada, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America in the Fourth Schedule. Subsequently, at the instance of the Committee
and the Ministry of External Affairs, the Ministry of Home Affairs agreed to include eight
more countries in the Fourth Schedule, namely, Switzerland, Greece, Israel, Sweden,
France, Cyprus, Portugal and New Zealand. While endorsing the inclusion of sixteen
countries identified by the Government in the Fourth Schedule, the Committee is of the
view that a proviso may be added to the definition of “specified country” providing that the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the said Schedule
by way of addition or omission in future. A second proviso may also be added making it
mandatory to lay before both Houses of Parliament such a notification. Accordingly, the
Committee recommends that clause 2 (iii) (gg) should be suitably amended.
7.1.2 Similarly, as a consequence to the amendment proposed by the Government in clause 9 of
the Bill, whereby it has proposed to delete the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 9 of
the principal Act, the definition of ‘overseas citizen of India’ in clause 2 (ii) (ee) also needs to be
amended which should read as follows:
“(ee) overseas citizen of India” means a person
(i) of Indian origin being a citizen of a specified country, or
(ii) who was a citizen of India immediately before being a citizen of a specified country,
and who is registered as an overseas citizen of India by the Central Government
under sub-section (1) of Section 7A”.
7.1.3 Subject to above, the Committee adopts the clause.
Clause 3
7.2 Clause 3 seeks to substitute a new section in place of section 3 of the principal Act
providing for acquisition of citizenship by birth.
7.2.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 4
7.3 Clause 4 seeks to amend section 4 of the principal Act thereby substituting sub-section (1)
dealing with citizenship by descent with a new sub-section which provides for the mandatory

7
registration of the birth of children born to Indian citizens outside India at an Indian Consulate. It
also makes for a declaration by parents at the time of applying for registration of birth that the
minor does not hold the passport of any other country and giving a minor who claims Indian
citizenship by descent, six months time to apply for overseas citizenship of India after attaining full
age.
7.3.1 The Government has brought an amendment in sub-Section (lA) of Section 4 to allow a
minor citizen of India by descent, who is also a citizen of another country, six months to renounce
the citizenship of the other country failing which he will cease to be a citizen of India by descent.
The sub-section as proposed to be amended reads as under:
“(lA) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section and is also a citizen of
any other country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship
or nationality of another country within six months of attaining full age”.
7.3.2 The Committee questioned as to how the Government would enforce the renunciation of
citizenship by a minor on his attaining the full age. The Home Secretary clarified that it would be
automatic after the expiry of six months from the day a minor attained full age.
7.3.3 The Committee adopts the clause with the amendment as proposed by the
Government.
Clause 5
7.4 Clause 5 seeks to amend section 5 of the principal Act to substitute a new sub-section in
place of the existing sub-section (1) and to insert a new sub-section (6) in the Act. This section
provides for citizenship by registration.
7.4.1 A point was raised as to whether it was possible to treat the persons, who have migrated
to India from her neighbouring countries due to religious and political persecutions, on a different
footing. In that context it was suggested that a reference to the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964
may be included in sub-section (1) in relation to the cases of the victims of religious and political
persecution in our neighbouring countries.
7.4.2 After some discussion, the Home Secretary clarified that the issue before the Committee
was the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and under what circumstances citizenship could be
conferred on certain categories of persons. He further clarified that an illegal migrant has to be
dealt with under the Foreigners Act whose provisions enable him to get certain facilities. Thereafter,
he comes within the ambit of Section 5 of the Citizenship Act. Therefore, the objectives of those
two Acts are quite different and one need not be brought into the focus of the other.
7.4.3 It was also clarified that the power of the Central Government in sub-section (1) to impose
conditions and restrictions for registering a person as a citizen of India, provides it with a fairly
large scope indicating a principled approach to the problem of victims of persecutions and others
who have forced themselves into this country.
7.4.4 The Committee, however, adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 6
7.5 Clause 6 seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act which provides for citizenship by
naturalisation. The amendment is consequential to the deletion of First Schedule to the principal
Act.
7.5.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.

8
Clause 7
7.6 Clause 7 seeks to insert new sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D in the principal Act providing
for registration of a person as an overseas citizen of India, conferment of rights on overseas
citizens of India, renunciation of overseas citizenship and cancellation of registration as overseas
citizen of India, respectively.
7.6.1 The Government has felt that the proviso to new Section 7A(l)(C) as reflected in the Bill
was not required. The intention of the Government was to maintain the basic provision for
automatic cessation of Indian Citizenship in the event of a citizen of full age taking the citizenship
of another country. Hence, there was no need for stipulating any time period as enumerated in the
aforesaid proviso. Accordingly, the Government has proposed its deletion.
7.6.2 The Committee during its deliberations felt that the oath of allegiance for an
overseas citizen of India, as provided in the Second Schedule and referred to in sub-clause
(2) of new Section 7A would mean taking away the right given to them by granting overseas
citizenship as the allegiance to the Constitution cannot be divided and it would create
problem with their primary citizenship. The Committee felt that by affirming/swearing
allegiance to Indian Constitution the overseas citizens might not be able to bear allegiance
to the constitution of the country whose citizenship they have acquired and are staying
there for most part of the year. A reference was also made to sub-section (b) of new section
7D which provides for cancellation of registration as an overseas citizen of India if a person
shows disloyalty or disaffection towards the Constitution.
7.6.3. In the light of the observations of the Committee, the Government has agreed to come out
with an amended oath in the Second Schedule. The Government has also agreed to make
consequential changes in sections 7A(2) and 7D (b).
7.6.4 In view of the above, the Committee would like to impress upon the Government
that it should, while reformulating the oath in the Second Schedule, fully address the
concern of the Committee as expressed in para 7.6.2.
7.6.5 Subject to above, the Committee adopts the clause.
Clause 8
7.7 Clause 8 seeks to amend section 8 of the principal Act to make some consequential
amendments required in the Act. Section 8 of the Act deals with renunciation of citizenship.
7.7.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 9
7.8 Clause 9 seeks to amend Section 9 of the principal Act which provides for termination of
citizenship. The clause seeks to insert a proviso after proviso in sub-section (1). The proviso
permits a citizen of India, who takes the citizenship of another country, to continue as an Indian
citizen until his application for registration as an overseas citizen of India is disposed of by the
Central Government. It also seeks to substitute the term “Citizen of India” instead of the word
“Person” in sub-section (2).
7.8.1 However, the Government felt that no change was required in the current provision in the
Act, according to which if a person takes the citizenship of some other country, he automatically
ceases to be an Indian citizen. Hence, it proposed the deletion of second proviso to sub-section
(1) of section 9 from the Bill.

9
7.8.2. The Committee adopts the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 10
7.9 Clause 10 seeks to delete sections 11 and 12 of the principal Act which deal with
Commonwealth citizenship.
7.9.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 11
7.10 Clause 11 seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act which deals with disposal of
application under sections 5 and 6. Sections 5 and 6 deal with citizenship by registration and
naturalisation, respectively. The amendment proposes to add reference to new section 7A in addition
to existing references to sections 5 and 6. The new section 7A provides for registration of overseas
citizens.
7.10.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 12
7.11 Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 14A in the principal Act to provide for compulsory
registration of every citizen of India and issuing of national identity cards.
7.11.1 The proposed provision makes it mandatory for a person to make an application for the
issue of a national identity card. The Government, however , later on realised that the provision as
contained in the Bill does not reflect clearly its intention of enumeration and the automatic grant
of a national identity card. Hence, there was no need for a person to make an application for the
purpose. An application was required only in cases of dispute. Accordingly, the Government has
proposed a change in sub-section (2) of the proposed section 14A which should read as under:
“The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India shall be
such as may be prescribed.”
7.11.1 The Committee adopts the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 13
7.12 Clause 13 seeks to insert a new section 15A in the principal Act to make a provision for
review of an order made by the Government.
7.12.1 However, in the context of preparing national register of citizens and issuing national identity
cards, the Government has felt that the provisions as proposed in the present Bill are not sufficient.
Hence, it has proposed to insert a second proviso in sub-section (1) of proposed new section 15A
which reads as under:
“Provided further that an application for a review of an order passed in terms of the
provisions of section 14A, shall be disposed of in the manner provided for in the procedure
laid down under clause (ia) of sub-section (2) of Section 18.”
7.12.2 The Committee adopts the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 14
7.13 Clause 14 seeks to amend section 17 of the principal Act. The existing section deals with
offences and prescribes an imprisonment of six months or fine or both, whereas by this

10
amendment the imprisonment is sought to be enhanced upto five years and the fine upto fifty
thousand rupees.
7.13.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 15
7.14 Clause 15 seeks to amend section 18 of the principle Act which contains power of the
Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The proposed amendment
seeks to insert sub clauses (a) and (ia) in sub-section (2) of section 18.
7.14.1 As regards (ia), the Government later felt that the provision as expressed in the Bill was
not necessary as the details of the procedure to be followed in the compulsory registration of the
citizens of India would be provided in the rules to be framed for the purpose. Accordingly, sub-
clause (ia) has been redrafted by the Government as under:
“(ia) the procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India under
sub-section (2) of section 14A.”
7.14.2 The Committee adopts the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 16
7.15 Clause 16 seeks to omit the First Schedule to the principal Act which contains the list of
Commonwealth countries.
7.15.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 17
7.16 Clause 17 seeks to substitute the Second Schedule to the principal Act, which prescribes
the oath of allegiance as a citizen of India with a new Schedule which contains an oath of
allegiance to the Constitution for the overseas citizens of India also.
7.16.1 The Committee recommends that the Second Schedule to the Act insofar as it
pertains to oath of allegiance by overseas citizens of India may be amended in the light of
its observations in paras 7.6.2 and 7.6.4 of the Report.
7.16.2 Subject to above, the Committee adopts the clause.
Clause 18
7.17 Clause 18 seeks to amend the Third Schedule to the principal Act which prescribes
qualifications for naturalisation of a person who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First
Schedule.
7.17.1 The Committee adopts the clause without any change.
Clause 19
7.18 Clause 19 seeks to insert Fourth Schedule in the principal Act which enlists the countries
for granting overseas citizenship to the people of Indian origin living there.
7.18.1 Subject to the observations/recommendations made in para 7.1.1 of the Report, the
Committee adopts the clause.

11
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
7.19 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill are adopted without any change.
8. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in the light of its observations/
recommendations.

MINUTES

XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 25 June, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
6. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Swadesh Chakroborty
8. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
12. Shri Subodh Roy
13. Shri Anadi Sahu
14. Shri P. A. Sangma
15. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
16. Shri Manabendra Shah
17. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
18. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
19. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
15

16
2. Shri R.K. Sharma, Special Secretary (FFR)
3. Shri Pravin Srivastava, Joint Secretary (F)
4. Shri K.S. Ramasubban, Joint Secretary (BM)
5. Shri J.K. Banthia, RGI
6. Shri Sanjiv Datta, Director
7. Shri A. Dharma Reddy, Deputy Secretary
8. Shri Vivek Wadekar, Deputy Secretary
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
1. Shri K.N. Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Ambastha, Deputy Legal Counsel
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Shri B.A. Agarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Shri R. Dayakar, Joint Secretary (NRI)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and his colleagues to make a
presentation on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill,  2003 which had been referred to the Committee
for its examination and report.
3. The Home Secretary thanked the Chairman and took permission for his Joint Secretary, to
make the presentation on the Bill.
4. The Joint Secretary (F) began his presentation by stating that it would be divided into four
stages, i.e. the first part would indicate the background; the second part would indicate the main
provisions of the Act as it existed; the third part would show the reasons for the proposed
amendments and the fourth part would show the amendments.
4.1 He explained that under the power of the Parliament bestowed by Article 11 of the
Constitution, the Citizenship Act was legislated in 1955 and it dealt with acquisition, determination
and termination of Indian Citizenship. There were four ways by which a person could acquire
Indian Citizenship, i.e. birth, descent, registration and naturalisation. Section 3 provided for
citizenship by birth, Section 4 governed citizenship by descent, Section 5 provided for citizenship
by registration, Section 6 provided for citizenship by naturalisation and Section 9(1) provided for
termination of citizenship.
4.2 He also mentioned that before 31st March, 1986, powers were delegated to the collectors
to grant citizenship to persons but after 1st April, 1986 citizenship could only be granted by the
Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.3 He also explained that the proposal for amending the Citizenship Act, 1955 was based on
an internal review undertaken by the Ministry itself.
4.4 He said that Government had set up a High Level Committee of Indian Diaspora under the
Chairmanship of Dr. L.M. Singhvi. That Committee made many recommendations, amongst which
one was pertaining to the grant of dual citizenship. On that basis the Government decided to grant
dual citizenship in a limited form with limited rights and to specific countries by making suitable
amendments in the Citizenship Act. He also made a reference to the scheme of issuance of
multipurpose identity cards taken by the Government and stated that provisions were made under

17
the Citizenship Act for National Citizenship Identity cards. He then dwelt upon the provisions of
the Bill in detail such as clause 4 which provided for the cessation of Indian Citizenship on minor
citizens on their attaining of full age. If a person acquired the citizenship of a foreign country, he
would automatically cease to be citizen of India. However, he mentioned of an amendment in
the Bill to give six months time to such minor citizens after attaining full age. Similarly about
clause 9 he stated that if a person was holding the citizenship of any other country or if he
voluntarily acquired it, and he also applied for registration as an overseas citizen of India, the
provision as contained would allow him to retain both the citizenship. Which was proposed to be
omitted.
4.5 The Joint Secretary in the Ministry further mentioned about clause 14(a) pertaining to the
issuance of National Identity Cards. He said that it was basically related to the procedure and
corresponding changes would be made in clause 1(a) of sub-sec. (2) of Section 18. The Home
Secretary clarified that by amending the clause, Government wanted to do away with the
requirement of application by the candidate and make it automatic to issue a card to such persons.
5. The Chairman thanked the officers for their presentation and raised some queries namely,
the need for making acquisition of citizenship more stringent; criteria on whose basis countries had
been chosen to be included in the Fourth Schedule; rationality for enhancing the penalty etc. He
then left the floor for other Members.
5.1 Members, inter alia raised queries such; problems arising out of granting of Indian
citizenship by registration and by marriage; grant of limited rights to overseas Indians who would
not be eligible for exercising franchise; embargo on their induction into civil services, appointment
to constitutional posts etc. and wanted to know its rationale; the countries which have given
representation to overseas citizens in their Parliaments, figures of persons of Indian origin who had
acquired Indian citizenship and their countrywise break up; issue of identity cards in a time bound
programme; determining of certain standards for Indian citizenship.
5.2 A Member questioned the basis of clause 14A, which required every Indian to apply for
registration of his name; reason for exclusion of Malaysia, Singapore, Gulf countries, Sri Lanka
Indonesia etc. from the list. Another Member specifically observed that the Treaty of Seychelles
should not be disturbed regarding the French nationality to people living in Pondicherry.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.38 
P.M.

18
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 15 July, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
6. Shri Drupad Borgohain
7. Shri Pramod Mahajan
8. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Adhi Sankar
10. Begum Noor Bano
11. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
12. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
15. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
16. Shri P.H. Pandian
17. Shri Subodh Roy
18. Shri P.A. Sangma
19. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
20. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
21. Shri Manabendra Shah
22. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
23. Shri Ramjilal Suman
24. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
25. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
26. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
27. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
18

19
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Dr. L.M. Singhvi, MP, Rajya Sabha
II. Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
Shri Devdas Chhotray, AS(J)
Shri D.D. Gupta, JS (J-1)
Shri Kuldip Gurtu, Director
Shri S. Twickly, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee as well as Dr. L.M.
Singhvi, M.P. (R.S.) to the meeting of the Committee. Chairman explained to the Members that
Dr. L.M. Singhvi headed the Committee on Indian Diaspora, which recommended amendment in the
Citizenship Act. He also welcomed Shri Pramod Mahajan who had promised to attend the meetings
inspite of his preoccupation at the political level.
2.1 The Chairman raised two issues for Dr. Singhvi to respond: whether the implication of
citizenship without the voting rights would have any legal infirmity and what would be the
consequences of extending the voting rights to them.
3. Dr. L.M. Singhvi thanked the Chairman for giving him an opportunity to assist the
Committee on the subject. He said that the matter of dual citizenship to be granted in a particular
way on particular conditions was a part of the recommendations by the Committee on Indian
Diaspora. He informed the Committee that it was during British colonial period, many people of
Indian origin left the country for livelihood.
3.1 He gave credit to the Prime Minister for his generous response in building relation with
Indian Diaspora. He stated that Shrimati Indira Gandhi and Shri Rajiv Gandhi had strongly
supported the idea of building strong bridges with the people of Indian origin. He gave the home
“setubandhan” to building stronger bridges with the people of Indian origin. He mentioned that
many countries accepted the concept of dual citizenship without obliterating the identity of the
people and further added that many countries where people of Indian origin lived did not want dual
citizenship; especially South Africans were interested only in stronger cultural contacts. He
mentioned that the whole idea of dual citizenship had been worked out within the framework of
the Constitution. He pointed out that nationality was the principal link between individuals and the
benefits of the laws of nation. He also made a reference to the convention developed during the
League of Nations rejecting the concept of citizenship while discussing the constitutional prohibition
to the enactment of any law which could provide for dual nationality. He states that Article 9
empowered the Parliament to enact a comprehensive legislation on citizenship. He further elaborated
that any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration or otherwise voluntarily acquired or had
at any time between the 26th Day of January 1950 and the commencement of the Act, 1955
voluntarily acquired the citizenship of another country shall, upon such acquisition or as the case

20
may be, such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India. A number of Commonwealth countries
were mentioned as possible sources for conferment of dual citizenship. He mentioned that France
had dual nationality and that the demand had come from Finland and Portugal.
3.2 He mentioned about the two islands Reunio and Guadalupe which were French territories.
There, the people of Indian origin sustained the economy and made the islands prosperous. They
did not want dual nationality but wanted the cultural relations because they reclaimed their
language, culture, dance and other things. He also explained that many immigrants wanted dual
nationality. They were first or second-generation immigrants therefore they wanted strong links
with India, the Indian culture and the Indian heritage.
3.3 Further he mentioned the various patterns of dual nationality in America and problems were
faced by the British with regard to the renunciation of their citizenship when somebody became
an American citizen. Several provisions were made thereafter which worked effectively. He then
dwelt upon the scheme of PIO Cards introduced earlier which gave many of the benefits that
would come from dual citizenship. About the Bill, he stated that it would be a kind of psychological
incentive for people to relate, to make investments, to make technology transfers and such things
and mentioned that these should be implemented in tandem with other recommendations of the
Committee on Indian Diaspora. He further mentioned about the experiences of other diasporas like
British, Chinese, etc. and referred to few lines of a book written by Sterling Seagrave describing
the contribution Chinese diaspora in the transformation of China.
3.4 In conclusion, Dr. Singhvi he stated that the present Bill should be seen in the light of the
principle being that it ought to be granted where there was a certain reciprocity of acceptance of
the idea of dual nationality or a stronger linkage. He also mentioned that he was not in favour of
overseas Indian having voting rights in India or being allowed to hold high constitutional offices
and expressed that the less they were embroiled in the politics of the country the better it was for
them as well as the country.
4. The Chairman thanked Dr. Singhvi for his lucid presentation on the subject.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. The Chairman, then, gave a brief overview of the practice and procedure followed for
appointment of judges and invited the Home Secretary and his colleagues for a presentation on the
Constitution (Ninety-eighth Amendment) Bill, 2003 relating to the setting up of a National Judicial
Commission.
6. The Home Secretary the judgement of the Supreme Court of 1993 dealing with appointment
of judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts, Chief Justices of High Courts and transfer of the
Judges and Chief Justices from one High Court to another. He stated that prior to 1993, the process
of appointment of judges of High Courts and the Supreme Court was required to be initiated by the
Executive i.e. Ministry of Law (Department of Justice). However after the Advocates on record v.
The Union of India judgement of the Supreme Court, the situation had completely changed.
7. He mentioned that India was the only country where judges appoint judges and the judiciary
excluded the executive from the process of appointment which needed to be reversed.
7.1 He stated that the Government decided to introduce the concept of National Judicial
Commission to deal with all aspects of the judiciary which include appointments, transfers, conduct
and any deviant behaviour which may call for action.
7.2 Dwelling upon the provisions of the Bill, he stated that, Article 124 of the Constitution was
being amended to provide for a National Judicial Commission. Article 147 (A) provided for the

21
constitution of a National Judicial Commission consisting of the Chief Justice of India as the
Chairperson, two other judges of the Supreme Court, the Union Minister in-charge of Law and
Justice and eminent citizen nominated by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister.
7.3 He explained about clause 4 relating to the duties of the Commission and that according to
clause 5 the recommendation made by the commission would be binding.
8. The Chairman then thanked the Home Secretary and raised some queries.
8.1 Members raised queries, inter alia , w.r.t. the procedures to be followed by the Commission,
ways to deal with judicial corruption, code of ethics, provision regarding complaints against
judiciary and the procedure thereof.
8.2 A Member questioned the rationality of the Law Minister being a member of the National
Judicial Commission chaired by the Chief Justice. He suggested for the President or the Vice-
President as the head of the Commission. Members also made general observation on the aspect
of judicial activism. Most of the Members felt that the introduction of National Judicial Commission
would not help in any way to check the judicial corruption and streamline the judicial appointments.
They felt that the Constitutional provisions as it existed before the 1993 judgement should be
reinstated.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The Committee, then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.

22
XXX
THIRTIEH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 15 October, 2003 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
LOK SABHA
6. Begum Noor Bano
7. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
8. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
9. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
10. Shri Subodh Roy
11. Shri Anadi Sahu
12. Shri P.A. Sangma
13. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
14. Shri Manabendra Shah
15. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
16. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
17. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
18. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Bill, 2003
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
2. Shri K.S. Rama Subhum, Joint Secretary (BM)
22

23
3. Shri A.K. Jain, Joint Secretary (HR)
4. Shri A.K. Goyal, Director (NE)
5. Shri Jag Ram, Deputy Secretary (NI)
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri B.A. Agrawal, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
The Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003
WITNESSES
Representatives of Assam Pradesh Congress Committee
1. Shir Pawan Singh Ghatowar, M.P. and President
2. Shrimati Syeda Anwara Taimur, Vice President
3. Shri Santosh Mohan Deb, M.P.
4. Shri Nurzamal Sarkar, Minister, Government of Assam
5. Shri Nazrul Islam, Minister , Government of Assam
6. Shri Ardhendu Kumar Dey, Minister, Government of Assam
Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri A.K. Goyal, Director
The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A. Dharma Reddy, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Narendra Verma, Under Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary and his colleagues to the meeting of the
Committee and requested him to make a presentation on the Constitution (One hundredth
Amendment) Bill, 2003. He made reference to the appointment of a Committee headed by Shri Sita
Kant Mohapatra to examine the demand for inclusion of thirty-eight languages in the Eighth
Schedule. He wanted to know as to when the Committee’s recommendations would be available.
Before asking the Home Secretary to take the floor, the Chairman welcomed the new Secretary of
the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.
3. The Home Secretary thanked the Chairman for giving him the opportunity to make a
presentation on the Bill. He stated that the proposal for inclusion of Bodo language in the Eighth
Schedule was brought up as a part of an understanding arrived at with the Bodo Liberation Tigers.
He referred to thirty-eight languages pending for inclusion in the Eighth Schedule as well as the
names of Members of the Committee headed by Shri Sita Kant Mohapatra to look into the matter.
He mentioned the terms of reference of the Committee viz. to evolve a set of objective criteria and
consider the feasibility for inclusion of more languages and to study the feasibility of treating all
eighteen languages included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution as official languages.

24
3.1 The Home Secretary referred to Articles 343, 344 and 351 of the Constitution of India and
the aspect of improving and strengthening the use of Hindi as the official language of the Union
with the help of other seventeen languages in the Eighth Schedule. He then mentioned the change
in the concept after the adoption of the Official Language Resolution, 1968 by the Parliament which
talked about permitting all the languages included in the Eighth Schedule as alternative media for
the All India and Higher Central Services Examination. Besides, the demand was also for inclusion
of these languages on the currency notes printed by the Reserve Bank of India. He stated that the
demand for inclusion of these languages in the Civil Services Examination was very difficult to be
implemented as was conveyed by the Union Public Service Commission.
4. The Chairman expressed the view that the main concern was that the development of Hindi
should not be affected. Language itself should not be allowed to be a divisive force in the country.
On a question by a Member as to why inclusion of Bodo language was being supported, the
Chairman gave two reasons for that, viz. Bodo was ‘a language spoken by a large number of
people in Assam and that it was a part of the Memorandum of Settlement signed by the
Government with the Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT).
4.1 Some Members observed that inclusion of more languages in the Eighth Schedule would be
a discouraging factor in Hindi becoming a language of UN and felt that the Mohapatra Committee
should be apprised of the views of the Committee on Home Affairs in this regard.
5. The Chairman then proposed the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and the
Committee adopted the clauses unanimously without any amendment.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Assam Pradesh Congress Committee
(APCC) to express their views on the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003.
7. The President, APCC expressed the views of the APCC agai nst the repeal of the Illegal
Migrants Determination by Tribunal Act, 1983. He stated that an objective study of the Act and
an impartial assessment of the ground realities prevailing in Assam would prove that none of the
grounds mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Illegal Migrants Laws
(Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2003 were valid. He briefly recollected the situation in which the
IMDT Act, 1983 was enacted and stated that the basic purpose of the Act was to provide for
establishment of Tribunals for determination of a person as an illegal migrant in a fair manner to
enable the Government to expel him. He gave data showing how effectively the Act had worked.
He apprehended that if the IMDT Act was repealed there would be a large-scale deportation of
genuine Indian citizens. Hence, there was no basis for its repeal.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Chairman then placed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 for discussion before the
Committee. He mentioned the four important ingredients of the Bill. viz. the acquisition of
citizenship would become more difficult; solving the issue of refugees in the light of the
commitment made in 1947 after the partition; the dual citizenship in respect of certain non-resident
Indians belonging to certain countries; the issue of National Registers of Citizen and the
identification cards to be issued to the citizens.
8.1 The Chairman stated that initially there were eight countries in the list for granting dual
citizenship to which eight more countries were added by the Government due to the efforts of the
Chairman, Committee on Indian Diaspora. He, thereafter, invited the Members to make observations
on the various provisions of the Bill.

25
8.2 Members expressing their views on various provisions of the Bill supported the move to
have a National Register of Citizens and Identity Cards. Some of the Members recalled the
circumstances which prevailed after the partition of India in 1947 and the subsequent problem of
refugees. They were of the view that the Government should have a sympathetic approach towards
them by giving them at least a ration card for food, etc. Some Members, however, were of the
view that it was not feasible considering the socio-economic conditions of the country.
8.3 A Member emphasized on the time-bound completion of registration of every birth, death
and marriage.
8.4 While concluding the discussion on the Bill, the Chairman summed up the observations of
the Members and stated that the commitment made at the time of partition could not be an
unending commitment and felt that at the most the persons migrating after the cut-off date of
24 March, 1971 could be given humanitarian assistance. Simultaneously, diplomatic pressure should
be put on the country to which they belonged so that these people could go back to their countries
of origin.
9. The Chairman announced the next round of meetings of the Committee starting from
28 October, 2003 to discuss the Bills pending consideration of the Committee.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 1.06 
P.M.

26
XXXIII
THIRTY-THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, 29 October, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anadi Sahu — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Motilal V ora
3. Shri B.P. Singhal
4. Dr. V . Maitreyan
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Pramod Mahajan
7. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
8. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Adhi Sankar
10. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
11. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
12. Shri M.O.H. Farook
13. Shri Rajen Gohain
14. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
15. Shri P.H. Pandian
16. Shri Subodh Roy
17. Shri P.A. Sangma
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
19. Shri Manabendra Shah
20. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
21. Shri Ramjilal Suman
22. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
23. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
26

27
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
Shri Pravin Srivastava, Joint Secretary
Shri J.K. Banthia, RGI
Shri A. Dharma Reddy, Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVE OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
REPRESENTATIVE OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Shri R. Dayaker, Joint Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the chose Shri Anadi Sahu to preside over the meeting.
The Committee took up further discussion on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
3. Members raised several substantive points such as whether the property rights available to
the French nationals living in Pondicherry according to Treaty of Seychelles would be affected by
the proposed legislation; how an undivided oath of allegiance for two countries can be ensured;
absence of consistent criteria for inclusion of countries in the Fourth Schedule and the necessity
to evolve some criteria for the purpose etc. Referring to clause 2(gg), Members suggested that the
definition of ‘specified country’ may include the countries that may be notified by the Government
from time to time in addition to countries mentioned in Fourth Schedule to the Bill.
4. The Home Secretary replied to some of the points. However, the Members were not
satisfied and desired comprehensive and complete response of the Government to the points raised
by them.
5. Thereafter, the Chair postponed the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill to the next
round of the meetings of the Committee and directed the Ministry to send detailed replies to the
points raised by the Members within seven days.
6. The Committee adjourned at 12.35 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30 October, 2003.

28
XXXVIII
THIRTY EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, 2 December, 2003 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
8. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Rajen Gohain
10. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
11. Shri P.H. Pandian
12. Shri Anadi Sahu
13. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
14. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
15. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
16. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
2. Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary
28

29
3. Shri K.S. Ramasubban, Joint Secretary
4. Shri J.K. Banthia, RGI
5. Shri K.M. Bali, Director
6. Shri A. Dharma Reddy, Deputy Secretary
7. Shri Sanjeev Dutta, Additional Director General, Doordarshan (Special invitee on behalf of
Ministry of Home Affairs)
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
1. Shri R. Dayaker, Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.A. Roy, Joint Secretary (CPV)
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri R.L. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri B.A. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and recalled the proposed
Government amendments in the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003. He then dwelt upon in detail
about the issue of refugees. He felt that the Government should take into account the prevailing
extraordinary circumstances in which the persons were compelled to leave the country of their
origin.
2.1 He then welcomed the Home Secretary along with his colleagues to the meeting of the
Committee to consider clause-by-clause the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003. Recapitulating the
points raised in the earlier meetings, the Chairman pointed out two issues, viz. one relating to the
Fourth Schedule to the Bill and the other regarding concept of oath of allegiance. Referring to the
first issue, he stated that eight countries were initially included in the Fourth Schedule to the Bill
and eight additional countries were added later on. He further stated that an overwhelming view
in the Committee was that the Government should be empowered to include or remove countries
by notification. Referring to the second issue, which was raised by Dr. Singhvi, he stated that the
allegiance could not be divided hence he wanted to know from the Home Secretary whether it
would not nullify the facilities which the legislation wanted to give and that whether the concept
altogether could be deleted from the present legislation.
2.2 Referring to the large number of representations received by the Committee from different
organisations insisting that the refugees from erstwhile East Pakistan should be extended the
citizenship rights, the Chairman stated that the Government had agreed to extend citizenship to
those who came to India before 25th March, 1971 as per the Assam Accord. He enquired
from the Home Secretary, how the Government could determine the refugee status and their
eligibility to citizenship without making any legal provision because certain persons might be
compelled to leave their country not only because of civil commotion but also because of religious
persecution.
3. The Home Secretary, replying to the issues raised by the Members, stated that there should
be no serious objection to the suggestion that the names of some countries be put in a schedule

30
as provided in the original Bill. On the issue of oath of allegiance, he replied that since it was not
likely to provide any disincentive to anybody seeking dual citizenship, it need not be insisted upon
and proposed to have a new oath which did not insist upon any such commitment. On the issue
of refugees, he assured the Committee that nobody from India would be sent back forcibly unless
certain conditions were fulfilled.
4. The Chairman then directed the Ministry of Home Affairs to finalise the amendments
regarding clause 2(gg) and oath of allegiance in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice.
5. A Member proposed that the provision should be either for a schedule and further executive
notification for other countries or for a power to the Government for issuing executive notification
for inclusion of countries. Another Member was of the view that to begin with, there must be a
schedule containing some countries.
6. The Chairman, thereafter, placed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003 before the
Committee for clause-by-clause consideration.
Clause 2
6.1 Clause 2 seeks to amend Section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 to substitute the existing
clauses (b), (c) and the proviso to clause (c) by new clause (b)  to define the term ‘illegal migrant’,
insert new clauses (ee) defining ‘overseas citizen of India’ and (gg) define ‘specified country’.
6.1.1 Clause 2 (iii) (gg) defines “specified country” as a country specified in the Fourth Schedule
for the purpose of grant of dual citizenship to persons of Indian origin residing in those countries.
In the first instance Government included eight countries, namely, Australia, Canada, Finland,
Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States of America in the Fourth
Schedule. Subsequently, at the instance of the Committee and the Ministry of External Affairs, the
Ministry of Home Affairs agreed to include eight more countries in the Fourth Schedule, namely,
Switzerland, Greece, Israel, Sweden, France, Cyprus, Portugal and New Zealand. While endorsing
the inclusion of sixteen countries identified by the Government in the Fourth Schedule, the
Committee is of the view that a proviso may be added to the definition of “specified country”
providing that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the said
Schedule by way of addition or omission in future. A second proviso may also be added making
it mandatory to lay before both Houses of Parliament such a notification. Accordingly, the
Committee recommends that clause 2 (iii) (gg) should be suitably amended.
6.1.2 Similarly, as a consequence to the amendment proposed by the Government in clause 9 of
the Bill, whereby it has proposed to delete the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 9 of
the principal Act, the definition of ‘overseas citizen of India’ in clause 2 (ii) (ee) also needed to
be amended as follows:
“(ee) overseas citizen of India” means a person of Indian origin being a citizen of a specified
country, or who was a citizen of India immediately before being a citizen of a specified country
and who is registered as an overseas citizen of India by the Central Government under sub-section
(1) of Section 7A” .
6.1.3 Subject to above, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 3
6.2 Clause 3 seeks to substitute section 3 of the principal Act by a new section providing for
acquisition of citizenship by birth.

31
6.2.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 4
6.3 Clause 4 seeks to amend section 4 of the principal Act thereby substituting sub-section (1)
dealing with citizenship by descent with a new sub-section which provides for the mandatory
registration of the birth of children born to Indian citizens outside India at an Indian Consulate. It
also makes for a declaration by parents at the time of applying for registration of birth that the
minor does not hold the passport of any other country and giving a minor, who claims Indian
citizenship by descent, six months time to apply for overseas citizenship of India after attaining full
age.
6.3.1 The Government brought an amendment in sub-Section (lA) of Section 4 to allow a minor
citizen of India by descent, who was also a citizen of another country, six months time to
renounce the citizenship of the other country failing which he would cease to be a citizen of India
by descent. The sub-section as proposed to be amended read as under:
“(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section and is also a citizen of any other
country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or nationality
of another country within six months of attaining full age”.
6.3.2 The Committee wondered as to how the Government would enforce the renunciation of
citizenship by a minor on his attaining the full age. The Home Secretary clarified that it would be
automatic after the expiry of six months from the day a minor attained full age.
6.3.3 The Committee adopted the clause with the amendment as proposed by the Government.
Clause 5
6.4 Clause 5 seeks to amend section 5 of the principal Act to substitute a new sub-section in
place of the existing sub-section (1) and to insert a new sub-section (6) in the Act. This section
provides for citizenship by registration.
6.4.1 A point was raised as to whether it was possible to treat the persons who had migrated
to India from their neighbouring countries due to religious and political persecution on a different
footing. In that context it was suggested that a reference to the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964
may be included in sub-section (1) in relation to the cases of the victims of religious and political
persecution in our neighbouring countries.
6.4.2 The Home Secretary clarified that the issue before the Committee was the Citizenship
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and under what circumstances citizenship could be conferred on certain
categories of persons. He further clarified that an illegal migrant had to be dealt with under the
Foreigners Act whose provisions enabled him to get certain facilities. Thereafter, he came within
the ambit of Section 5 of the citizenship Act. Therefore, the objectives of those two Acts were
quite different and one need not be brought into the focus of the other.
6.4.2.1 It was also clarified that the power of the Central Government in sub-section (1) to impose
conditions and restrictions for registering a person as a citizen of India provided it with a fairly
large scope indicating a principled approach to the problem of victims of persecution and others
who forced themselves into this country.
6.4.3 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.

32
Clause 6
6.5 Clause 6 seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act which provides for citizenship by
naturalisation. The amendment is consequential to the deletion of First Schedule to the principal Act.
6.5.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 7
6.6 Clause 7 seeks to insert new sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D in the principal Act providing
for registration of a person as an overseas citizen of India, conferment of rights on overseas
citizens of India, renunciation of overseas citizenship and cancellation of registration as overseas
citizen of India, respectively.
6.6.1 The Government felt that the proviso to new Section 7A(1)(C) as reflected in the Bill was
not required. The intention of the Government was to maintain the basic provision for automatic
cessation of Indian citizenship in the event of a citizen of full age taking the citizenship of another
country. Hence, there was no need for stipulating any time period as enumerated in the aforesaid
proviso. Accordingly, the Government proposed its deletion.
6.6.2 The Committee during its deliberations felt that the oath of allegiance for an overseas citizen
of India, as provided in the Second Schedule and referred to in sub-clause (2) of new Section 7A
would mean taking away the right given to them by granting overseas citizenship as the allegiance
to the Constitution could not be divided and it would create problem with their primary citizenship.
The Committee felt that by affirming/swearing allegiance to Indian Constitution the overseas
citizens might not be able to bear allegiance to the constitution of the country whose citizenship
they acquired and were staying there for most part of the year. A reference was also made to sub-
section (b) of new section 7D which provided for cancellation of registration as an overseas citizen
of India if a person showed disloyalty or disaffection towards the constitution.
6.6.3 In the light of the observations of the Committee, the Government agreed to come out with
an amended oath in the Second Schedule. The Government also agreed to make consequential
changes in sections 7A (2) and 7D (b).
6.6.4 In view of the above, the Committee impressed upon the Government that it should, while
reformulating the oath in the Second Schedule, fully address the concern of the Committee as
expressed in para 6.6.2.
6.6.5 Subject to above, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 8
6.7 Clause 8 seeks to amend section 8 of the principal Act to make some consequential
amendments required in the Act. Section 8 of the Act deals with renunciation of citizenship.
6.7.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 9
6.8 Clause 9 seeks to amend Section 9 of the principal Act which provides for termination of
citizenship. The clause seeks to insert a proviso after proviso in sub-section (1). The proviso
permits a citizen of India, who takes the citizenship of another country, to continue as an Indian
citizen until his application for registration as an overseas citizen of India is disposed of by the
Central Government. It also seeks to substitute the term “Citizen of India” instead of the word
“Person” in sub-section (2).
6.8.1 However, the Government felt that no change was required in the current provision in the
Act, according to which if a person took the citizenship of some other country, he automatically

33
ceased to be an Indian citizen. Hence, it proposed the deletion of second proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 9 from the Bill.
6.8.2 The Committee adopted the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 10
6.9 Clause 10 seeks to delete sections 11 and 12 of the principal Act which deal with
Commonwealth citizenship.
6.9.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 11
6.10 Clause 11 seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act which deals with disposal of
application under sections 5 and 6. These two sections deal with citizenship by registration and
naturalisation, respectively. The amendment proposes to add reference to new section 7A in addition
to existing references to sections 5 and 6. The new section 7A provides for registration of overseas
citizens.
6.10.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 12
6.11 Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 14A in the principal Act to provide for compulsory
registration of every citizen of India and issuing of national identity cards.
6.11.1 The proposed provision made it mandatory for a person to make an application for the
issue of a national identity card. The Government, however, later on realised that the provision
as contained in the Bill did not reflect clearly its intention of enumeration and the automatic
grant of a national identity card. Hence, there was no need for a person to make an
application for the purpose. An application was required only in cases of dispute. Accordingly, the
Government proposed a change in sub-section (2) of the proposed section 14A which read as
under:
“The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India shall be such as
may be prescribed.”
6.11.2 The Committee adopted the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 13
6.12 Clause 13 seeks to insert a new section 15A in the principal Act to make a provision for
review of an order made by the Government.
6.12.1 However, in the context of preparing national register of citizens and issuing national identity
cards, the Government felt that the provisions as proposed in the present Bill were not sufficient.
Hence, it proposed to insert a second proviso in sub-section (1) of proposed new section 15A
which read as under:
Provided further that an application for a review of an order passed in terms of the provisions
of section 14A, shall be disposed of in the manner provided for in the procedure laid down under
clause (ia) of sub-section (2) of Section 18.”
6.12.2 The Committee adopted the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.

34
Clause 14
7.13 Clause 14 seeks to amend section 17 of the principal Act. The existing section deals with
offences and prescribes an imprisonment of six months or fine or both, whereas by this
amendment the imprisonment is sought to be enhanced upto five years and the fine upto fifty
thousand rupees.
6.13.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 15
6.14 Clause 15 seeks to amend section 18 of the principal Act, which contains power of the
Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act The proposed amendment
seeks to insert sub clauses (aa) and (ia) in sub-section (2) of section 18.
6.14.1 As reg ards sub-clause (ia), the Government felt that the provision as included in the Bill
was not necessary as the details of the procedure to be followed in the compulsory registration
of the citizens of India would be provided in the rules to be framed for the purpose. Accordingly,
sub-clause (ia) was redrafted by the Government as under:
“(ia) the procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India under sub-
section (2) of section 14A.”
6.14.2 The Committee adopted the clause with the amendment proposed by the Government.
Clause 16
6.15 Clause 16 seeks to omit the First Schedule to the principal Act which contains the list of
Commonwealth countries.
6.15.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 17
6.16 Clause 17 seeks to substitute the Second Schedule to the principal Act, which prescribes
the oath of allegiance as a citizen of India with a new Schedule which contains an oath of
allegiance to the Constitution for the overseas citizens of India also.
6.16.1 The Committee recommended that the Second Schedule to the Act insofar as it pertained
to oath of allegiance by overseas citizens of India should be amended in the light of its
observations.
6.16.2 Subject to above, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 18
6.17 Clause 18 seeks to amend the Third Schedule to the principal Act which prescribes
qualifications for naturalisation of a person who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First
Schedule.
6.17.1 The Committee adopted the clause without any change.
Clause 19
6.18 Clause 19 seeks to insert Fourth Schedule in the principal Act which enlists the countries
for granting overseas citizenship to the people of Indian origin living there.

35
6.18.1 Subject to its observations/recommendations made earlier, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
6.19 Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title of the Bill were adopted without any change.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings, was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.

36
XIL
THIRTY NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, 10 December, 2003 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
8. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Rajen Gohain
10. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
11. Shri P.H. Pandian
12. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
13. Shri Subodh Roy
14. Shri Anadi Sahu
15. Shri Manabendra Shah
16. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The Committee
then took up for consideration the draft One hundred and Seventh Report on the Citizenship
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
2.1 The Chairman recalled the clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill undertaken by the
Committee on 2 December, 2003 and stated while endorsing various amendments proposed by the
Government vis-a-vis various provisions of the Bill that the views of the Members had been
incorporated. He then invited the Members to make suggestions/amendments, if any, in the draft
Report.
36

37
3. A Member, who was also the Chairman of the Committee on Indian Diaspora, suggested
some corrections in the Report regarding his evidence tendered before the Committee on the Bill.
3.1 Some members suggested deletion of a sentence from para 7.4.1.
3.2 A Member suggested that the Fourth Schedule and the 16 countries already included by the
Government therein should be retained while conferring the Government with the power to make
addition or omission in the Schedule in future.
4. The Committee adopted the Report subject to the amendments proposed by the Members
present.
5. Thereafter, the Committee authorised its Chairman and his absence Dr. L.M. Singhvi and
in his absence Shri A. Vijayaraghavan to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Prakash
Mani Tripathi and in his absence Shri P.H. Pandian to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha on
12 December, 2003.
6. The Chairman informed the Members of the next meeting of the Committee would be held
on 17 December, 2003 to take up the consideration and adoption of draft Report on the Assam
Rifles Bill, 2003.
7. Some Members requested for disposal of the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and
Amending) Bill, 2003 either before the winter session of the Parliament was over or before the
expiry of the term of the Committee. They expressed the apprehension that if the Bill in question
was not disposed of before the expiry of the term of the Committee, the whole exercise of
consideration of the Bill may have to be initiated de novo by the reconstituted Committee.
7.1 Replying to the demand for early disposal of the Illegal Migrants Laws (Repealing and
Amending) Bill, 2003, the Chairman stated that since the in-house discussion on the Bill was yet
to be undertaken by the Committee, it would not be possible to dispose it of as very little time
was left both before the winter session was over as well as the expiry of the term of the
Committee.
7.2 As regards the apprehension expressed by some of the Members, the Chairman clarified that
the work done by the Committee on the said Bill would remain valued even after the expiry of the
term of the Committee and therefore the reconstituted Committee need not start the whole process
de novo.
8. The Committee adjourned at 3.50 
P.M.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
9 MAY , 2003
Bill No. XXXIX of 2003
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2003.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the commencement of that provision.
2. In section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section ( 1),—
41
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
57 of 1955.

42
(i) for clauses ( b) and ( c) and the proviso to
clause ( c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(b) “illegal migrant” means a foreigner who has
entered into India—
(i) without a valid passport or other travel
documents and such other document or authority
as may be prescribed by or under any law in
that behalf; or
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel
documents and such other document or authority
as may be prescribed by or under any law in
that behalf but remains therein, beyond the
permitted period of time;’;
(ii) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(ee ) “overseas citizen of India” means a
person of Indian origin being a citizen of a specified
country, or an Indian citizen, who is registered, as an
overseas citizen of India by the Central Government
under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A;’;
(iii) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(gg ) “specified country” means a country
specified in the Fourth Schedule;’.
3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“3. ( 1) Except as provided in sub-section ( 2), every
person born in India—
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950,
but before the 1st day of July, 1987;
(b) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but
before the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2003 and either of whose parents is
a citizen of India at the time of his birth;
(c) on or after the commencement of the
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003, where—
(i) both of his parents are citizens of India;
or
(ii ) one of whose parents.is a citizen
of India and the other is not an illegal migrant at
the time of his birth,
shall be a citizen of India by birth.
Substitution of
new section for
section 3.
Citizenship by
birth.

43
(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of
this section if at the time of his birth—
(a) either his father or mother possesses such
immunity from suits and, legal process as is accorded
to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to
the President of India and he or she, as the case may
be, is not a citizen of India; or
(b) his father or mother is an enemy alien and
the birth occurs in a place then under occupation by
the enemy.”.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1), the
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen
of India by descent,—
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950,
but before the 10th day of December, 1992, if his
father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or
(b) on or after the 10th day of December, 1992,
if either of his parents is a citizen of India at the time
of his birth:
Provided that if the father of a person referred
to in clause ( a) was a citizen of India by descent only,
that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of
this section unless—
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian
consulate within one year of its occurrence or
the commencement of this Act, whichever is
later, or, with the permission of the Central
Government, after the expiry of the said period;
or
(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in
service under a Government in India:
Provided further that if either of the parents
of a person referred to in clause ( b) was a
citizen of India by descent only, that person shall
not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section,
unless—
(a) his birth is registered at an
Indian consulate within one year of
its occurrence or on or after the 10th day
of December, 1992, whichever is later,
or, with the permission of the Central
Government, after the expiry of the said
period; or
Amendment of
section 4.

44
(b) either of his parents is, at the
time of his birth, in service under a
Government in India:
Provided also that on or after
the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2003, a person shall not
be a citizen of India by virtue of this
section, unless his birth is registered at an
Indian consulate in such form and in such
manner, as may be prescribed,—
(i) within, one year of its
occurrence or the commencement
of the Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2003, whichever is later; or
(ii) with the permission of
the Central Government, after the
expiry of the said period:
Provided also that no such
birth shall be registered unless the
parents of such person declare, in
such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed, that the minor
does not hold the passport of
another country.
(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this
section shall not cease to be a citizen of India if within six
months of attaining full age he makes an application for
registration as on overseas citizen of India under this Act and
until such application is disposed of by the Central Government.”.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 1), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and
such other conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed, the Central Government may, on application
made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India
and person not being an illegal migrant who is not
already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of
any other provision of this Act if he belongs to any of
the following categories, namely:—
(a) a person of Indian origin who is
ordinarily resident in India for seven years before
making an application for registration;
(b) a person of Indian origin who is
ordinarily resident in any country or place
outside undivided India;
Amendment of
section 5.

45
(c) a person who is married to a citizen of
India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven
years before making an application for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are
citizens of India;
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose
parents are registered as citizens of India under
Clause ( a) of this sub-section or sub-section ( 1)
of section 6;
(f) a person of full age and capacity who,
or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of
independent India, and has been residing in India
for one year immediately before making an
application for registration;
(g) a person of fun age and capacity who
has been registered as an overseas citizen of
India for five years, and who has been residing
in India for two years before making an
application for registration.
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of clauses ( a) and
(c), an applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in
India if—
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period
of twelve months immediately before making an
application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years
immediately preceding the said period of twelve months
for a period of not less than six years.
Explanation 2 .—For the purposes of this sub-section, a
person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either
of his parents, was born in undivided India or in such other
territory which became part of India after the 15th day of
August, 1947.”;
(b) after sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(6) If the Central Government is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary to grant
exemption from the residential requirement under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) to any person or a class
of persons, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, grant such exemption.”.
6. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the
words “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First
Schedule”, the words “not being an illegal migrant” shall be
substituted.
Amendment of
section 6.

46
7. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following heading
and sections shall be inserted, namely:—
‘OVERSEAS  C ITIZENSHIP
7A. ( 1) The Central Government may, subject to such
conditions and restrictions including the condition of reciprocity as
may be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register
any person as an overseas citizen of India if—
(a) that person is of Indian origin of full age and
capacity who is a citizen of a specified country; or
(b) that person is of full age and capacity who has
obtained the citizenship of a specified country on or after the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003
and who was a citizen of India immediately before and such
commencment; or
(c) that person is a minor of a person mentioned in
clause ( a) or clause ( b):
Provided that in case of a person mentioned in
clause ( b), such application shall be made within a period of
six months from the date on which he has obtained the
citizenship of a specified country.
(2) The person registered as an overseas citizen of India
under sub-section ( 1) shall on taking the oath of allegiance specified
in the Second Schedule be an overseas citizen of India as from the
date on which he is so registered.
(3) No person who has been deprived of his Indian citizenship
under this Act shall be registered as an overseas citizen of India
under sub-section ( 1) except by an order of the Central Government.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and sections
7B, 7C and 7D, the expression “person of Indian origin” shall mean
a citizen of another country who,—
(i) was eligible to become a citizen of India at the time
of the commencement of the Constitution;
(ii) belonged to a territory that became part of India
after the 15th day of August, 1947; and
(iii ) the children and grand-children of a person
covered under clauses ( i) and ( ii), but does not include a
person who is or had been at any time a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government
may, by, notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
7B. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, an overseas citizen of India shall be
entitled to such rights [other than the rights specified under sub-
section ( 2)] as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
Insertion of
heading and
new sections
7A, 7B, 7C
and 7D.
Registration of
overseas
citizens.
Conferment of
rights on
overseas
citizens of
India.

47
(2) An overseas citizen of India shall not be entitled to the
rights conferred on a citizen of India—
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to
equality of opportunity in matters of public employment;
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as
President;
(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election of
Vice-President;
(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for
appointment as a Judge of the High Court;
(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 in regard to registration as a voter;
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 with regard to the eligibility for being a
member of the House of the People or of the Council of
States, as the case may be;
(h) under sections 5, 5A and 6 of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 with regard to the eligibility for being a
member of the Legislative Assembly or a Legislative Council,
as the case may be, of a State;
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State
except for appointment in such services and posts as the
Central Government may by special order in that behalf specify.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be
laid before each House of Parliament.
7C. ( 1) If any overseas citizen of India of full age and
capacity makes in the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing
his overseas citizenship of India, the declaration shall be registered
by the Central Government, and; upon such registration, that person
shall cease to be an overseas citizen of India.
(2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas citizen of India
under sub-section ( 1), every minor child of that person registered as
an overseas citizen of India, shall thereupon cease to be an overseas
citizen of India,
7D. The Central Government may, by order, cancel the
registration granted under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A if it is
satisfied that—
(a) the registration as an overseas citizen of India
was obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the
concealment of any material fact; or
Renunciation of
overseas
citizenship.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1951.
Cancellation of
registration as
overseas citizen
of India.

48
(b) the overseas citizen of India has shown himself by
any act or speech to be disloyal or disaffected towards the
Constitution of India as by law established; or
(c) the overseas citizen of India has, during any war in
which India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or
communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or
associated with, any business or commercial activity that was
to his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an
enemy in that war; or
(d) the overseas citizen of India has, within five years
after registration under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A has
been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than
two years; or
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interest of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of India,
friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the
interests of the general public.’.
8. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the words “who is also a citizen
or national of another country” shall be omitted;
(b) in the proviso to sub-section ( 2), after the word
“declaration”, the words “in the prescribed form and manner”
shall be inserted;
(c) sub-section ( 3) shall be omitted.
9. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that after the commencement
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003, any
citizen of India who voluntarily acquires the citizenship
of a specified country shall not cease to be a citizen of
India; if within six months thereof he makes an
application for registration as an overseas citizen of
India under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A, until such
application is disposed of by the Central Government.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2) for the word “person”, the words
“citizen of India” shall be substituted.
10. Sections 11 and 12 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
11. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words and
figures “sections 5 and 6”, the words, figures and letter “sections
5, 6 and 7A” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
section 9.
Omission of
sections 11
and 12.
Amendment of
section 14.

49
12. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“14A. ( 1) The Central Government may compulsorily
register every citizen of India and issue national identity card
to him.
(2) The procedure to be followed in compulsory
registration of the citizens of India, the form and manner of
making application, the documents and other evidence by
which such application shall be accompanied and the fees
payable in respect of such application, the form of national
identity card and other details shall be such as may be
prescribed.”.
13. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“15A. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Central Government, may within thirty days from the date of
such order, make an application for review of such order:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain
application after the expiry of the said period of thirty days,
if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient
cause from making the application in time.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1),
the Central Government shall, make such order as it deems
fit, and the decision of the Central Government on such
review shall be final.”.
14. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “six months”, the words “five years”
shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “with fine”, the words “with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
15. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the form and manner in which a
declaration under sub-section ( 1) of section 4
shall be made;”;
(b) after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“( ia) the procedure to be followed in
compulsory enrolment of a citizen of India, the
form and manner for making applications, the
Insertion of
new section
14A.
Issue of
national identity
cards.
Insertion of
new section
15A.
Review.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 18.

50
documents and other evidence by which such
application shall be accompanied and the fees
payable in respect of such application, the form
of national citizenship identity card and other
details, under sub-section (2) of section 14A;”;
(ii) in sub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any rule made in respect of a
matter specified in clause ( ia) of sub-section ( 2) may
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.”.
16. The First Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.
17.  For the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the
following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:—
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 5( 2), 6( 2) and 7A( 2)]
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
I
I, A/B....................do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws of India and
fulfil my duties as a citizen of India.
I, A/B....................do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws of India and
fulfil my duties as an overseas citizen of India.”.
18. In the Third Schedule to the principal Act,—
(a) in the opening portion, the words “who is not a
citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule” shall be
omitted;
(b) in clause ( b), for the words “he has renounced the
citizenship of that country in accordance with the law therein
in force in that behalf and has notified such renunciation to
the Central Government”, the words “he undertakes to
renounce the citizenship of that country in the event of his
application for Indian citizenship being accepted” shall be
substituted;
(c) in clause (d),—
Omission of
First Schedule.
Substitution of
Second
Schedule by a
new Schedule.
Amendment of
Third
Schedule.

51
(i) for the words “twelve years”, the words
“fourteen years” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “nine years”, the words
“eleven years” shall be substituted;
(d) in the proviso, in clause ( ii), for the words “thirteen
years”, the words “fifteen years” shall be substituted.
19. After the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the
following Schedule shall be  inserted, namely:—
“THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 2( 1)(gg)]
1. Australia.
2. Canada.
3. Finland.
4. Ireland.
5. Italy.
6. Netherlands.
7. United Kingdom.
8. United States of America.”.
Insertion of
new Fourth
Schedule.

52
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Citizenship Act, 1955 which provides for the acquisition of citizenship,
after the commencement of the Constitution by birth, descent, registration,
naturalisation and in-corporation of territory under certain circumstances, and
also provides for the termination and deprivation of citizenship, was among those
109 Central Acts identified for a review by the Commission on Review of
Administrative Laws constituted by the Central Government under the
Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in 1998. Subsequently, the High Level Committee
on Indian Diaspora constituted by the Central Government, inter alia ,
recommended the amendment of this Act to provide for the grant of dual
citizenship to persons of Indian origin belonging to certain specified countries.
The Central Government has accordingly decided to make provisions for the
grant of dual citizenship and has taken the opportunity of introducing a scheme
for the compulsory registration of every citizen of India, and for this purpose
to issue national identity cards.
2. The above objects are proposed to be achieved, inter alia , by amending
provisions of the Citizenship Act so as to—
(i) make acquisition of Indian citizenship by registration and
naturalisation more stringent;
(ii) prevent illegal migrants from becoming eligible for Indian
citizenship;
(iii) simplify the procedure to facilitate the re-acquisition of Indian
citizenship by persons of full age who are children of Indian citizens, and
former citizens of independent India;
(iv) provide for the grant of overseas citizenship of India to persons
of Indian origin belonging to specified countries, and Indian citizens who
choose to acquire the citizenship of any of these countries at a later date;
(v) provide for the compulsory registration and issue of a national
identity card to all citizens of India;
(vi) enhance the penalty for violation of its provisions, as well as
the rules framed under it; and
(vii) to omit all provisions recognizing, or relating to the
Commonwealth citizenship from the Act.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; L.K. ADVANI.
The 7th May, 2003.
52

53
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Citizenship Act, 1955
(hereafter referred to as the Act) relating to citizenship by descent. The said
amendment, inter alia, empowers the Central Government to lay down, by rules,
the form and manner in which registration of birth at an .Indian consulate shall
be made and the form and manner of declaration by parents for registration of
births of children at such consulates.
2. Clause 5 seeks to amend section 5 of the Act relating to citizenship by
registration. The proposed sub-section (1) of section 5 empowers the Central
Government to make rules laying down the conditions and restrictions to register
as a citizen of India any person who is not an illegal migrant.
3. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D in
the Act relating to overseas citizenship of India. Sub-section (1) of proposed
new section 7A empowers the Central Government to prescribe, by rules, the
conditions and restrictions for making application by certain categories of
persons for registration as “overseas citizen of India”.
4. Proposed new section 7C empowers the Central Government to make
rules relating to the manner of declaration of renouncing overseas citizenship of
India.
5. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8 of the Act relating to
renunciation of citizenship, inter alia, to empower the Central Government to lay
down by rule, the form and manner of making declarations by children on
attaining full age for resumption of Indian citizenship.
6. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 14A in the Act relating
to issue of national identity cards to all citizens of India. Under new section 14A,
the Central Government may make rules to lay down the procedure for
compulsory registration of citizens of India, the form and manner in which such
applications may be made and the documents, other particulars and fee which
may accompany such applications.
7. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid
provisions are generally matters of procedure or administrative details and it is
not possible to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
53

54
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS F ROM T HE C ITIZENSHIP  A CT, 1955
(57 O F 1955)
**** *
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “a Government in India” means the Central
Government or a State Government;
(b) “citizen” in relation to a country specified in the First
Schedule, means a person who under the citizenship or
nationality law for the time being in force in that country, is
a citizen or national of that country;
(c) “citizenship or nationality law”, in relation to a country
specified in the First Schedule, means an enactment of the
legislature of that country which at the request of the
Government of that country, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, have declared to be an
enactment making provision for the citizenship or nationality
of that country:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in
relation to the Union of South Africa except with the previous
approval of both Houses of Parliament;
(d) “Indian consulate” means the office of any consular
officer of the Government of India where a register of births
is kept, or where there is no such office, such office as may
be prescribed;
(e) “minor” means a person who has not attained the age
of eighteen years;
(f) “person” does not include any company or
association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(h) “undivided India” means India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 as originally enacted.
****
A
CQUSITION  OF C ITIZENSHIP
3. (1) except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born
in India,—
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before
the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1986;
Interpretation.
Citizenship by
birth.
54

55
(b) on or after such commencement and either of whose
parents is a citizen of India at the time of his birth;
shall be a citizen of India by birth.
(2) A person shall not be such a citizen by virtue of this section
if at the time of his birth—
(a) his father possesses such immunity from suits and legal
process as is accorded to any envoy of a foreign sovereign
power accredited to the President of India and is not a citizen of
India; or
(b) his father is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a
place then under occupation by the enemy.
4. ( 1) A person born outside India,—
(a) on or after the 26th January, 1950 but before the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992,
shall be a citizen of India by descent if his father is a citizen
of India at the time of his birth; or
(b) on or after such commencement, shall be a citizen of
India by descent if either of his parents is a citizen of India
at the time of his birth:
Provided that if the father of such a person referred to in
clause ( a) was a citizen of India by descent only, that person
shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless—
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its occurrence or the commencement of this Act,
whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central
Government, after the expiry of the said period; or
(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under
a Government in India:
Provided further that if either of the parents of such a person
referred to in clause ( b) was a citizen of India by descent only, that
person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless—
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its occurrence or the commencement of the
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992, whichever is later, or
with the permission of the Central Government, after the
expiry of the said period; or
(b) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in
service under a Government in India.
5. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such condition
and restrictions as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may,
on application made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any
person who is not already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution
or by virtue of any of the other provisions of this Act and belongs
to any of the following categories:—
Citizenship by
descent.
39 of 1992.
Citizenship by
registration.
39 of 1992.

56
(a) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in
India and have been resident for five years immediately before
making an application for registration;
(b) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in any
country or place outside undivided India;
(c) persons who are, or have been, married to citizens of
India and are ordinarily resident in India and have been so
resident for five years immediately before making an application
for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India; and
(e) persons of full age and capacity who are citizens of a
country specified in the First Schedule:
Provided that in prescribing the conditions and restrictions
subject to which persons of any such country may be registered
as citizens of India under this clause, the Central Government
shall have due regard to the conditions subject to which citizens
of India may, by law or practice of that country, become citizens
of that country by registration.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, a person
shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his
parents, was born in undivided India.
**** *
6. ( 1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by
any person of full age and capacity who is not a citizen of a
country specified in the First Schedule for the grant of a certificate
of naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied
that the applicant is qualified for naturalisation under the provisions
of the Third Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation:
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the
applicant is a person who has rendered distinguished service to
the cause or science, philosophy; art, literature, world peace or
human progress generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions
specified in the Third Schedule.
**** *
TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP
8. ( 1) If any citizen of India of full age and capacity, who is also
a citizen or national of another country, makes in the prescribed
manner a declaration renouncing his Indian citizenship the
declaration shall be registered by the prescribed authority; and, upon
such registration, that person shall cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war
in which India may be engaged, registration thereof shall be with-
held until the Central Government otherwise directs.
Citizenship by
naturalisation.
Renunciation
of citizenship.

57
(2) Where a person ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-
section ( 1) every minor child of that person shall thereupon
cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that any such child may, within one year after
attaining full age, make a declaration that he wishes to resume
Indian citizenship and shall thereupon again become a citizen
of India.
(3) For the purposes of this section, any woman who is, or
has been, married shall be deemed to be of full age.
9. ( 1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration or
otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the
26th January, 1950 and the commencement of this Act voluntarily
acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such
acquisition or, as the case may be, such commencement, cease to
be a citizen of India:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a
citizen of India who, during any war in which India may be
engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country,  until
the Central Government otherwise directs.
(2) If any question arises as to whether, when or how any person
has acquired the citizenship of another country, it shall be
determined by such authority, in such manner, and having regard to
such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.
**** *
SUPPLEMENTAL
11. Every person who is a citizen of a Commonwealth country
specified in the First Schedule shall, by virtue of that citizenship,
have the status of a Commonwealth citizen in India.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by order notified in the
Official Gazette, make provisions on a basis of reciprocity for the
conferment of all or any of the rights of citizen of India on the
citizens of any county specified in the First Schedule.
(2) Any order made under sub-section ( 1) shall have effect
notwithstanding any-thing inconsistent therewith contained in any
law other than the Constitution of India or this Act.
**** *
14. (1) The prescribed authority or the Central Government may
in its discretion, grant or refuse an application under section 5 or”
section 6 and shall not be required to assign reasons for such grant
or refusal.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 15 the decision of the
prescribed authority or the Central Government on any such
application as aforesaid shall be final and shall not be called in
question in any court.
Termination of
citizenship.
Commonwealth
citizenship.
Disposal of
application
under sections 5
and 6.
Power to confer
rights of Indian
citizen on
citizens of
certain
countries.

58
**** *
17. Any person who, for the purpose of procuring anything to be
done or not to be done under this Act, knowingly makes any
representation which is false in a material particular shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
18. ( 1)* * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for:—
**** *
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government
may provide that breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees.
Offences.
Power to
make rules.

59
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(1)(b) and 5(1)(e)]
A. The following Commonwealth countries:—
1. United Kingdom.
2. Canada.
3. Commonwealth of Australia.
4. New Zealand.
5. Union of South Africa.
6. Pakistan.
7. Ceylon.
8. Federation of Rhodesia and Nayasaland.
9. Ghana.
10. Federation of Malaya.
11. Singapore.
B. The Republic of Ireland.
Explanation:— In this Schedule, “United Kingdom” means the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and includes the Channel Islands, the Isle of
man and all Colonies; and “Commonwealth of Australia” includes the territories
of Papua and the territory of Norfolk Island.
59

60
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 5(2) and 6(2)]
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
I, A/B....................do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that
I will faithfully observe the laws of India and fulfil my duties as a citizen of
India.
60

61
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 6(1)]
QUALIFICATIONS FOR NATURALISATION
The qualifications for naturalisation of a person who is not a citizen of a
country specified in the First Schedule are—
(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where citizens of India
are prevented by law or practice of that country from becoming subjects or
citizens of that country by naturalisation;
(b) that if he is a citizen of any country, he has renounced the citizenship
of that country in accordance with the law therein in force in that behalf and
has notified such renunciation to the Central Government;
(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a
Government in India or partly the one and partly the other, throughout the
period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of the application;
(d) that during the twelve years immediately preceding the said period of
twelve months, he has either resided in India or been in the service of a
Government in India, or partly the one and partly the other, for periods
amounting in the aggregate to not less than nine years;
(e) that he is of a good character;
(f) that he has an adequate knowledge of a language specified in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution; and
(g) that in the event of a certificate of naturalisation being granted to him,
he intends to reside in India, or to enter into or continue in, service under a
Government in India or under an international organization of which India is
a member or under a society, company or body of persons established in
India:
Provided that the Central Government may, if in the special circumstances
of any particular case it thinks fit,—
(i) allow a continuous period of twelve months ending not more than six
months before the date of the application to be reckoned, for the purposes of
clause ( c) above, as it had immediately preceded that date;
(ii) allow periods of residence or service earlier than thirteen years before
the date of the application to be reckoned in computing the aggregate
mentioned in clause ( d) above.
61

62
62
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955
(Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

63
ANNEXURE-II
List of individuals and organizations willing to appear before the
Committee for making oral evidence in regard to Citizenship
(Amendment) Bill, 2003
Organisations:
1. Dalit Samanway Samiti, Kolkata.
2. B.N. Seva Samiti, Kolkata.
3. Udbastu Sangram Parishad, West Bengal.
4. Hari-Guru Chand Mathu Seva Sangha, Kolkata.
5. Namasudra Samaj Sanstha, Kolkata.
6. Shri Shri Hari Chand Guruchand Seva Sangha, New Delhi.
7. Institute of Applied Humanities, Kolkata.
8. Madhyamgram Mission Sripur, Kolkata.
9. Madhya Pradesh Namasudra Kalyan Samiti, Bhopal.
10. Shri Ashis Sinha, General Secretary, W . B. Dalit Samaj Teachers’ Association, Kolkata.
11. Bahujan Samaj Party, West Bengal, 24 Parganas, (South).
12. Ambedkar Mission for Social Change, Nadia, West Bengal, Kolkata.
13. Anwesha Sadharan Granthagar, Kolkata.
Individuals:
14. Shri Parimal Biswas, Kolkata.
15. Shri Mahendra Nath Talukdar, Kolkata.
16. Shri Ranjit Kumar Hira, Kolkata.
17. Shri Surendra Nath Mandal, Kolkata.
18. Shri B.C. Poddar, Kolkata.
19. Shri Sib Narayan Roy, Kolkata.
20. Shri S.K. Neogi, Kolkata.
21. Shri Ranjit Kumar Sikdar, Kolkata.
22. Shri Dhirendra Nath Mallik, Burdwan, West Bengal.
23. Shri Deepak Sikdar, Kolkata.
24. Shri K.B. Haldar, New Delhi.
63

64
25. Shri Naresh Chandra Das, West Bengal.
26. Ms.  Achintya Bala and 13 others, Kolkata.
27. Shri Sibasish Laha, Department of Physics, Presidency College, Kolkata.
28. Dr. Y . Shivaji, Former M.P. (R.S.) Guntur (No Memorandum).
29. Shri Lab Mandal (Address not given).
30. Shri Birendra Nath Barai and 4 others, Distt. Raisen, Madhya Pradesh.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.