PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 121
ND
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2  AUGUST, 2006)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  LOK SABHA ON 2  AUGUST, 2006)
ND
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2  AUGUST, 2006)
ND
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  LOK SABHA ON 2  AUGUST, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2006/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)JULY, 2006/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON HOME  AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ADMINISTRATION OF UNION TERRITORIES
(ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS, 
PONDICHERRY AND CHANDIGARH)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ADMINISTRATION OF UNION TERRITORIES
(ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS,
PONDICHERRY AND CHANDIGARH)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2 ND AUGUST, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2 ND AUGUST, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY , 2006/SRAV ANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C.S.(H.A.)-233

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  O F T HE C OMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(viii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (ix)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
Chapter-I
Administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands ....................................... 1—10
Chapter-II
Administration of Pondicherry ....................................................................... 1 1—18
Chapter-III
Tsunami – Rehabilitation and Reconstruction ............................................. 19—23
Chapter-IV
Administration of Chandigarh ......................................................................... 24—31
4. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................. 32—40
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES O F T HE M EETINGS O F T HE C OMMITTEE ......................................... 41—69
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 71 —110
(i) Study-Note on the visit of the Committee to Andaman and Nicobar
Islands and Pondicherry ....................................................................................... 73—93
(ii) Study-Note on the visit of the Committee to Chandigarh ............................ 95—110

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2002)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shrimati Basanti Sarma
3. Shri Kapil Sibal
4. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
5. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
6. Shri Kalraj Mishra
7. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
*9. Shri K.M. Saifullah
10. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
11. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
12. Shri Drupad Borgohain
*13. Shri C.M. Ibrahim
14. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani
♣ 16. Shri Lalu Prasad
♣ 17. Shri Motilal V ora
LOK SABHA
18. Shri Rajen Gohain
19. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
20. Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad PatiI
21. Shri Anadi Sahu
22. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
23. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
24. Shri Vinay Katiyar
25. Shri Manabendra Shah
26. Sardar Buta Singh
27. Shri Raj Kumar Wangcha
28. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
29. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
30. Shri K. Karunakaran
31. Begum Noor Bano
(i)
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 9 April, 2002 on expiry of term as Member of Rajya Sabha.
♣ Shri Lalu Prasad and Shri Motilal V ora were Nominated w.e.f. 22 April, 2002.

(ii)
32. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
33. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
34. Shri Subodh Ray
35. Shri B.V.N. Reddy
36. Shri Ramji Lal Suman
37. Shri Rammurti Singh Verma
38. Shri Anandrao Vithoba AdsuI
39. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
40. Shri Adhi Sankar
41. Shri P .H. Pandian
42. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
43. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
44. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
45. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi
α 46. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
β47. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
α Nominated w.e.f.  25 February, 2002.
β Nominated w.e.f.  19 April, 2002.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2003)
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Motilal V ora
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
8. Dr. V . Maitreyan
9. Shri Lalu Prasad
10. Shri Drupad Borgohain
11. Shri Ram Jethmalani
*12. Shri Pramod Mahajan
♣ 13. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
♦ 14. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
15. Vacant
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Adhi Sankar
17. Begum Noor Bano
18. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
19. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale
20. Shri M.O.H. Farook
21. Shri Rajen Gohain
22. Shri Vinay Katiyar
23. Shri K. Karunakaran
24. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
25. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
26. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
27. Shri P.H. Pandian
28. Shri Bhuma Nagi Reddy
29. Shri Subodh Roy
30. Shri Anadi Sahu
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f.  27 February, 2003.
♣ Nominated  w.e.f.  5 May, 2003.
♦ Nominated w.e.f.  27 July, 2003.

31. Shri P.A. Sangma
32. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
33. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
34. Shri Manabendra Shah
35. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
36. Shri C.K. Jaffer Sharief
37. Capt. (Retd.) Inder Singh
38. Sardar Buta Singh
39. Shri Ramjilal Suman
40. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
41. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi
42. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
43. Shri Rajkumar Wangcha
φ44. Dr. (Shrimati) Sudha Yadav
ƒ45. Shri Tarlochan Singh Tur
(iv)
φ Nominated w.e.f.  26 February, 2003.
ƒ Nominated w.e.f.  7 April, 2003.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05)**
(Constituted on 5 August, 2004)
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R. K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7. Shri N. Jothi
8. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*10. Shri Vidya Nivas Misra
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14. Shri Biren Singh Engti
15. Shri Rahul Gandhi
16. Shri Tapir Gao
17. Shri T.K. Hamza
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Ajit Jogi
20. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
21. Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
22. Shri Sachin Pilot
23. Shri Ashok Pradhan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26. Shri Bajuban Riyan
(v)
** Composition of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees was reduced from 45 Members to 31 by
amending Rule 269 (1) vide  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 41502 dated the 20th July, 2004.
* Nominated w.e.f.  5th September, 2004 vice  Shri Manoj Bhattacharya. expired on 14th February, 2005.

27. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
(vi)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 5 August, 2005)
#1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri N. Jothi
•6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*8. Shri Sitaram Yechury
**9. Shri Sanjay Raut
$10. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri L.K. Advani
12. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
13. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
14. Shri Biren Singh Engti
15. Shri Rahul Gandhi
16. Shri Tapir Gao
17. Shri T.K. Hamza
18. Shri Naveen Jindal
19. Shri Ajit Jogi
20. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
21. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
22. Shri Sachin Pilot
23. Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
26. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
27. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
28. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
29. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
30. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
31. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
(vii)
# Retired as Member of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2006. Re-nominated as Member and re-appointed as Chairperson of the
Committee w.e.f.  8th April, 2006 on her re-election to Rajya Sabha.
• Retired as Member of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2006.
* Nominated w.e.f.  25th September, 2005 vice  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan.
** Nominated w.e.f. 29th October, 2005.
$ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on retirement from the Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2006. Re-nominated to the
Committee w.e.f.  8th May, 2006 on re-election to the Rajya Sabha.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
(viii)

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this One-Hundred and Twenty first Report on the Administration of Union Territories.
2. The Committee first took up the “Administration of Union Territories” for study and report
in 2002. The Committee undertook study visits to Chandigarh in September, 2002, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands in October, 2002 and Pondicherry in June, 2003. It held a meeting with the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and Chief Secretaries of UT of Chandigarh and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands. However, the then Committee could not present the Report. The
Committee was reconstituted in 2004-05. Since it had all the new Members, hence it decided to
have a first hand experience by visiting those UTs again.
2.1 The Committee visited to Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands in June, 2005 and
Chandigarh in September, 2005. During its visits, the Committee interacted with the Lt. Governors/
Advisor, key officials, local people’s representatives, NGOs of the respective UTs and Tsunami
affected people of Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
2.2 The Committee also heard in person the Home Secretary and Chief Secretaries of the
respective UTs on the issues raised during its visit to those UTs in its meetings held on
27th October and 8th November, 2005 in Delhi. The Committee held an in-house discussion on the
issues relating to the UTs in its meeting held on 10th January, 2006.
2.3 The Committee considered the draft Report in its sitting held on 6th June, 2006 and adopted
the same.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following:—
(i) Presentations of key officials of the respective UT Administrations;
(ii) Memoranda received by the Committee during its visits;
(iii) Comments of respective UTs on the points raised in the Memoranda;
(iv) Written replies furnished by the Ministry to the Questionnaires sent by the Secretariat;
and
(v) Written clarifications furnished by the Ministry, on points/issues raised by the
Members during the deliberations of the Committee.
4. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the support provided
by the Senior Officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the respective UTs.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
6 June, 2006 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.

1
REPORT
Introduction
Seven Union Territories are enumerated in the First Schedule to the Constitution. The
Committee took up for study  and report administration of three of these viz. Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Pondicherry and Chandigarh. The Committee undertook study visits of these
UTs. Under Articles 239 to 241 of the Constitution, administration of every union territory shall
be administered by the President through an Administrator to be appointed by him with such
designation as he may specify. The three UTs studied by the Committee are quite different from
one another. Andaman and Nicobar Islands is a territory quite far away from the mainland
comprising numerous small islands scattered in Bay of Bengal. Its southern-most point is nearer
to Indonesia. It is about 1200 km from the mainland. The UT of Pondicherry though a coastal
territory, has a Legislative Assembly. Chandigarh, a recently developed UT is the capital of two
States — Haryana and Punjab. Therefore each of these is unique in geographical locations and
administrative structures.
Chapter-I
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS
Brief historical, geographical and demographic profile
2.0 The name Andaman was presumed to be derived from Hanuman, who was known to the
Malays as Handuman. Since Pre-historic times, these islands were the home of aboriginal tribes.
The tribes living in Andaman group of islands are of Negrito origin, viz. the Great Andamanese,
Onges, Jarawas, and Sentinalese, while the tribes living in Nicobars are of Mongoloid stock, viz.
the Nicobarese and Shomphens. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands were shrouded in mystery for
centuries because of their inaccessibility. The first settlement by the British in the islands took place
in 1789, which was later abandoned in 1796, The second settlement was basically a penal
settlement, taken up in 1858. During the British period political leaders, considered dangerous to
the interests of the Raj and other dreaded criminals were deported from the mainland to the Cellular
Jail-the Indian Bastille, at Port Blair. Thus these islands were infamously known as the ‘Black Water
Prison’ or ‘Kala Pani’.
2.1 The Andaman and Nicobar Islands were declared as a scheduled district in 1874 under the
Scheduled Districts Act with the main objective to provide simple and good administration in these
areas as these were inhabited by simple tribal people. Under the Government of India Act, 1919
too, the territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, being too small to have a legislature, continued
to remain under Central Legislature with powers vested in the then Governor-General to make
regulations under the Act and to extend laws of other parts of India to it as scheduled district.
The position continued under the Government of India Act, 1935 except that Governor General was
empowered to make regulations for peace and progress and for good governance of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Until Andaman .and Nicobar Islands came under the occupation of Japanese forces
during the Second World War, the Archipelago was used by the British Government in India as a
penal settlement, Even. after Independence the Union Constitution Committee in its Report
Submitted on October 21, 1947 favoured direct administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands by
the Centre.

2
2.2 The Andaman and Nicobar are a group of 572 islands, islets and rocks lying in the South
Eastern Part of the Bay of Bengal with a total geographical area of 8.249 sq km with 38 inhabited
islands. They lie along an and in long and narrow broken chain, approximately North-South, over
a distance of nearly 800 kms. The Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar has been divided into
2 districts viz District of Andaman and District of Nicobars. The district of Andaman is Northern
Part of Andaman and Nicobar islands and comprises of 550 Islands, Islets and rocks out of which
only 26 are inhabited. The total provisional population of the UT according to 2001 census is
3,56,265; the decadal growth of population between 1971-81 being 63.93%. Between 1981-1991
it was 48.70% and declined to 26.94% between 1991-2001. The population density of the islands
is 43 people per sq. km. The rise in population can mainly be attributed to immigration. Within the
total population., the tribal population is about 30,000 in 2001 as compared to 26,770 in 1991
census.
2.3 In these Islands, people of all faiths-Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs etc, and speaking
languages like Hindi, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi, Nicobari etc, live together in complete peace
and harmony. Inter-religion and inter-regional marriages are Common in the Islands. Because of this
amazing racial and cultural mix, it is correctly described as Mini-India.
ADMINISTRATIVE SET UP
Panchayati Raj Instituions
3.1 The Pradesh Council in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands was constituted in June, 1981
under the provisions of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Administration) Regulation, 1979. The
Pradesh Council was an advisory body and was set up to discuss and make recommendations to
the Administrator on policy matters, plan and budget of the Union Territory and legislative matters.
It consisted of the Administrator; Member of Lok Sabha representing the Union Territory; Chairman
of the Port Blair Municipal Board and others.
3.2. W ith the establishment of the Panchayati Raj Institutions in A&N Islands, the institution of
Pradesh Council was discontinued. While Pradesh Council was an advisory body, panchayats enjoy
executive functions. The Ministry have also stated that there is no proposal to revive the Pradesh
Council.
3.3 Consequent upon the Constitution seventy third and seventy fourth Amendments, a three-
tier Panchayat System for the UT was introduced through the Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(Panchayats) Regulation, 1994 and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Municipal) Regulation, 1994.
The Andaman and Nicobar (Administration) Regulation, 1974 which provided for constitution of a
Pradesh Council was repealed on 23 May, 1994 by the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Municipal)
Regulation, 1994.
3.4 On promulgation of the A&N Islands (Panchayat) Regulation, 1994, by the President of
India, the three-tier Panchayat System was introduced consisting of 67 gram panchayats, seven
panchayat samities and one zila parishad which started functioning from October, 1995.
3.5 The elections for all the three tiers of PRIs are conducted by the Election Commission as
per provisions of A&N Islands (Panchayats/Preparation of Electoral Rolls and Conduct of Election),
Rule, 1995, notified on 28 March, 1995, for 67 gram panchayats, seven panchayat samities and
one zila parishad.
3.6 After the promulgation of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Panchayats) Regulation, 1994,
various rules have been framed for effective implementation of the provision contained in the
Regulation.

3
3.7 Under A&N Islands (panchayats) Regulation, 1994, powers have been delegated to PRIs for
implementing schemes of economic development and social justice. The regulation endows the PRIs
with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of Self-
Government. The Regulation further authorises the panchayats to levy, collect and appropriate such
taxes, duties, tolls and fees as are specified.
3.8 The A&N Administration, vide Notification Nos.178, 179 and 180 all dated 22.12.1995 have
specified the activities to be implemented by the three tiers of PRIs. Accordingly, the Administration
has issued direction for transfer of activities of the following departments to the PRIs:
(1) Agriculture;
(2) PWD;
(3) Electricity;
(4) Fisheries; and
(5) Rural Development
3.9 The Committee was informed that, in actual practice, only the activities of PWD, i.e., rural
roads and rural water supply have been transferred to PRIs till date on a mutual agreement between
the PRIs and PWD. Even though, the activities of PWD had been transferred, funds and
functionaries required for proper upkeep and maintenance of the transferred assets were yet to be
provided. The transferred roads (182 kms) are in very bad shape and require huge amount for its
repair and maintenance.
3.10 In respect of other Departments, vis-a-vis , Agriculture, Electricity, Fisheries and Rural
Development, though the Administration had specified the functions to be transferred to the PRIs,
nothing concrete had been done so far to execute the orders of the Administration in its true letter
and spirit.
3.11 The Administration had also initiated action for transfer of activities in the field of
education, small-scale industries, farm forestry, social welfare, public distribution, health and
sanitation but orders in this regard were yet to be issued by the Administration.
Need for a Legislative Assembly
3.12 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in the written reply, stated that the matter relating to
provision of a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers for the A&N Islands was considered
by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 1 October, 1997 and it decided to defer the matter.
3.13 Elaborating about the Cabinet Note of 1997, the Committee was informed that the Ministry
of Home Affairs suggested the following options in the Cabinet Note:
(a) The existing administrative set-up of the Union Territory of the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands as per provisions contained in Article 239 of the Constitution be continued;
(b) A Legislature with a Council of Ministers may be granted to the Union Territory of
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands without altering its Union Territory status, on the
pattern of administrative set-up provided to Pondicherry under the Government of
Union Territories Act, 1963.
3.14 The Cabinet, in its meeting held on 1 October, 1997, considered the proposal and decided
to defer the matter.
3.15 The Chief Secretary, Andaman and Nicobar (Administration), during the course of oral
submissions before the Committee, stated that the issue of providing Legislative Assembly had been

4
raised many times. He also felt that as per the people’s aspirations, there should be an Assembly.
He also stated that the issue of size and form of the Assembly could be decided later.
3.16 The Committee is of the view that as A&N Islands, which is headed by a Lieutenant
Governor, has no public representative to supervise, to consider or to monitor the functions
of the Government apart from the Lieutenant Governor, it can at least have a Pradesh
Council. It is also of the view that Panchayati Raj cannot be a substitute for the Pradesh
Council. PRIs will look after the execution of policies and programmes under Part IX
(Article 243 G) of the Constitution, whereas the Pradesh Council would review and
supervise the functioning of the Government.
3.17 The Committee is also given to understand that there are problems of increasing
unemployment and urbanization, law and order, bootlegging. The Committee feels that these
are directly connected with development. When the State is administered by officers only,
there is no scope for monitoring and overseeing the working of the Administration and
ultimately development is affected. When development is not taking place, people suffer
leading to increase in crime rate. These issues can be solved only by people’s participation
in governance through their elected representatives.
3.18 The Committee, during its visit to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, noted the
immensity of tsunami devastation and the problem of shortage of staff. Had there been a
Legislative Assembly the relief operation would have been addressed in a better manner.
The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that there is a strong justification for setting
up of a Legislative Assembly for the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It therefore,
recommends to the Government to take necessary steps in this direction.
3.19 Until a final decision is taken for setting up a Legislative Assembly, some kind of
monitoring mechanism is required. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Pradesh
Council may be revived immediately. This is all the more necessary because the
administration of the entire UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands cannot be left to the
Panchayat Raj Institutions. These are only local self governing institutions and they cannot
be a substitute for a legislative set up.
3.20 The Committee also takes note of the fact that consequent upon the seventy third
and seventy fourth Amendments to the Constitution, though the participation of the people
in planning and execution of developmental works in the UT started at the grass-root level,
the process of delegation of powers and functions to PRls have been very slow. The subjects
apportioned to them are limited and even in those areas the transfer has not been
complete. The Committee, therefore, recommends that local bodies may be delegated more
powers and functions without further delay so that they can meet the people’s aspirations.
Further the Committee recommends that these bodies should be supported by adequate
staff, finance and other logistics.
Sociological Set up
4.0 The aboriginal tribes of the Islands have a population of approximately thirty thousand and
some of them appear to be on the verge of extinction. The anthropological reports say that the
population of one of the primitive tribes viz. Onge has come down to around hundred. This has
caused concern for the sociologists as to how the tribes can be saved from extinction and how
they can be brought into mainstream. The policy of the Government, as informed to the
Committee, in relation to the six aboriginal tribes of Andaman and Nicobar islands, has been to
protect their interests; save them from extinction; encourage them to maintain their culture and
identity; and thereby facilitate them to co-exist with the mainstream society. The Government have

5
promulgated a Regulation called “the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Protection of Aboriginal Tribes)
Regulation, 1956 so as to ensure protection of the interests of the various tribes in the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands.
4.1 Replying to a query as to whether the Government has any plan to bring the. aboriginal
tribes into the mainstream, the Ministry have informed that in the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, there are five primitive Tribes, viz., Great Anadamanese, Onges, Jarawas,
Shompens and Sentinelese. Of these, presently Great Andamanese and Onges are in contact with
the outside world and in fact a few Great Andamanese are employed under the Administration.
Similar is the case with the Onges. So far as Jarawas are concerned, the Ministry of Home Affairs
in consultation with the U.T. Administration recently has formulated the Jarawa Policy in pursuance
of an order of the High Court of Calcutta in PIL No.WP048 of 1999 — Ms. Shyamali Ganguly,
Advocate vs. Union of India and Others. As per the policy no attempts to bring the  Jarawas to
the mainstream society against their conscious will or to rehabilitate them to separate islands/
locations at this stage of their social development, would be made. The Jarawa Policy has been
accepted by the Calcutta High Court. It was also stated that the Administration was following
similar policy in respect of the Shompens and Sentinelese for the time being.
4.2 When asked to comment on the future plan for the tribals of Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
particularly the primitive tribals, the Chief Secretary, Andaman and Nicobar Islands (Administration)
stated that they should not be integrated immediately into the mainstream; otherwise they will just
vanish because they will contact various diseases. This has happened with Onges and Andamanese.
He has further stated that integration is a very slow process and if they are brought directly into
the civilised world from the primitive, they would probably have a lot of problem. He has further
informed the Committee that the Ministry have a High-Powered Committee of Scientists,
Anthropologists and others who advise them on a day-to-day basis.
4.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that there are five primitive tribes in the
whole of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. They fulfil the essential characteristics of tribals.
The Committee understands the compulsion of the Government in integrating the tribal
communities into the mainstream of the society. This is a sociological process, which needs
to be addressed through the process of time only. However, the Committee notes that the
tribes are living amidst reserved forest land. These tribals, may at some point of time in
future come out and mix up with the civilised society. Therefore, some provision has to be
made so that when they enter the civilised world, they should be given an opportunity to
use the forest land and do the farming. While preserving the uniqueness of the tribals, the
process of integration into the mainstream of the society may continue as per requirement
at a particular point of time.
Administrative Issues
5.0 During the visit of the Committee to the Islands, it was informed that for better
administration., the Andaman District needs to be bifurcated and corresponding sub-division and
tehsils are also required to be created. In reply to a query as to whether the Ministry has received
any proposal from the UT Administration regarding creation of new district and sub-divisions, the
Ministry stated that the A&N Administration submitted a proposal for creation of a new District,
namely, North and Middle Andaman by dividing the existing Andaman district. The proposed new
district would have its HQs at Mayabunder. The proposal, besides creation of a new District
involves creation of corresponding Sub-Divisions and Tehsils in the new set up. It was also
informed that the proposal was under consideration of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
5.1 The Committee feels that the proposal of the Island Administration for creation of
new district and sub-divisions would help in delegation and decentralization of powers
necessary for quick decision-making. The Committee recommends that the demand of the

6
Administration may be examined on priority. The new District and sub-divisions would help
the local administration in catering the needs of people, in an efficient manner and in the
quickest possible time.
Need for helicopters
5.2 The UT Administration has taken one helicopter from M/s Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. on
lease which has been in service from 17 May, 2003 . Another Pawan Hans helicopter was inducted
after the Tsunami disaster which was away for major repairs since 24th May, 2005.  These
helicopters are of Dauphin type which can carry 7 passengers apart from the pilot. The
Administration has informed that the helicopter has not come back as yet, despite several
reminders. However, for far-flung areas beyond Car Nicobar, the passenger capacity is reduced to
5 on account of fuel constraints.
5.3 The Committee was also informed that the helicopters ply to Campbell Bay twice a week
and Hut Bay once a week. On the other two days, (Sunday being reserved for maintenance) the
helicopter operates upto Car Nicobar. However, depending upon the needs, helicopter schedule is
varied. Post-tsunami, it is not normally operated in the northern islands since relief and
rehabilitation is essentially focusing on the southern islands.
5.4 Replying to a query as to whether the Government has any plan to augment the number
of helicopters for 572 Islands spreading over 800  kms, the Ministry informed that the Andaman
and Nicobar Administration have submitted a proposal for acquisition of two Dornier and two
Dhruv Helicopters from M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. at an estimated cost of Rs.141 crore. The
A&N Administration have informed that the Planning Commission has earmarked Rs.50 crore for
this purpose during the financial year 2005-06 . The proposal submitted by the A&N Administration
is presently under consideration in the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
5.5 The Committee understands the gigantic task of the administration of 572 islands
spread over 800 kms. They need sufficient vehicles for transportation and aerial route is
the only available means for ‘inter-island transportation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the proposal for acquisition of two helicopters may be approved at the
earliest. This will help the administration in providing necessary help to the people besides
making the helicopters available for inter-island transport on a regular basis.
Personnel Administration
5.6 The Chief Secretary informed the Committee that there was a shortage of around 3000
Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ staff in the Administration which was causing difficulty in the relief and
rehabilitation work and other ongoing projects. He felt that the long process of recruitment i.e. the
vacancies being forwarded to Ministry of Home Affairs and from there to Union Public Service
Commission for recruitment, takes a long time resulting in the vacancies remaining unfilled for a
very long time. The Chief Secretary felt that some arrangements should be made by the
Government of India to fill up the vacancies at least at lower level faster. The Special Secretary
in the Ministry, apprised the Committee that the 10% blanket ban on recruitment by the Central
Government was also applicable to the UT and a clause in that order regarding abolition of the
vacancies, which remain unfilled for two years, was a bottleneck in filling up the vacant posts,
He also apprised that out of these 3000 vacant posts, 400 posts have been sanctioned by Ministry
of Finance and other 650 are in the process of being sanctioned.
5.7 The Committee notes the difficulty being faced by the Administration due to shortage
of staff in providing relief and rehabilitation and completion of other ongoing projects. Such
a large number of vacancies for such a small administrative set-up is a matter of concern

7
particularly when relief and rehabilitation work is to be done on war footing. The
Committee recommends that the Finance Ministry’s blanket ban on recruitment for the UT
should be reconsidered. The Government should also look into the issue of delay in filling
up of vacancies and take steps to expedite the same.
Tourism in the Islands
6.0 Considering the natural and virgin beauty of the islands, tourism has been identified as one
of the thrust sectors for the economic development and employment generation in the islands. The
development of tourism can change the economic scenario in the islands and bring about significant
change in the economic well being of the local population.
6.1 In regard to opening more islands for tourism, the Ministry stated that the Island
Development Authority (IDA) in its tenth meeting held on 19.1.2003 under the Chairmanship of the
then Prime Minister decided, inter alia, to assign to a Standing Committee of Secretaries (SCOS),
a time bound responsibility of developing and recommending a policy for development of tourism,
fisheries, high-value agriculture and hydro-carbon energy sources in A&N Islands. Consequently,
the Ministry of Tourism formulated an Action Plan for development of tourism in A&N Islands. The
Action Plan proposed development of tourism in the A&N Islands in three phases. In the first
phase, it was proposed to develop tourism in the following ten islands in the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands and also opening up for foreign investment and tourism: (i) Havelock Island; (ii) Neil Island;
(iii) Long Island; (iv) North Passage Island (Merk Bay); (v) South Andaman Island; (vi) Cinque
Island; (vii) Rose and Smith Island; (viii) Little Andaman Island; (ix) Rutland Island; and
(x) Interview Island.
6.2 The Committee was also informed that the development of other islands for promotion of
tourism would be taken up in the second and third phase. The Ministry of Tourism prepared a note
for obtaining the approval of the Cabinet to the proposed action plan for development of tourism
in A&N Islands. The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that they conveyed clearance to the
proposal contained in the draft Cabinet Note circulated by the Ministry of Tourism. The Committee
was also informed that all the above-mentioned islands would be thrown open for tourism in A&N
Islands as and when the Cabinet approves the action plan.
6.3 The objectives set in the Tenth Five-year Plan for the promotion of tourism are:
➢ Eco-friendly and environmentally sustainable tourism;
➢ Essentially playing the role of a facilitator and encouraging private sector investment
in various sectors like development of high quality resorts, introduction of high speed
boats, adventure water sports, etc.;
➢ Continuing to simultaneously concentrate on development of new tourism activities/
products; and
➢ Marketing A&N Islands as eco-tourism destination.
For achieving the above-mentioned objectives, the following schemes have been taken up:
➢ Strengthening of Directorate of Tourism;
➢ Creation, Maintenance of tourism infrastructure;
➢ Tourism promotional activities; and
➢ Strengthening and maintenance of tourist accommodation.
6.4 The Committee was informed that with the implementation of the creation and maintenance
of tourism infrastructure scheme, the direct and indirect employment generation would be about

8
5,000 persons and by implementing the strengthening and maintenance of tourist accommodation
scheme, the employment generation would be about 5,000 persons.
6.5 The Committee desires that the objectives set in the Tenth Five-Year Plan such as
ecofriendly and environmentally sustainable tourism, development of new tourism activities/
products and marketing the Islands as eco-tourism destination, etc. should be achieved. The
schemes taken up needed to be implemented on a priority basis for achieving the objectives
as this would generate employment besides strengthening tourism. The Committee also
recommends that 2006-2007 being the terminal year of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, all-out
efforts may be made so that no activity taken up remains incomplete.
6.6 On 26 December, 2004, a massive earthquake, measuring 9.3 on the Richter Scale, had hit
the Islands followed by tsunami waves which unleashed havoc and devastation causing huge
damage to life and property in the Islands. Tourism, which is the lifeline of t he Islands’ economy,
has been adversely affected by the disaster. In the post-tsunami, tourist arrivals have dipped to
rock-bottom levels. The tourist arrival in January 2004 were 13,309 which had dipped to 1335
in January, 2005. Similarly the number dipped to 1313 in February 2005 from 12011 in
February, 2004. The Committee was informed that a strategy for post-tsunami tourism development
has been prepared with short-term and medium-term objectives.
6.7 The Committee desires that the Government should address both the short-term and
medium-term objectives and take necessary steps for taking up and completion of all the
proposals in a definite timeframe.
6.8 Andaman and Nicobar Islands are the ultimate unexplored destination of India’s
tourism. Once they are open to tourists there is no doubt that the islands would become
one of the tourism attractions in the world. Despite having very good tourism potential,
India has not tapped it well. A&N Islands are a good example of this. There are many
countries in the world which thrive on tourism and India is not able to make use of the
potential. The Committee is however happy to note that things are moving in the right
direction with the opening up of more islands in A&N Islands. By opening up islands, more
investment will flow in and tourism will develop which ultimately leads to economic growth
of the islands and the country. The Committee desires that the proposal of opening more
islands for tourism may be got cleared from the Cabinet at the earliest.
Air connectivity
7. The need for an international airport at Port Blair has increased, to a great extent, with the
growing demand for air-traffic and A&N Islands being considered as tourist destination in World
Tour Map. The  main work of extension of the airstrip has been carried out with additional length
of 5000 ft, by APWD. Need for Helicopter service which will tremendously boost tourism activities
in these Islands including international tourists was also felt. This will certainly open up new vistas
of self-employment opportunities to Island youths and private entrepreneurs.
7.1 Port Blair lies on the route from the Indian mainland to South-East Asia. The A&N Islands
has vast potential for being promoted as a high-value-Iow-volume tourism destination. For this it
is important that International flights make a stopover at Port Blair, the gateway to the Islands, thus
opening the islands to international tourism. It was stated that a request for declaring of Vir
Savarkar Airport as an International Airport was made to the Ministry of Civil Aviation by the A&N
Administration way back in July, 2001. In addition, a suggestion was also made by the UT
administration to the Ministry of Civil Aviation to consider stopover of one or two flights of the
Indian Airlines on the Chennai-Singapore and Chennai-Bangkok sectors in Port Blair. But the
extended runway of the Port Blair airport is yet to be functional for operation of long haul wide-

9
bodied aircraft. This issue is being pursued by the Lt. Governor, A&N Islands from time to time
with the Minister for Civil Aviation.
7.2 The Committee was also informed that the following proposals of air connectivity have been
made as medium-term objectives as a strategy for post-tsunami tourism promotion:
➢ Introduction of direct flights from Delhi, Mumbai, Cochin and other important
destinations of the country to Port Blair;
➢ Introduction of flights by various airlines to Port Blair like Sahara, Deccan,
Kingfisher, etc., and also private chartered flights;
➢ Introduction of competitive and attractive air fares by various airlines like Apex, Super
Apex, Metro Apex, etc.;
➢ Introduction of International Airline flights for Port Blair;
➢ Introduction of International Chartered Flights for Port Blair;
➢ Declaring Port Blair as International Airport;
➢ Transfer of the operations of the airport to the Airports Authority of India;
➢ Opening of additional civilian airports in Andaman as well as Nicobar District for
landing of national and international flights as well as for operation of helicopter
services and small planes for inter-island transportation;
➢ Introduction and promotion of sea planes for national and international transportation;
and
➢ Introduction of helicopter services, small planes and sea planes by Government as well
as the private sector for inter-island transportation of tourists.
7.3 The vast potential of international tourists can only be tapped if there is world class
airport and other infrastructure. Air connectivity and tourism are inter-linked and inter-
dependent. A&N Islands, being remotely and strategically located, need better air
connectivity both domestic and international for better tourist arrivals. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take steps to declare Vir Savarkar Airport as an
International Airport as a step towards projecting A&N Islands as an attractive tourist
destination. The Committee also recommends that to begin with the Government can make
the stopover for Chennai-Bangkok and Chennai-Singapore flights at the Islands. It also
urges upon the Administration to complete the expansion work of the airport expeditiously,
thus making it capable for operation of wide-bodied aircraft. The Committee is also of the
view that the other proposals in the strategy for post-tsunami tourism promotion, if
implemented, will go a long way in the promotion and strengthening of tourism in Andaman
and Nicobar, Islands, particularly the proposal relating to introduction of flights from
various cities to Port Blair will go a long way in attracting tourists from different
destinations of the country to the Islands. The Committee desires that the above proposals
may be taken up on top priority.
AGRICULTURE AND FISHERY
8.1 The years between 1927 to 1931 were actually the beginning of Agriculture Department in
the Islands with main task of experimenting in coconut plantation, coffee garden and 16 village
demonstration plots, when agriculture was negligible. The area expansion for increasing production
was the main theme up to the end of Fourth Five-Year Plan, i.e., 1974. From the Fifth Plan,

10
intensive agriculture was the practice due to paucity of land, and by the Seventh Plan, various.
developmental activities through different schemes began. During this post-Independence
development era, a lot of commercial crops were introduced which are now successfully growing
in these Islands.
8.2 In Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the total available land for agriculture is limited to 50,000
ha., i.e., six per cent of the total geographical area only. The Ministry have stated that no further
land was being released because of the prevailing ecological conditions. Due to rapid urbanisation
and growth of population in these Islands, arable land is shrinking while pressure on enhancing
productivity is enormous. It was also stated that strategy was adopted to keep a balance among
the various uses of land to increase production and productivity in a sustainable manner and efforts
were being made to produce more per unit area by adopting multiple and intensive cropping system
following the scientific management practices with utmost care of conserving soil and water.
Further, efforts are underway to utilise the vacant hilly land by promoting plantation, fruits and
spices crops, which grow naturally well out here.
8.3 On a query as to whether there was any proposal to diversify farming and fishing in the
Islands by promoting shrimp/crab culture, it was stated that the Ministry of Agriculture and
Cooperation (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying), the administrative Ministry, had
indicated that since freshwater resources were very limited in ‘the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, there was not much scope for freshwater aquaculture. However, suitable areas
could be identified and earmarked for undertaking coastal shrimp culture in the Union Territory.
The Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture (CIBA) in collaboration with the Central
Agricultural Research Institute (CARl) working under the Department of Agriculture Research and
Education (DARE) may take up identification of suitable areas for coastal shrimp culture. It was
also stated that the UT Administration may allot suitable lands to shrimp farmers on a long-term
lease.
8.4 The Committee is of the view that considering the vast potential of fisheries, shrimp,
crab and prawn, concerted efforts need be made to explore the potential by diversifying
fishing to Shrimp, Crab and Prawn culture. The issue of identification of suitable areas for
coastal shrimp culture may be pursued with Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture
(CIBA). This is necessary in view of scarcity of freshwater in the Islands. The Committee
notes that land available in the Islands is very less and its optimum use should be made.
Besides diversifying farming practices, efforts should also be made to increase productivity.
Efforts being made to utilise vacant hilly land for plantation, spices, crops, etc., may be
intensified as these are eco-friendly and they grow naturally. Similarly, diversification of
agriculture by encouraging plantation of cash crops such as cashew nuts, spices, and coconut
in the Islands might prove to be a panacea for improving the economic condition of the
farmers and the tribals living in the region.

11
CHAPTER-II
PONDICHERRY
BRIEF HISTORICAL, GEOGRAPHICAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
9.1 The Territory of Pondicherry was merged with the Indian union with effect from
01.11.1954 in accordance with the agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of France. However, the de-jure transfer of Pondicherry took place on
16 August, 1962 and since then the Union Territory of Pondicherry has been administered under
the provisions of Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. The Union Territory of Pondicherry
consists of four regions namely Pondicherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam which are lying
geographically separated from one another. Pondicherry region which is on the east coast, about
162 kms. south of Chennai is the largest of these areas. The Union Territory of Pondicherry is
480 sq. kms. in area and has a population of 9,74,345 according to the 2001 census. The male
and female population, respectively, is 4,86,961 and 4,87,384, registering a sex ratio of 1,001
females for every 1000 males. The Scheduled Castes population is 1,57,771 and accounts for
16.19% of the total population.
STATEHOOD TO PONDICHERRY
9.2 The UT of Pondicherry has an elected Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers.
During the visit to Pondicherry, the Committee interacted with the Chief Minister and his ministerial
colleagues besides holding a meeting with the MLAs. There was an unanimous feeling among the
elected people’s representatives that power was concentrated in the Executive, i.e., the Lieutenant
Governor and in turn the Union Home Ministry. The people’s representatives were of the view that
the political aspirations of the people could be fulfilled only by granting full statehood to the UT.
The Committee was apprised that the Legislative Assembly, Pondicherry, had passed Resolutions
from 1971 to 2004 for grant of statehood to Pondicherry and sent the same to Government of
India for consideration. The Resolutions passed on 9.6.2000, 26.6.2001 and 30.7.2004 sought
granting of statehood with special category status to the Union Territory.
9.3 The Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs, during the course of his oral
submissions before the Committee stated that according to the criteria of the Planning Commission,
special category status was given to States on the basis of the criteria which include strategic
location on the border with neighbouring countries, hilly terrain, inadequate economic and social
infrastructure, predominantly large tribal population and limited and weak revenue base compared
to the development needs. Planning Commission had taken the view that Pondicherry did not
have such disadvantages and, therefore, it had ruled out granting Special Category status to
Pondicherry.
9.4 Replying to a query regarding the status of the proposal of statehood of Pondicherry
Government, the Ministry in its written response informed that the proposal submitted by the
Government of Pondicherry for granting statehood with special category status vide its
Memorandum dated September 2004 was not accepted by the Government of India on the
following grounds:—
(a) It is not eligible to be considered for a special category status as per the guidelines
of the Planning Commission.
11

12
(b) It is not a viable State economically . Out of its total budget of about Rs.1050 crores
in the year 2004-05, there was a revenue deficit of over Rs. 400 crores.
(c) It consists of four geographi cally, culturally and l inguistically separate segments. While
Pondicherry and Karaikal are Tamil speaking, Mahe is Malayalam speaking and Yanam
is Telugu speaking.
(d) The per capita income of Pondicherry is almost double to that of neighbouring Tamil
Nadu. Therefore, it cannot be said that development has suffered for want of
Statehood.
9.5 The Chief Secretary, Pondicherry, during the course of his oral submissions before the
Committee, stated that according to 11th Finance Commission, if at all Pondicherry was to become
a State, it should be given a Special Category status. According to the Chief Secretary, most of
the powers have now been delegated to the Chief Minister as well as Lieutenant-Governor. Both
of them are having administrative as also financial powers. He further stated that in other States,
files stop at the level of the Chief Minister whereas in Pondicherry, all the important files would
go upto the Lieutenant-Governor.
9.6 The Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, when asked by the Committee to clarify
about the next step to be taken by the Government in the matter, stated that according to the
Government, it was not correct to give the Special Category status now and some more time was
necessary.
9.7 The Committee takes note of the views expressed by a section of the society in
Pondicherry and feels that the sentiments of the people and the people’s elected
representatives cannot be ignored. The overwhelming view of all of them is in favour of
Statehood to the Union Territory of Pondicherry with Special Category status. The
Committee feels that the aspirations of the people have to be respected. The Committee
takes due note of the views of the Ministry that it will not be a viable State economically.
But the Committee cannot be oblivious to the fact that when Goa graduated into a State,
there were apprehensions that Goa might not sustain as a State because of its weak
financial base. But, today, Goa has proved it otherwise. Further, Pondicherry has a
Legislative Assembly with elected representatives.
9.8 The Committee is also given to understand that Pondicherry Government appointed
a Committee to go into its viability as a State and the then Chief Secretary of Pondicherry
had submitted the Report; the Report was examined and it was agreed, in principle, by the
Government that it would bring forward a Bill in the Parliament to grant Special Category
Status to Pondicherry. However, this proposal was shelved.
9.9 Looking at the practical point of view, the Committee is of the view that Pondicherry,
as a Union Territory, is a big handicap for the Chief Minister to function. Most of the
administrative powers are vested in the Lieutenant-Governor and files are cleared by him.
9.10. T aking into account all these factors, the Committee is of the view that the issue of
Statehood to Pondicherry needs to be considered in a holistic manner. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government may consider granting Statehood to Pondicherry with Special
Category Status.
B-II CATEGORY STATUS TO PONDICHERRY
10.1 The issue of upgrading Pondicheny to B-II category from ‘C’ category for the purpose of
HRA was raised at different levels during the visit of the Committee. It was contended that whereas

13
Port Blair and Panaji having less than 2 lakh population had been accorded the status of B-1 category,
Pondicherry was being deprived of the same. The Ministry while responding to the issue has
informed that the matter was referred to Ministry of Finance and that the Ministry of Finance has
stated that the proposal for grant of B-II category to Pondicherry had been considered in detail earlier
also but could not be agreed to because cities/towns were classified/reclassified on the basis of their
population as reflected in the decennial census report. Moreover, for the purpose of grant of HRA,
the population within the municipal area of the city is taken into account. As per census of 2001,
the population of Pondicherry (UA) was 5,05,959 and that of Pondicherry (MC) 2,20,865.
Accordingly, Pondicherry (UA) is classified as ‘B-ll’ for the purpose of CCA and ‘C’ class for HRA.
The Ministry also stated that since it does not fulfil the existing criteria i.e. the population of
Municipal limit area should be between 5-10 lakh for Classification of a city into B-II class as
recommended by the 5th Central Pay Commission and accepted by the Government. Therefore, the
demand for upgradation of Pondicherry as B-II class city for grant of HRA could not be agreed to.
10.2 The Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, during the course of his oral submissions
before the Committee, mentioned that the Pondicherry Government had recommended for its
upgradation but it could not be acceded to as the Ministry of Finance was not agreeable to the
same.
10.3 The city of Pondicherry, which is also the capital of the UT of Pondicherry has been
undergoing a rapid transformation. It has all the characteristics of a developed urban
agglomeration. The Committee takes note of the fact that the population of urban
agglomeration of Pondicherry exceeded 5.05 lakhs as per the Census of 2001. The rapid
growth of administration, industrialization, educational institutions; the population of urban
agglomeration exceeding five lakhs; the floating population of about one lakh per day, justify
the grant of B II status to Pondicherry. The Committee is also given to understand that Port
Blair and Panji were granted B II status, even though their population was less than that of
Pondicherry. The Committee expresses its concern over the discriminatory attitude shown
towards Pondicherry. When Port Blair and Panaji have been granted B II status, the
Committee cannot buy the argument given by the Government in respect of Pondicherry.
B II status, besides increasing HRA to Government employees will also enhance the status
of the city. The city will be able to get urban development schemes and more opportunities
for development. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that Government may grant
B II status to Pondicherry city for the purpose of payment of HRA. The Committee urges
upon the Government that “the relaxation made in the case of the cities of Port Blair and
Goa in this regard may also be extended to Pondicherry so that the officials of the Central/
UT Government are adequately compensated for their expenditure on housing.
RECOGNITION OF SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PONDICHERRY
11.1 During its visit to Pondicherry, the Committee came to know that people belonging to
Scheduled Tribes do not enjoy the status of Scheduled Tribes and the facilities accompanying it
such as reservation in education, employment, etc. in Pondicherry. This was causing problem for
the ST communities as their brethren in neighbouring districts of Tamil Nadu were getting the
benefit of reservation facility whereas they were being deprived of the same. Replying to a query
as to the reason for  excluding the STs from the demographic profile of the UT and that whether
the Government had any plan to provide reservation to the STs in Pondicherry, the Ministry of
Home Affairs forwarded the following facts given by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs:
“Constitution of India does not define Scheduled Tribes as such. Article 366 (25) refers to
Scheduled Tribes as those tribes or tribal communities who are scheduled in accordance
with Article 342 of the constitution. This Article states that only those communities who

14
have been declared as such by the President through an initial public notification will be
considered as Scheduled Tribes. Any further amendment in the list is through an Act of
Parliament. The list of Scheduled Tribes is State-specific and a community declared as
Scheduled Tribe in a State need not be so in another State. No community has been
specified as Scheduled Tribes in relation to the States of Haryana and Punjab and Union
Territories of Chandigarh, Delhi and Pondicherry. It further stated that the essential
characteristics were first laid down by the Lokur Committee. It mentioned that for  a
community to be identified as Scheduled Tribe the following characteristics were
required:—
(i) Indication of Primitive traits;
(ii) D istinctive culture;
(iii) Shyness of contact with the public at large;
(iv) Geographical isolation; and Backwardness-social and economic.
As per the modalities fixed for deciding inclusion in, exclusion from  and other modification
in the list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes approved in June, 1999, if the
concerned State Government recommends the proposal and forwards it to the Central
Government, it is sent to the Registrar General of India (RGI). The RGI, if satisfied with
the recommendations of the State Government, recommends the proposal to the Central
Government. Thereafter, Central Government refers the proposal to the National
Commission for Scheduled Tribes (erstwhile National Commission for SCs and STs) for
their recommendation. After the National Commission recommends, the matter is processed
for the decision of the Cabinet. According to the above procedure, only those cases that
have been agreed to by the concerned State Government, Registrar General of India as well
as National Commission for STs, are considered for amending legislation. After the decision
of the Cabinet, a Bill is introduced in Parliament. In case, a proposal is not supported by
the RGI, it is referred back to the State Government for reviewing or further justifying their
recommendations in the light of the observations of the RGI and these proposals remain
under consideration till an agreement is reached between the concerned State Government
and the RGI as to fulfilment of the criteria by the community concerned.”
11.2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs further stated that the UT Administration of Pondicherry had
recommended for inclusion of various communities in the list of Scheduled Tribes since 1982
onwards. The Registrar General of India in his report dated 18.8.1992 had, inter-alia reported that
the communities which were trying to seek their notification as Scheduled Tribe in relation to
Pondicherry represent a migrant stock with no cultural roots in the UT and did not answer the
laid down criteria. The proposal was referred to the UT Admn. for reviewing or further justifying
their recommendations in the light of the observations made by the RGI. The UT Administration
of Pondicherry vide their letter dated 2.09.2003 recommended five communities for inclusion in the
Scheduled Tribes list. Their details are given below:—
(i) lrular (including Sub-tribes of Irular);
a. Villi
b. Vettaikaran
(ii) Mlaikuravan;
(iii) Kattunayakan;
(iv) Yerukula; and
(v) Kuruman

15
UT Administration of Pondicherry requested the Ministry of Home Affairs to include the
above communities in the list of STs on the basis of recommendations made in the “Report
of identification of the Scheduled Tribes of Pondicherry-An ethnographic Study” prepared by
Dr. T. Subramanyam Naidu, Head of Department of Anthropology and Centre for Future Studies,
Pondicherry University, Pondicherry. The recommendation of the UT was again sent to RGI for
their comments on 16-0-2004. However, the UT Administration was requested on 5.7.2004 to send
a comprehensive ethnic study of each tribe to justify their inclusion with supporting information
to the Ministry. The UT Administration had forwarded a copy of the report prepared by
Dr. T. Subramanyam Naidu, Head of Department of Anthropology and Centre for Future Studies,
Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, to the Ministry on 20.7.2004 which was handed over to the
Office of the RGI. The RGI vide their D.O. No. 8/1/04-SS (Pondicherry) dated 7-2/2005 was of
the view that the claims of the above communities for inclusion in the list of ST of UT of
Pondicherry were not justified. The Committee was further informed that the comments of the RGI
had been referred to the Government of Pondicherry for further justification on the claims of above
communities, vide this Ministry’s letter dated 2.5.2005.
11.2.2 The Committee expresses its concern that even though the UT Administration of
Pondicherry has been recommending for recognition of the Scheduled Tribes, the Registrar
General of India has not taken any positive decision so far. His views on five criteria are
not pragmatic and hence may be dispensed with. The Committee also notes that the above
mentioned tribes existed in UT of Pondicherry even before its independence in 1954, as per
the reports of Backward Classes Commission of Pondicherry. The Committee is of the view
that RGI is procrastinating the matter. Keeping in view the existence of scheduled Tribes
as identified by the Government of Pondicherry, Backward classes commission and the
Ethnographic study of Dr. Subramaniyam Naidu, the Committee recommends notification by
Government of the five Scheduled Tribes identified by the UT Administration of Pondicherry
in terms of Articles 342 read with Article 366 (25) of the Constitution.
ELECTION TO PANCHA YATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS
12.1 Panchayats, evolved in ancient India, are one of the oldest democratic systems still in use
today. They have been the backbone of the Indian villages since the beginning of recorded history.
Gandhiji, the father of the nation, had aptly remarked that Indian Independence must begin at the
bottom and every village ought to be a republic or Panchayat having powers. Mahatma Gandhi
advocated Panchayati Raj, as the foundation of India’s political system. The Constitution (Seventy-
Third Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for establishment of a three-tier structure (Village Panchayat,
Panchayat Samiti or Intermediate-level Panchayat and Zila Parishad or District-level Panchayat);
establishment of Gram Sabhas at the village level and regular elections to Panchayats every five years.
12.2 The Constitution (Seventy- Third Amendment) Act, 1992 also envisages empowered
Panchayats as institutions of self-government at the village level capable of:
➢ Planning and executing village level public works and their maintenance; and
➢ Ensuring welfare of the people at the village level including health, education,
communal harmony, social justice, particularly gender and caste-based discrimination,
dispute resolution, welfare of children, especially the girl child.
12.2.1 A rticle 243 E (3) provides as under:
“An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be ccmpleted-
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution;

16
Provided that where the reminder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would
have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under
this clause for constituting the Panchayat for such period.”
12.3 The Committee during its visit to Pondicherry, was informed that elections to Panchayat Raj
Institutions (PRIs) have not taken place in the UT for the last thirty years. Replying to a query,
the Secretary, Panchayati Raj informed the Committee that Court’s stay was the reason for not
holding PRI elections in the UT, and that it had been vacated and Administration was ready to hold
election any time.
12.4 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that in spite of the
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) having been granted constitutional status, and under
Articles 243 (K) and (L) of the Constitution regular elections are required to be held to the
panchayats every five years, elections thereto have not been held in Pondicherry for the
last 30 years. In this connection, the Committee takes notes of the constitutional provision
under Article 243 E (3). The Committee takes strong exception to the non-compliance of the
constitutional obligation. The Committee is happy to learn that the order for conducting
elections to Panchayati Raj Institutions has been issued recently.
PERSPECTIVE PLAN FOR TOURISM DEVELOPMENT
13.1 Pondicherry has a rich French Cultural heritage, having been the capital of the French
Colonies in India since the 17th  Century. Pondicherry region, with a coastal line of 45 Kms, well
planned French Bouleward town, palm fringed beaches, resorts, backwaters, water sports centre,
fishing villages, harbour, the pier, Aurobindo Ashram, Auroville and other attractions Pondicherry is
the ideal place for spending holidays with family. The tourism potential of Pondicherry is not fully
tapped. In view of providing adequate and better facilities to visiting tourists the administration with
the help of the Government of India has been jointly taking efforts to boost tourism activities.
13.2 On being asked to comment on the perspective plan for developing tourism in the UT, the
Ministry of Home Affairs have stated that in the field of Tourism UT Government has following
perspective plan:—
– “Operationalization of Pondicherry Airport and extension of the existing runway in
order to operate ATR/Boeing type aircrafts.
– Establishing Green Field Airport at Karaikal
– Development of Port in Pondicherry and Karaikal.
– Development of Thirunallar (Lord Shaneeshwar) as a Temple Town.
– Development of Art and Craft Village in Murungapakkam, Pondicherry.
– Development of Family Entertainment Centre on the Beach Road.
– Revitalization of Bharathi Park.
– Development of Karaikal Beach at an estimate of Rs. 5 crores.
– Government of Pondicherry is one of the equity holders in the Tourist Train Southern
Splendor which is proposed to be launched shortly on lines of “Palace on Wheels”.
The train will cover the southern States such as Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry.
To provide an enabling environment of attracting private investment in the tourism
sector (for the construction of hotels, resorts, entertainment parks etc.) the
Government of Pondicherry is offering the following subsidies:—

17
• An investment subsidy of 25% subject to a maximum of 100 lakhs.
• An interest subsidy equal to a difference of 5%.
• Reimbursement of Registration fees on purchase of land and building and Town
Planning charges.
• Incentive for roof repairs and facade improvements upto a maximum of
Rs. 1.50 lakhs per heritage building.
• Construction subsidy upto 20% of the building costs for additional rooms subject
to a maximum of Rs. 5 lakhs per heritage building.
– Acquisition of Iand under the Land Bank Scheme for tourism purpose.
– V arious steps are being taken for Preservation of Heritage and Promotion of Rural
Tourism.
– Promotion of Adventure Tourism and Promotion of Health Tourism is being actively
considered.”
13.3 The Committee feels that in view of the historical significance and geographical
location, Pondicherry has the potential to develop into a good tourist destination. The
Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Pondicherry Government in making
it as an ideal tourist destination. Airports are an important ingredient for growth of tourism
and in that direction the Committee recognizes the necessity of Pondicherry and Karaikal
airports. The Committee recommends that the Central Government should make all efforts
for early operationalisation of the Pondicherry Airport and establishing of Karaikal Airport.
The Committee also recommends that the development of Pondicherry and Karaikal Ports
and Art and Craft Village in Murungapakkam may be taken up and completed at the
earliest as these would give good infrastrucutral support required for tourism. Construction
of Star Hotels may also be taken up and the development of Medical Tourism may be
emphasized.
AGRICULTURE AND IRRIGATION
14.1 Alth ough agricultural growth in Pondicherry had been negative in the nineties, it has made
considerable progress on a number of fronts. Improved crop production technologies have been
adopted, crop and irrigation intensities have increased and a network of support institutions and
infrastructure have been developed. However, agricultural productivity has remained low and not
increased perceptibly during the last ten years. In addition, there are emerging signs of land
degradation, poor soil management and excessive exploitation of water resources.
14.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that it had become necessary for the Government of
UT of Pondicherry to reorient agriculture production so as to enable the farmers to produce for
the market. This required transfer of knowledge and skills to them. Hence the department decided
to open Uzhavar Udhaviyagams (Farmers’ Help Centres) for  each revenue village which would
ultimately be the knowledge hub of the villages. It would be a one-stop solution for the various
problems being faced by the farming community. Towards this end, the Government of UT of
Pondicherry proposes to introduce large scale diversification of agriculture, encourage less water
intensive and more profitable horticulture production, mechanization, introduction of concepts of
hi-tech and precision agriculture, close co-ordination and interaction between the Government
Agriculture College (PAJANCOA) and the farming community, introduction of post-harvest
technologies like setting up of cold storage plants, rural godowns etc., setting up of market
forecasting centers, introduce contract farming in floriculture activities like orchids, wide spread
use of computers and internet etc., are the thrust areas of the current year.

18
14.3 The Committee expresses its concern over the fast declining net area sown and low
agricultural productivity in the last ten years. Productivity remaining static, land
degradation, poor soil management and excessive exploitation of water resources indicate
the poor health of agriculture sector. The proposal of the UT of Pondicherry to open Uzhavar
Udhaviyagams (Farmers’ Help Centres) is a path-breaking solution to the ills ailing the
farm sector. The Committee is happy to learn that the plan has been implemented and feels
that it should be pursued in the right perspective.
FISHERY DEVELOPMENT
15.1 The Union Territory of Pondicherry comprises of four maritime regions with 45 Kms of a
coastal line and 675 sq. kms of inshore waters. Various development oriented plans and welfare
schemes are implemented with an objective to augment marine, inland and brackish water fishery
production and to develop socio-economic conditions of fishermen community. The Ministry of
Home Affairs informed that the UT of Pondicherry proposed to increase the fish production to
57,000 MT by the end of Tenth Plan.
15.2 T sunami left a major impact on the fishermen community in UT of Pondicherry. 599 people
died in Pondicherry due to the killer tidal waves of tsunami, out of which 492 in Karaikal and 107
in Pondicherry. The fishermen had borne the brunt of tsunami and the losses incurred by them are
heavy, both in terms of lives lost and damage to the fishing rafts.
15.3 When the Committee sought to know about the Government’s plans to rebuild the affected
region for diversifying agriculture and fishery by promoting crab/shrismp culture, etc. the Ministry
of Home Affairs stated as under:
“A comprehensive plan for modernizing the fishing activities being planned as a part of
World Bank assisted project to increase the fish production of this territory and also to
substantially enhance the living standard of fishermen in this territory. It includes
reconstruction of fishing village, modernization of fishing vessels, introduction of fishing
trawlers, training of fishermen on modem fishing technology etc. Regarding promotion of
Shrimp culture, clearance of aquaculture, authority of India is needed for any renewal and
formation of new farms. Action is being taken to identify the uncultivable lands suitable for
shrimp culture. It is also stated that the 12 Shrimp farms with an extent of 36.28 Ha. Of
area at Karaikal has been affected by recent tsunami disaster on 26.12.2004.”
15.4 The Committee is of the view that early action is needed to bring the people
belonging to agricultural and fishermen communities affected by Tsunami, back to
normalcy. Some rehabilitation measures have already been taken. Now, it is time that
sufficient infrastructure is in place so that they could start leading normal life. The
Committee desires that the comprehensive plan for modernizing fishing activities initiated
by the Government may be implemented at the earliest. For promotion of shrimp culture
clearance of Aquaculture Authority may be obtained at the earliest. Identification of
cultivable land may be completed soon so that shrimp culture may be developed at the
earliest.

19
19
CHAPTER-III
TSUNAMI-REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
16. The massive earthquake and resultant tsunami, which occurred on 26.12.2004, caused
unprecedented damage to life and property. Extensive damage was reported from Car Nicobar,
Katchal, Chowra, Nancowry, Great Nicobar, etc., in the Nicobar District and Netaji Nagar and Hut
Bay in Andaman District. The earthquake and Tsunami caused extensive damage in Port Blair
harbour, jetties at Aberdeen, Phoenix Bay, Junglighat and Haddo were flooded by tidal waters. In
the Islands, 3513 persons are reported to have lost their lives (including those missing and
presumed dead).
16.1 The disaster left a severe impact on livelihood. Fishermen living on the coasts lost their
boats and fishing nets. The disaster caused an enormous environmental impact which will affect
the region for many years to come. It has been reported that severe damage has been inflicted on
ecosystems such as mangroves, coral reefs, forests, coastal wetlands, vegetation, rock formations,
animal and plant biodiversity and groundwater. The main effect is being caused by poisoning of
the freshwater supplies and the soil by saltwater infiltration and deposit of a salt layer over arable
land. Wells that served communities were invaded by sea, sand and earth; and aquifers were
invaded through porous rock. The saline soil becomes sterile, and it is difficult and costly to
restore the same for agriculture. It may also cause the death of plants and important soil
micro-orgarnisms.
16.2 The Committee, during its visit to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, made a study of the
impact of tsunami tidal waves on Andaman and Nicobar Islands and held discussions with a cross-
section of the people. The Member of Parliament representing the Union Territory stated that the
effect of tsunami was enormous and about 10,000 houses were to be constructed but the various
restrictions regarding forest conservation were an impediment in the rehabilitation work for
construction of permanent houses. He pleaded for payment of cash instead of built-up houses for
them. Further, he stated that Government should provide interest free loans for development of
trade and commerce which was totally ruined. Augmentation of helicopter service in view of
the strategic position of the Islands was also sought by him. He was of the view that
timely disbursement of compensation was very vital for building people’s confidence in the
Government.
16.3 The representatives of Tsunami affected people were of the view that interest free housing
loan should be provided to them. Every affected family should be provided with at least one
Government job. Compensation should be granted to the next of kin of those who had died as was
given to the victims of avalanche disaster in J&K.
16.4 The Committee. also visited the Tsunami affected villages (Tamaloo and Chuk Chuka) of
Car Nicobar to see the intermediate shelters and interacted with the people and their representatives
called Captains, Vice-Captains. They expressed reservations about the permanent shelters proposed.
to be built of concrete and steel. They wanted construction of permanent shelters with local
materials which could be expanded later on for accommodating more members of their families.
Since iron is prone to rust due to salinity it was told to be unfit for rehabilitation units.

20
17. Explaining about the damage to the agricultural land due to tsunami, the Development
Commissioner stated that the total area damaged was 10837 hectares out of which paddy and other
field crops were on 1730 hectares whereas plantation crops were on 9107 hectares. The total area
under submergence was 4339 hectares comprising paddy and other field crops. The total
reclaimable area was 6561 hectares which consisted of 694 hectares of paddy and other field crops
and 5867 hectares of plantation crops. He mentioned that a total number of 6020 farmers were
affected out of which 1743 were in Andaman district and 4277 in Nicobar district. The total
financial loss was to the tune of Rs. 321 crore. The Commissioner mentioned that out of a total
livestock/poultry of 10,85,739 in the Islands before Tsunami, 1,57,577 livestock/poultry were lost
due to tsunami for which Rs. 11.83 crore as compensation was sanctioned by Government of
India.
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
18. Explaining about the rehabilitation efforts made, the Ministry of Home Affairs, in their
written note, stated that the Rajiv Gandhi Relief Package, announced immediately after the Tsunami,
had an outlay of Rs. 821.88 crore. Out of the outlay of Rs. 821.88 crore for immediate relief and
rehabilitation, an amount of Rs. 532 crore was sanctioned during the financial year 2005-06, out
of which an amount of Rs. 519.81 crore had been spent. Rs. 235 crore has been sanctioned for
the current year. The Ministry of Home Affairs also stated that construction of 9565 shelters was
organised for temporarily housing homeless families and these have been fully occupied. The
construction of these shelters was done in a record time of about two-and-a-half months, well
before the onset of monsoon last year.
18.1 The Government has recently approved (December, 2005) a long-term reconstruction
programme for restoring the infrastructure and livelihood in Andaman and Nicobar Islands with a
total outlay of Rs. 2677.91 crore. It is to be implemented over a period of three years. As part
of the reconstruction programme, the Government of India has approved a programme for
construction of 9714 permanent houses for the victims. The whole programme would be
implemented under the overall supervision of Ministry of Urban Development. Excavation work has
started in 20 out of 25 clusters. Construction materials have started reaching the Islands. The
target date for completion of the shelters is December, 2007, except for the shelters at Campbell
Bay which are dependent on construction of roads that are planned.
18.2 Relief for small traders and businessmen: The Ministry have also stated that revival
package for small traders and businessmen in Andaman and Nicobar Islands has been approved
under which outstanding amount in respect of loans up to Rs. 2 lakh as on 26.12.2004 will be
written off from the books of financial institutions. For loans beyond Rs. 2 lakh and up to
Rs. 5 lakh, normal interest on outstanding principal amount as on 26.12.2004 will be waived off
for three years. The total value of this package is Rs. 57.51 crore. A proposal for further
enhancing this package is under consideration.
18.3 Compensation for loss of crop:  The compensation for loss of crops was substantially
enhanced by the Government of India. As against the original rate of Rs. 4,000/- per hectare for
plantation crops, the rate has been enhanced to Rs. 90.465/- per hectare. In the case of other
agricultural crops, the rate has been enhanced from Rs. 1,000/- to Rs. 2,500/-. per hectare to
Rs. 22,231/- per hectare. The enhanced package is under implementation.
18.4 Special Package for Agriculture:  A special agricultural package of Rs. 239.54 crore under
Rajiv Gandhi Relief Package for reclaiming agricultural land that was damaged has been approved
for Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Such a package has not been approved for any other State.
Under this programme, the following activities have been undertaken:

21
➢ Repair and reconstruction of dykes;
➢ Cleaning of debris of affected areas;
➢ Application of organic manure in plantation crops area;
➢ Rainwater harvesting through construction of check dams; and
➢ Supply of pumpsets.
19. The tsunami tidal waves have caused widespread devastation in the Islands resulting
in loss of human life as well as livestock besides loss of property. The Committee feels that
considering the magnitude of destruction of life and property, whatever rehabilitation that
has been provided would not match the loss caused by the natural calamity. But the relief
provided will mitigate the suffering though the scares may not be removed permanently.
However, the Government should not leave any stone unturned to ensure early
rehabilitation of the affected people and to undertake reconstruction process to ensure that
they start their normal life at the earliest. The Committee understands that the
Government have taken up several relief measures. In regard to construction of permanent
houses, the Committee feels that the permanent shelters should be at locations which are
high on ground near the earlier habitations as the livelihood of the people requires them
to continue residing there. Similarly, while constructing the houses, use of local material
such as bamboo, wood, etc., should be preferred as they are earthquake-resistant and give
better protection from sun. The Committee also takes note of the fact that some people,
who met the Committee during its visit, desired that money may be provided to their
families so that they can construct their houses themselves. This is a better proposition
because it will engage the families in the reconstruction work till the completion of the
construction. The Government may, therefore, consider providing them financial help
besides other required material to enable the families engage themselves in the
reconstruction work.
19.1 The Committee has noted that revival package for small traders consists of waiver
of loans and interest thereon, etc. The Committee recommends that the Government may
consider increasing the package of Rs. 57.15 crore further. It also recommends that the
Government may consider providing interest-free fresh loans for at least two years to
enable them to start their business afresh. Though the Government has given compensation
for loss of agricultural crops which is now Rs. 22,231 per hectare, this is a pittance
considering the fact that agricultural land has now become saline and uncultivable and
barren. It can no longer be used for any agricultural activities and even grass will not grow.
Therefore, the Government should consider providing some package for permanent
rehabilitation of the farmers whose agricultural land is no longer useful. The package may
also contain providing assistance for business or employment.
19.2 The Committee feels that the request of the people in the islands for employment
to at least one person in each affected family needs to be considered. A one-time creation
of employment opportunities would give permanent relief to the families. Besides this,
filling up of 3000 vacant posts would also cover a large number of people. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government may consider these proposals immediately and
take decisions thereon.
Pondicherry
20. The killer tidal waves of tsunami triggered by series of earthquakes of unprecedented scale
off the Indonesian Coast struck the coastal areas of the Union Territory of Pondicherry on the early

22
hours on 26 December, 2004. The tsunami waves hit the coasts of South India with such ferocity
and suddenness that it has turned out to be the deadliest natural disaster in the recent history,
bringing huge devastation of catastrophic proportions. Coastal fishing community and some of the
poorest people living in the coastal regions were the most affected with huge loss of lives as well
as fishing crafts and tackles and destruction of habitat and houses. Children and women were
affected most adversely as they were the least able to resist and were dragged into watery graves.
An estimated 30,000 people became homeless in the Union Territory of Pondicherry. The death toll
was 599 - 492 in Karaikal and 107 in Pondicherry.
20.1 Sixteen villages in Pondicherry and seventeen villages in Karaikal have been affected. 17,432
people in Karaikal and 26,000 people in Pondicherry have been displaced. The agricultural crop in
792 hectares of land has been damaged. Owing to the tsunami 10,061 houses were damaged.
Twenty-two relief camps were set up in Karaikal and twenty-six in Pondicherry to take care of
the relief operations of about 30,000 victims of tsunami during its peak period of functioning.
20.2 El aborating upon the relief operations, the District Commissioner, Karaikal stated that 15000
people were brought to the twenty-two relief camps within ten days of Tsunami tragedy. They
were provided with rice, kerosene and other cooking materials. NGOs also helped by way of
community kitchen. The Government also provided relief to fishermen who lost their boats
depending upon the fishing craft. The compensation of Rs. 3750/-  per hectare, as immediate relief,
was given for sea water intrusion in the agricultural fields. Another Rs 60000/-per hectare would
be given to them to take steps to restore the productivity of land. For loss of cattle also
compensation was provided on a certain yardstick. He mentioned that 1200 temporary shelters were
constructed and Rs 1000/- per family was provided for repair of houses. For constructing
permanent shelters land had been identified and required modalities were being worked out.
20.3 Reflecting upon relief and rehabilitation measures, the Relief and Rehabilitation
Commissioner stated that there were twenty-two relief centers at Karaikal and twenty-six at
Pondicherry. Ex gratia payment of Rs. 1 lakh each was made to the families of the deceased and
an amount ranging from Rs. 5000 to Rs. 4.5 lakh were given for various items such as funeral
expense, medical expense, housing subsidy for damaged houses, purchase of catamarans/boats,
wooden mechanized boats, etc. Besides this, Rs. 3750/- was also immediately given to each farmer
for damage to crops.
20.4 Rajiv Gandhi Relief Package:  The Ministry of Home Affairs have stated that immediately
after tsunami hit the coastal area of Pondicherry on 26 December, 2004, the Government of India
sanctioned an amount of Rs. 155.62 crore under the Rajiv Gandhi Rehabilitation package to the
Pondicherry Government for the purpose of immediate relief and rehabilitation measures.
20.5 Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme:  The Government has recently approved in
December, 2005, a long-term reconstruction programme for restoring the infrastructure and
livelihood in Pondicherry. This long-term reconstruction programme has a total outlay of
Rs. 518.08 crore.
20.6 Housing Reconstruction: It was further stated the Government of Pondicherry has planned
to construct 10,061 permanent houses for the victims. These will be spread over 34 settlements.
The Government of Pondicherry has formulated a Government Order governing the involvement of
the NGOs with a novel idea of insisting the NGOs to deposit 10 per cent to 20 per cent of the
project cost in any nationalised bank in the name of the NGO themselves but governed by a
tripartite agreement restricting the withdrawal of the amount by the concerned NGO after
completing 85 per cent of the work. So far, 15 MoUs have been signed with NGOs for
construction of 5,042 houses in 23 settlements. The total project cost amounts to Rs. 42.45 crore.
A total extent of 57-62-74 hectares has been acquired to facilitate construction of houses by the

23
NGOs. Out of 10,061 houses, 341 houses have already been completed and 4,827 houses are under
various stages of construction. Land acquisition is in progress for construction of remaining 4,893
houses.
20.7 Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project Under World Bank Aided Project:  The
Ministry have also stated that a World Bank aided project with an outlay of Rs. 158 crore for
providing permanent shelter and restoration of livelihood programme is under implementation. The
Pondicherry Government has constituted a Society namely Project Implementation Agency (PIA)
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 to serve as an umbrella agency to implement the
assistance given by the World Bank and to undertake various other activities related thereto for
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction in various sectors. So far the agency has taken up
construction work at 3 villages and development of infrastructural facilities in 8 villages. This apart,
the agency has taken up the work of filling up of low-lying areas where the NGOs have been
assigned with construction of houses for the affected persons.
21. The Committee notes that about 800 hectares of agricultural land as well as crops
were affected by the tidal waves in Pondicherry. Much of the land may remain permanently
unfit for farming. The relief given may not give permanent compensation to the affected
people. In all the cases of permanent loss of land, the Committee suggests that the
Government may consider raising the compensation appropriately.
21.1 After Tsunami, many farmers have been severely affected with many children getting
orphaned. Though Government has provided relief package and rehabilitation, it may also
consider providing permanent compensation in the form of reservation in employment to
such victims. This is all the more necessary in the case of orphaned children.
21.2 In regard to construction of permanent houses, the Committee expresses its concern
that out of 10, 061 houses, only 341 houses have been completed so far and it feels that
this way it is going to take a long time for completing all the houses. The Committee
recommends that the pace of construction may be increased and all the houses may be
completed within a definite time frame. Land acquisition for construction of houses may be
completed at the earliest so that construction may start at the earliest.
21.3 The World Bank aided project is an appreciable effort of the international agency.
Government may monitor the project so that targets are achieved within the given time
frame.

24
CHAPTER-IV
CHANDIGARH
22. The Union Territory of Chandigarh was conceived in 1949 as the capital of Punjab,
following the partition of India. The foundation stone of the city was laid in 1952 in the lap of
Shivalik hills and it was named after Goddess Chandi, whose temple “Chandi Mandir” is in its close
vicinity. A number of highly eminent and imaginative architects, both foreign and Indian were
involved in the planning of this city. Those included Charles Edouard Jeanneret also known as
Le Corbusier, a French born in Switzerland, who was instrumental in developing the Master
Plan and designing the Capital Complex. Chandigarh continued as the capital of Punjab till
1 November, 1966. Following the reorganisation of that State into Punjab and Haryana, the Union
Territory of Chandigarh was created under Section 4 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act of 1966
with its administrative functioning directly under the Central Government. The city however
continues to be the combined capital of Punjab and Haryana.
22.1 The Union Territory Administration is headed by the Administrator, who is appointed by the
President of India under Article 239(2) of the Constitution of India. The Administrator is assisted
by an Adviser. The Adviser oversees the day-to-day administration. The powers to legislate vest
with the Parliament. The nodal Ministry for the Union Territory of Chandigarh is the Ministry of
Home Affairs. Being a Union territory without a legislature, the entire plan and non-plan expenditure
is met directly from the Consolidated Fund of India. All its income goes directly to the Consolidated
Fund of India. Therefore, a single demand covering all functions of the Administration is presented
to the Parliament as part of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
22.2 The Union Territory of Chandigarh comprises one Parliamentary Constituency and one
district. The Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh (MCC) came into existence in May, 1994 under
the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (as extended to Chandigarh) by an Amendment Act of
1994. An elected Mayor heads the Corporation. The Commissioner, Municipal Corporation looks
after general administration of the Corporation.
22.3 There are a number of Boards and Corporations under various Departments in Union
Territory of Chandigarh. However, two of the more important Corporations/Boards are the
Chandigarh Industrial and Tourism Development Corporation (CITCO) and Chandigarh Housing
Board (CHB) to look after the promotion of industries and tourism and housing, respectively.
Legislature for Chandigarh
23. During its visit from 13 to 14 September, 2005 to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, the
Committee was informed that the administration of the UT is very bureaucratic and not accessible
to public and there was no involvement of people’s representative due to absence of a legislature
in Pondicherry. The local Member of Parliament suggested an elected Pradesh Council and
Executive Councillors for the UT of Chandigarh instead of Legislative Assembly to solve the
problem of inaccessibility of administration.
23.1 Replying to a question as to whether the Government had ever considered/proposed to
create a Legislative Assambly for Chandigarh and whether the Government had any other proposal
such as creation of an elected body like Pradesh Council and Executive Councillors for Chandigarh,
24

25
the Ministry had informed that there was no such proposal with the Government nor had any such
proposal been considered in the recent past.
23.2 Replying to a question as to whether an Inter-State Development Council consisting of
representatives from the States of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh and UT of Chandigarh
should be constituted for implementation of developmental projects, the Ministry had informed that
formation of an Inter-State Development Council was not considered essential after the enactment
of the Constitution (Seventy third and Seventy fourth Amendments) Acts. The urban and rural local
bodies were effectively discharging various development functions in the Union Territory. There
was also a forum, namely, the Home Minister’s Advisory Committee for Chandigarh which, inter
alia, consists of representatives from the Municipal Corporation and the Zilla Parishad, where
development issues relating to Chandigarh were deliberated upon.
23.3 The Home Secretary, during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee, stated
that they had not received any proposal for an elected body in the form of an Assembly or a
Metropolitan Council nor was any such proposal under their consideration. He also stated that the
present set up was functioning well and whatever support Chandigarh needed from the Government
of India, it was being provided, He felt that if they were able to constitute a Metropolitan Planning
Committee and strengthen and ensure that the Advisory Council to the Administrator meet more
frequently and also if the Home Minister’s Advisory Council meet regularly, there may not be a
need for alteration of the present situation. On being asked to respond to the demand of the local
MP for a Pradesh Council, the Home Secretary stated that, at present, there was no necessity for
such a political body. He further stated that it would be difficult to say, at present, as to what kind
of a political body would be there in Chandigarh in future but such a political body may not be
required right now.
23.4 The Committee notes the view of the Home Secretary that the present arrangement
is working satisfactorily. However, when the Committee visited Chandigarh, various political
leaders and general public informed that there was no forum to ventilate their grievances.
The Committee is also constrained to learn that it is very difficult for the general public
to meet the Administrator and that they felt that the present arrangement is not able to
solve their problems. The Committee is of the view that the Municipal Corporation cannot
solve all the problems of the people and the Advisory Council cannot help things to the
extent people want their aspirations to be fulfilled. Thus, there needs to be some
mechanism by which people have better access to the administration and which can address
and redress their grievances. Such mechanism, besides solving the problems of the people,
would also fulfil their aspirations. Therefore, keeping in view the aspirations of the people’s
representatives and the general public at large, the Committee recommends that some kind
of arrangement should be put in place in the UT of Chandigarh which should be
easily accessible to the public and which could effectively and adequately redress their
grievances.
Metropolitan Planning Committee
24. The Cqmmittee was apprised that the population of Chandigarh has crossed one million and
therefore should have a Metropolitan Planning Committee
1 as per norms. But it was learnt that even
the District Planning Committee 2 has not yet been constituted in the UT, which may be instrumental
in preparing draft development plan for the entire district after consolidating the plans prepared by
the Panchayats and Municipalities.
1 Article 243 ZE
2 Article 243 ZD

26
24.1 Citing reasons for not creating the Metropolitan Planning Committee in UT of Chandigarh
so far and explaining as to how the people’s representatives are associated/involved in preparation
of the plan of the UT, in the absence of District Planning Committee, the Ministry has informed
that the creation of a Metropolitan Planning Committee, which would be best suited for Chandigarh,
requires enactment of suitable legislation. The Home Secretary, in his presentation before the
Committee, stated that population of Chandigarh as per 1991 census was more than nine lakh and
by now the number would have crossed one million. Steps would, therefore, now be taken towards
constituting a Metropolitan Planning Committee consisting of urban Chandigarh and also the 18
villages. He also felt that it was the urban planning which the administration had lost control on
and by setting up of Metropolitan Planning Committee, these things could be taken care of.
24.2 The Committee notes that the Metropolitan Planning Committee can go a long way
in solving the problems of the people of Chandigarh and fulfilling their aspirations. Even
though the Metropolitan Planning Committee is not the ultimate solution to the elected
legislative body, it can, to a large extent, address the problems of the masses. The
Committee suggests that suitable legislation may be brought in at the earliest so that steps
may be initiated for setting up of the Metropolitan Planning Committee.
Advisory Council to Administrator
25. There are two advisory bodies relating to Chandigarh – the Home Minister’s Advisory
Committee and the Administrator’s Advisory Council. The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that
the Administrator’s Advisory Council was constituted on 6 January, 2005 and expanded on
20 October, 2005. The Council met on 31 January, 2005 and a few sub-groups have been
constituted. Similarly, the Home Minister’s Advisory Committee consists of the Administrator, UT
Administration, Member of Parliament from the Union Territory and members from the Municipal
Corporation, Chandigarh, including the Mayor and Zila Parishad.
25.1 The Administrator’s Advisory Council comprises the Member of Parliament; Mayor,
Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh; Chairman, Zila Parishad; three Councillors, Municipal
Corporation; one member from Zila Parishad; Presidents of various social bodies and other eminent
persons. All the national political parties have been included as members in the Council in order
to enlarge its representative character.
25.2 On the functioning and effectiveness of the Advisory Council, the Horne Secretary stated
that the Advisory Council to the Administrator should meet more frequently and needs to be
strengthened. He further apprised that the Council is not as broad-based as it should have been.
He also felt that members of the Advisory Council, should be sufficiently empowered and it be
made more broad-based. It should also meet more frequently.
25.3 The Committee understands that infrequent meetings of the Advisory Council to
Administrator might be causing problems in redressing the grievances of the people. In the
absence of a legislative body, at least, other bodies such as the Advisory Council should be
given the necessary teeth to address the people’s grievances. The Committee agrees with
the Home Secretary that the Council should meet more frequently. The Committee,
therefore, suggests that necessary steps may be taken in that direction to ensure that the
Council meet more frequently. The Committee also agrees with the view of the Home
Secretary that members of the Advisory Council should be adequately empowered. It
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take necessary steps to redefine the
powers and functions of the members of the Advisory Council and steps may also be taken
to give more powers to the Council as such. As regards the suggestion of Home Secretary
that the Council needs to be broad-based, the Committee has not received any concrete

27
proposal from the Ministry. The Committee, however, feels that the issue needs to be
deliberated upon and steps taken in this direction too.
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh
26. The Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh came into being with effect from 24 May, 1994
after the extension of Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act in 1994
was passed. The areas included in Municipal Corporation are:
(i) City of Chandigarh as notified by Administrator, UT of Chandigarh;
(ii) The area of erstwhile Notified Area Committee, Manimajra; and
(iii) The villages of Attawa, Badheri, Burail and Buterla.
26.1 The entire area of Municipal Corporation has been divided into 20 wards and each ward
is represented by an elected councillor. Besides this, members from amongst the persons, who are
eminent/distinguished in public life, are nominated by the Administrator, UT. Member of Parliament
from Chandigarh is an ex-officio member of the Municipal Corporation. Thus, in all there are 30
councillors, 20 elected, 9 nominated and one ex-officio. One third of total number of seats to be
filled up by direct election are reserved for women. Similarly, out of seats reserved for scheduled
castes, one third are reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes. At present 7 seats
out of 20 seats are reserved for women. Besides, out of 9 nominated members 2 are women. At
present the Corporation has 11 women councillors.
26.2 The term of the Municipal Corporation is for five years and that of Mayor, Senior Deputy
Mayor and Deputy Mayor is one year each. The office of Mayor is reserved for a women
councillor in the first and fourth year and in favour of Scheduled Caste member in the third year.
26.3 The first elected body of the Corporation came into existence on 23 December. 1996 and
completed its term on 22 December, 2001. The second term of Municipal Corporation started with
effect from 1 January, 2002.
26.4 The working of Municipal Corporation is based on the Committee system under which
various sub-committees dealing with specified subjects, such as Water supply and Sewerage,
Roads, Slum Development, Fire Services, Environment. and City Beautification, House tax etc. have
been constituted. Each of these sub-committees is headed by a chairman whereas the Finance and
Contract committee is headed by Mayor. The tenure of the Finance and Contract committee is
5 years whereas the tenure of other committees is one year. Different committees have been
delegated financial and other powers to carry on the work relating to Municipal Corporation
functions.
26.5 The main functions performed by the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh are water supply
and sewerage disposal, street lighting, sanitation, community centres, roads and bridges,
horticulture, fire services, rehabilitation of colonies/slums, whereas some regulatory functions such
as removal/prevention of encroachments on Municipal land, prevention of deposit/dumping of malba
and garbage at non-designated places, management of municipal property and management of
cremation ground are also performed by the Corporation.
26.6 The Committee during its visit also interacted with the Mayor and Councillors of Municipal
Corporation of Chandigarh. The Committee was apprised of the various initiatives taken by the
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh viz. augmentation of water supply scheme, paid parking,
sahej safai kendras, garbage processing units, idle truck parking, multi-level parking etc. The
Committee was told that the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh is an elected body with a lot of
responsibilities but limited authority and financial resources. The Committee was apprised that the

28
decision on devolution of 17% of budget of administration of UT, as recommended by Second
Delhi Finance Commission, has not been communicated to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh.
Besides, it was also requested to raise tax revenue to 23% in view of large scale work to be
undertaken by the Municipal Corporation.
26.7 Replying to a question about the coordination mechanism between the MCC and the
Administration, the Ministry has informed that there has been no problem of coordination between
the two. It further stated that the Municipal Corporation Act governs the relationship between the
Administration and the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. The budget estimates prepared by the
MCC are approved by the Administration under Section 86 of the Act. Besides, as per the
provisions of Section 69 of the Act, a copy of the proceedings of the meetings of the House is
sent to the Administration by the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh. All major decisions/
directions of the Administration are brought to the notice of the House of the Corporation through
commissioner’s office.
26.7.1 On the demand of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh for increasing the devolution of
23% tax revenue to MCC, the Ministry has stated that the National Capital Territory of Delhi has
since constituted the Third Delhi Finance Commission, vide order dated: 21.10.04 to make
recommendations on devolution of funds to local bodies for the five year period commencing from
1.4.06. Under Section 84-A(I) of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh)
Act, 1994, the Finance Commission constituted under Section 107-A of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act, 1957, is required to act as the Finance Commission in respect of Chandigarh also.
Chandigarh Administration vide order dated: 6-1-05 have also specified the terms of reference of
Third Delhi Finance Commission. Since the Third Delhi Finance Commission has been constituted,
the recommendations on further devolution of funds to MCC, as and. when received will be
considered for implementation the Ministry informed. It was further stated that the
recommendations of the Second Delhi Finance Commission were for devolution of 17% of the total
tax revenue to the M.C.C. which have been accepted vide letter dated 17-8-05 by the Government
of India and further steps are being taken by the administration accordingly.
26.8 While deposing before the Committee, the Administrator to the Chandigarh Administration
stated that the Administration has no problem in widening the power of MCC by transferring the
entire area of UT of Chandigarh including eighteen villages alongwith functions and funds but the
problem may arise in transferring functionaries from the Administration to Corporation. However, the
Administration has still written to the MCC for giving its opinion on transferring the eighteen villages
to MCC so that the same may be finalised and forwarded to Third Delhi Finance Commission for
appropriate recommendations. The Adviser also assured the Committee that the increase in revenue
would be commensurate to the increase of function and jurisdiction of the MCC.
26.9 The Committee is constrained to learn from the Mayor and Councillors of Municipal
Corporation of Chandigarh that it has more responsibilities with limited authority and
financial resources. The Committee has noted the MCC’s request for a share of 23 per cent
of the tax revenue. The Committee is of the view that a municipal body functions closest
to the people and needs to solve problems at the quickest possible time. For this purpose,
it requires sufficient resources. The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of
Home Affairs may discuss the issue with the Mayor and Councillors of MCC on its
requirement of resources for a “better upkeep of the city. Steps may be taken for early
implementation of the Second Delhi Finance Commission recommendations for devolution of
17 per cent share of tax revenue until the Third Delhi Finance Commission takes a decision
on the proposed devolution of 23 per cent tax revenue.
26.10 The Committee understands that the Zila Parishad and the Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) in 18 villages would come to an end should the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation

29
of Chandigarh be extended to these villages. And in the absence of any demand from the 18
villages for extension of jurisdiction of the MCC into their areas and the orientation of MCC
being urban, these villages may lose their rural identity without entailing any benefits and
urban taxation of the municipality may add to their woes. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the rural identity of the 18 villages may not be disturbed.
Scheduled Caste Certificates
27. The Committee during its visit learnt that scheduled castes certificates had not been issued
since 1995 without the production of residence proof prior to 1 January, 1966 (creation of UT of
Chandigarh) in the Union Territory.
27.1 In a written reply to the reasons for non-issuance of SC certificates to genuine SC
candidates after 1995, the Ministry has stated that as per guidelines dated 22.3.1977 issued by
the Government of India, a person can be issued SC certticate by the competent authority
of the State of which he or she was a permanent resident on the date of residential
Notification declaring his/her caste as SC in the State and not by the competent authority of
the State/UT to which he migrated. As the Presidential Order in respect of Chandigarh was
issued on 1.11.1966 i.e. at the time of creation of Union Territory  of Chandigarh, all the
permanent residents and their children belonging to SCs in UT Chandigarh, residing
permanently in Chandigarh are issued SC certificates. These instructions were slightly
amended by the Government of India on 17.11.1982 to the effect that the competent authority
of a State/UT may issue the SC certificate to a person who has migrated from another State
on the production of the genuine certificate issued to his/her father/mother from the State
of their origin. The SC certificates in UT are also issued accordingly to such migrant population
on production of SC certificate from the State of their origin.
27.2 Further replying as to how SC certificates were issued to the genuine SC inhabitants of
Chandigarh till 1995; the Ministry informed that except the persons who were permanent resident
of UT Chandigarh as on the date of Presidential Order dated 1.11.1966 and those who produced
the SC certificate from the State of origin, none was eligable for issuance of SC cerfificate.
However, some people other than those falling in the above two categories were issued SC
certificates inadvertently till 1995, simply on the verification of residence by the Revenue
Authorities and on production of affidavit by the applicants. Issuance of SC certificates to such
persons were inadvertent and not as per the instructions of Government of India. This practice
was discontinued in 1996 after it came to the notice of the Administration.
27.3 In response to a question regarding Government’s plan to adopt the practice of issuance of
SC certificate to bonafide SC residents in vogue in Delhi mutatis mutandis in the UT of Chandigarh;
the Ministry has stated that the problem in respect of UT of Chandigarh is peculiar as it is a newly
planned City with a sizeable migrant population. The matter is already under consideration in
consultation with the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and two meetings on 8.9.2005 and
19.10.2005 have since been held with the Ministry of Social justice and Empowerment to finalize the
issue. The Home Secretary had assured the Committee that the issue would be sorted out soon.
27.4 The Committee is constrained to note that such an important issue has been kept
unresolved for so long and the people belonging to the SC community had to suffer.  Such
issues need to be attended to without delay. The Committee trusts that Home Secretary would
stick to the assurance made before the Committee and the issue would be resolved immediately.
Career Prospects and Other Grievances of Government Teachers in the UT
28. During the visit of the Committee, a delegation of Government Teachers’ Union of the UT
met and submitted their grievances such as lack of promotional avenues for the teaching

30
community in Education Department, pending proposal regarding promotion of teachers to the post
of lecturer in Senior Secondary School in Chandigarh, deputation quota of 25% for taking lecturers
from States. The Committee was informed that some of the deputationists have got pro forma
promotion to the post of Principal in virtue of their promotion in their parent State(s) and lecturers
of the UT are working under the supervision of the deputationists who got promotion in view of
the position explained above. Demand for scrapping of the rule which allows teachers to come on
deputation from other States to the UT of Chandigarh was raised in the memoranda. Besides that,
the other issues raised in the memorandum include restoration of six weeks summer break which
is at present reduced to four weeks; change of format of Annual confidential Report (ACR);
confirmation in the post of teachers after completing three years of service; filling up of vacant
posts of teachers, introduction of Sanskrit as a subject in all Senior Secondary School alongwith
Hindi and Punjabi; restoration of the post of Director, State Institute of Education to the School
cadre; creation of post of vice-principal in all senior secondary Schools; stoppage of allotment of
houses to the persons on deputation from the States of Punjab and Haryana as these States have
their own pool of accommodations; special housing scheme by Chandigarh Housing Board for
teaching community of UT cadres.
28.1 The Committee gathers that the Chandigarh Administration is either ignorant of or
non-responsive to the problems and issues of Government Teachers. Such inept handling of
their problem would demoralise them. The Committee recommends that the problems faced
by the teachers may be addressed properly.
Air, Rail and Road Transport for Chandigarh
29. The Committee, during its visit to Chandigarh was apprised of the need for upgradation of
Chandigarh Civil Airport to International Airport as the city is the gateway to the States of Punjab,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir. Besides, the need for electrification of
Chandigarh-Ludhiana railway line and four laning of Kalka–Chandigarh–Ludhiana highway, etc.
29.1 The Committee recommends that considering the growing importance of the
Chandigarh city, the Government should explore the possibility of upgrading the Civil Airport
to an International Airport and make it twenty-four hcurs airport, The railway service may
also be further improved keeping in view the requirement of the city and the region.
Building bye-laws
30. During the visit of the Committee, the Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) representing
Chandigarh alleged that the indifferent attitude of the Chandigarh Administration towards the
enforcement of building bye-laws had led to alterations/additions in over ninety percent houses/flats
particularly in Phase II of the city. Issuance of notice and occasional demolitions had only added
to the woes of the people. All delegations, which met the Committee, advocated for one time
relaxation of building bye-laws to regularize the need-based alterations/additions in flats/houses.
Their views were also endorsed in the various memoranda received by the Committee during its
visit to Chandigarh.
30.1 It was alleged by the residents that the Administration adopted a very rigid and indifferent
attitude in the name of implementing building bye-laws to the alterations/additions carried out by
the house owners particularly in phase IT of the city which was creating a lot of problems for
them. It was demanded that one time relaxation in building bye-laws may be made to regularize
the need based alterations/additions in the respective flats/houses.
30.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that in order to regulate the construction in a planned
manner, certain regulations and byelaws were framed. The Administration was particular that those

31
basic requirements were adhered to. However, from time to time, various relaxations in the building
bye-laws had been made, which to some extent compromised the architectural controls and zoning
regulations.
31.0 Regarding enforcement mechanism of buildings bye-laws in the UT of Chandigarh, the
Ministry in its written reply stated that a Plan Approval Cummittee had been constituted for
sanctioning of plans which checked whether plans were in conformity with varbus building bye-
laws. Post completion stage, the enforcement is undertaken by the Estate Officer (E.O.), UT. The
competent authority (E.O.) issues notice to the persons who violate the bye-laws and the
unauthorized structure is removed following the prescribed procedure under the law.
31.1 On the issue of large scale violation of the bye-laws, the Ministry stated that violations were
largely due to the desire to maximize the built up area for various economic reasons. There are
roughly 2,00,000 dwelling units in Chandigarh whereas the enforcement staff consists of only
seven personnel. The expectation is that people will comply with the requirements of the law and
the rules. When violations come to light they are dealt with according to established legal
procedures.
31.2 On being asked whether the Government has any proposal under its consideration to give
one time relaxation in building by-laws to regularize need based alterations/addition in the flats/
houses, it was stated that a number of relaxations had already been permitted for various types of
houses/buildings through different notifications issued between the period August, 1996 to
June, 2005 and there was no other proposal under consideration.
32. The Committee feels that the situation that has arisen in Chandigarh is more or less
similar to the situation that arose in Delhi in the recent past. The Committee takes note
of the serious situation that arose in Delhi when Courts passed orders for demolition/
sealing of unauthorized constructions in Delhi leading to a public outburst as a large
number of buildings/houses were found to be affected by the said drive. Consequently, the
Central Government had to step in to prevent the situation from further worsening and
Parliament enacting a special legislation for the purpose. To avoid such a situation in
Chandigarh where too alteration/additions in houses have been made on a large scale, the
Committee feels that the Government should bring about a practical solution to the problem
by having a re-look at the building bye-laws of Chandigarh, which are quite old and also
keeping in view the needs of expanding families. Government may also in this context
consider giving a one time relaxation to the building bye-laws in Chandigarh.

32
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ADMINISTRATIVE SET-UP
The Committee is of the view that as A&N Islands, which is headed by a Lieutenant
Governor, has no public representative to supervise, to consider or to monitor the functions
of the Government apart from the Lieutenant Governor, it can at least have a Pradesh
Council. It is also of the view that Panchayati Raj cannot be a substitute for the Pradesh
Council. PRIs will look after the execution of policies and programmes under Part IX
(Article 243 G) of the Constitution, whereas the Pradesh Council would review and
supervise the functioning of the Government. (Para 3.16)
The Committee is also given to understand that there are problems of increasing
unemployment and urbanization, law and order, bootlegging. The Committee feels that these
are directly connected with development. When the State is administered by officers only,
there is no scope for monitoring and overseeing the working of. the Administration and
ultimately development is affected. When development is not taking place, people suffer
leading to increase in crime rate. These issues can be solved only by people’s participation
in governance through their elected representatives. (Para 3.17)
The Committee, during its visit to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, noted the
immensity of tsunami devastation and the problem of shortage of staff. Had there been a
Legislative Assembly the relief operation would have been addressed in a better manner.
The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that there is a strong justification for setting
up of a Legislative Assembly for the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It therefore,
recommends to the Government to take necessary steps in this direction. (Para 3. 18)
Until a final decision is taken for setting up a Legislative Asstembly, some kind of
monitoring mechanism is required. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Pradesh
Council may be revived immediately. This is all the more necessary because the
administration of the entire UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands cannot be left to the
Panchayat Raj Institutions. These are only local self governing institutions and they cannot
be a substitute for a legislative set up. (Para 3.19)
The Committee also takes note of the fact that consequent upon the seventy third
and seventy fourth Amendments to the Constitution, though the participation of the people
in planning and execution of developmental works in the UT started at the grass-root level,
the process of delegation of powers and functions to PRIs have been very slow. The subjects
apportioned to them are limited and even in those areas the transfer has not been
complete. The Committee, therefore, recommends that local bodies may be delegated more
powers and functions without further delay so that they can meet the people’s aspirations.
Further the Committee recommends that these bodies should be supported by adequate
staff, finance and other logistics. (Para 3.20)
Sociological Set up
The Committee takes note of the fact that there are five primitive tribes in the
whole of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. They fulfil the essential characteristics of tribals.
The Committee understands the compulsion of the Government in integrating the tribal
32

33
communities into the mainstream of the society. This is a sociological process, which needs
to be addressed through the process of time only. However, the Committee notes that the
tribes are living amidst reserved forest land. These tribals, may at some point of time in
future come out and mix up with the civilised society. Therefore, some provision has to be
made so that when they enter the civilised world, they should be given an opportunity to
use the forest land and do the farming. While preserving the uniqueness of the tribals, the
process of integration into the mainstream of the society may continue as per requirement
at a particular point of time. (Para 4.3)
Administrative Issues
The Committee feels that the proposal of the Island Administration for creation of
new district and sub-divisions would help in delegation and decentralization of powers
necessary for quick decision-making. The Committee recommends that the demand of the
Administration may be examined on priority. The new District and sub-divisions would help
the local administration in catering to the needs of people, in an efficient manner and in
the quickest possible time. (Para 5.1)
Need for helicopters
The Committee understands the gigantic task of the administration of 572 islands
spread over 800 kms. They need sufficient vehicles for transportation and aerial route is
the only available means for inter-island transportation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the proposal for acquisition of two helicopters may be approved at the
earliest. This will help the administration in providing necessary help to the people besides
making the helicopters available for inter-island transport on a regular basis. (Para 5.5)
Personnel Administration
The Committee notes the difficulty being faced by the Administration due to shortage
of staff in providing relief and rehabilitation and completion of other ongoing projects. Such
a large number of vacancies for such a small administrative set-up is a matter of concern
particularly when relief and rehabilitation work is to be done on war footing. The
Committee recommends that the Finance Ministry’s blanket ban on recruitment for the UT
should be reconsidered. The Government should also look into the issue of delay in filling
up of vacancies and take steps to expedite the same. (Para 5.7)
Tourism in the Islands
The Committee desires that the objectives set in the Tenth Five-Year Plan such as
ecofriendly and environmentally sustainable tourism, development of new tourism activities/
products and marketing the Islands as eco-tourism destination, etc. should be achieved. The
schemes taken up needed to be implemented on a priority basis for achieving the objectives
as this would generate employment besides strengthening tourism. The Committee also
recommends that 2006-2007 being the terminal year of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, all-out
efforts may be made so that no activity taken up remains incomplete. (Para 6.5)
The Committee desires that the Government should address both the short-term and
medium-term objectives and take necessary steps for taking up and completion of all the
proposals in a definite timeframe. (Para 6.7)
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are the ultimate unexplored destination of India’s
tourism. Once they are open to tourists there is no doubt that the islands would become

34
one of the tourism attractions in the world. Despite having very good tourism potential,
India has not tapped it well. A&N Islands are a good example of this. There are many
countries in the world which thrive on tourism and India is not able to make use of the
potential. The Committee is, however, happy to note that things are moving in the right
direction with the opening up of more islands in A&N Islands. By opening up islands, more
investment will flow in and tourism will develop which ultimately leads to economic growth
of the islands and the country. The Committee desires that the proposal of opening more
islands for tourism may be got cleared from the Cabinet at the earliest. (Para 6.8)
Air connectivity
The vast potential of international tourists can only be tapped if there is world class
airport and other infrastructure. Air connectivity and tourism are inter-linked and inter-
dependent. A&N Islands, being remotely and strategically located, need better air
connectivity both domestic and international for better tourist arrivals. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take steps to declare Vir Savarkar Airport as an
International Airport as a step towards projecting A&N Islands as an attractive tourist
destination. The Committee also recommends that to begin with the Government can make
the stopover for Chennai-Bangkok and Chennai-Singapore flights at the Islands. It also
urges upon the Administration to complete the expansion work of the airport expeditiously,
thus making it capable for operation of wide-bodied aircraft. The Committee is also of the
view that the other proposals in the strategy for post-tsunami tourism promotion, if
implemented, will go a long way in the promotion and strengthening of tourism in Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, particularly the proposal relating to introduction of flights from various
cities to Port Blair will go a long way in attracting tourists from different destinations of
the country to the Islands. The Committee desires that the above proposals may be taken
up on top priority. (Para 7.3)
AGRICULTURE AND FISHERY
The Committee is of the view that considering the vast potential of fisheries, shrimp,
crab and prawn, concerted efforts need be made to explore the potential by diversifying
fishing to Shrimp, Crab and Prawn culture. The issue of identification of suitable areas for
coastal shrimp culture may be pursued with Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture
(CIBA). This is necessary in view of scarcity of freshwater in the Islands. The Committee
notes that land available in the Islands is very less and its optimum use should be made.
Besides diversifying fanning practices, efforts should also be made to increase productivity.
Efforts being made to utilise vacant hilly land for plantation, spices, crops, etc., may be
intensified as these are eco-friendly and they grow naturally. Similarly, diversification of
agriculture by encouraging plantation of cash crops such as cashew nuts, spices, and coconut
in the Islands might prove to be a panacea for improving the economic condition of the
farmers and the tribals living in the region. (Para 8.4)
STATEHOOD TO PONDICHERRY
The Committee takes note of the views expressed by a section of the society in
Pondicherry and feels that the sentiments of the people and the people’s elected
representatives cannot be ignored. The overwhelming view of all of them is in favour of
Statehood to the Union Territory of Pondicherry with Special Category status. The
Committee feels that the aspirations of the people have to be respected. The Committee
takes due note of the views of the Ministry that it will not be a viable State economically.
But the Committee cannot be oblivious to the fact that when Goa graduated into a State,

35
there were apprehepsions that Goa might not sustain as a State because of its weak
financial base. But, today, Goa has proved it otherwise. Further, Pondicherry has a
Legislative Assembly with elected representatives. (Para 9.7)
The Committee is also given to understand that Pondicherry Government appointed
a Committee to go into its viability as a State and the then Chief Secretary of Pondicherry
had submitted the Report; the Report was examined and it was agreed, in principle, by the
Government that it would bring forward a Bill in the Parliament to grant Special Category
Status to Pondicherry. However, this proposal was shelved. (Para 9.8)
Looking at the practical point of view, the Committee is of the view that
Pondicherry, as a Union Territory, is a big handicap for the Chief Minister to function. Most
of the administrative powers are vested in the Lieutenant-Governor and files are cleared by
him. (Para 9.9)
Taking into account all these factors, the Committee is of the view that the issue
of Statehood to Pondicherry needs to be considered in a holistic manner. The Committee,
therefore recommends that Government may consider. granting Statehood to Pondicherry
with Special Category Status. (Para 9.10)
B-II CATEGORY STATUS TO PONDICHERRY
The city of Pondicherry, which is also the capital of the UT of Pondicherry, has been
undergoing a rapid transformation. It has all the characteristics of a developed urban
agglomeration. The Committee takes note of the fact that the population of urban
agglomeration of Pondicherry exceeded 5.05 lakhs as per the Census of 2001. The rapid
growth of administration, .industrialization, educational institutions; the population of urban
agglomeration exceeding five lakhs; the floating population of about one lakh per day,
justify the grant of B II status to Pondicherry. The Committee is also given to understand
that Port Blair and Panji were granted B II status, even though their population was less
than that of Pondicherry. The Committee expresses its concern over the discriminatory
attitude shown towards Pondicherry. When Port Blair and Panaji have been granted B II
stdus, the Committee cannot buy the argument given by the Government in respect of
Pondicherry. B II status, besides increasing HRA to Government employees will also
enhance the status of the city. The city will be able to get urban development schemes and
more opportunities for development. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that
Government may grant B II status to Pondicherry city for the purpose of payment of HRA.
The Committee urges upon the Government that the relaxation made in the case of the
cities of Port Blair and Goa in this regard may also be extended to Pondicherry so that the
officials of the Central/UT Government are adequately compensated for their expenditure on
housing. (Para 10.3)
RECOGNITION OF SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PONDICHERRY
The Committee expresses its concern that even though the UT Administration of
Pondicherry has been recommending for recognition of the Scheduled Tribes, the
Registrar General of India has not taken any positive decision so far. His views on five
criteria are not pragmatic and hence may be dispensed with. The Committee also notes that
the above mentioned tribes existed in UT of Pondicherry even before its independence in
1954, as per the reports of Backward Classes Commission of Pondicherry. The Committee
is of the view that RGI is procrastinating the matter. Keeping in view the existence of
scheduled Tribes as identified by the Government of Pondicherry, Backward classes
commission and the Ethnographic study of Dr. Subramniyan Naidu, the Committee

36
recommends notification by Government of the five Scheduled Tribes identified by the UT
Administration of Pondiicherry in terms of Articles 342 read with Article 366 (25) of the
Constitution. (Para 11.2.2)
ELECTION TO PANCHA YATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS
The Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that in spite of the
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) having been granted constitutional status, and under
Articles 243 (K) and (L) of the Constitution regular elections are required to be held to the
panchayats every five years, elections thereto have not been held in Pondicherry for the
last 30 years. In this connection, the Committee takes notes of the constitutional provision
under Article 243 E (3). The Committee takes strong exception to the non-compliance of the
constitutional obligation. The Committee is happy to learn that the order conducting
elections to Panchayati Raj Institutions has been issued recently. (Para 12.4)
PERSPECTIVE PLAN FOR TOURISM DEVELOPMENT
The Committee feels that in view of the historical significance and geographical
location, Pondicherry has the potential to develop into a good tourist destination. The
Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Pondicherry Government in making
it as an ideal tourist destination. Airports are an important ingredient for growth of tourism
and in that direction the Committee recognizes the necessity of Pondicherry and Karaikal
airports. The Committee recommends that the Central Government should make all efforts
for early operationalisation of the Pondicherry Airport and establishing of Karaikal Airport.
The Committee also recommends that the development of Pondicherry and Karaikal Ports
and Art and Craft Village in Murungapakkam may be taken up and completed at the
earliest as these would give good infrastrucutral support required for tourism. Construction
of Star Hotels may also be taken up and the development of Medical Tourism may be
emphasized. (Para 13.3)
AGRICULTURE AND IRRIGATION
The Committee expresses its concern over the fast declining net area sown and low
agricultural productivity in tbe last ten years. Productivity remaining static, land
degradation, poor soil .management and excessive exploitation of water resources indicate
the poor health of agriculture sector. The proposal of the UT of Pondicherry to open Uzhavar
Udhaviyagams (Farmers’ Help Centres) is a path-breaking solution to the ills ailing the
farm sector. The Committee is happy to learn that the plan has been implemented and feels
that it should be pursued in the right perspective. (Para 14.3)
FISHERY DEVELOPMENT
The Committee is of the view that early action is needed to bring the people
belonging to agricultural and fishermen communities affected by Tsunami, back to
normalcy. Some rehabilitation measures have already been taken. Now, it is time that
sufficient infrastructure is in place so that they could start leading normal life. The
Committee desires that the comprehensive plan for modernizing fishing activities initiated
by the Government may be implemented at the earliest. For promotion of shrimp culture
clearance of Aquaculture Authority may be obtained at the earliest. Identification of
cultivable land may be completed soon so that shrimp culture may be developed at the
earliest. (Para 15.4)

37
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
The tsunami tidal waves have caused widespread devastation in the islands resulting
in loss of human life as well as livestock besides loss of property. The Committee feels that
considering the magnitude of destruction of life and property, whatever rehabilitation that
has been provided would not match the loss caused by the natural calamity. But the relief
provided will mitigate the suffering though the scares may not be removed permanently.
However, the Government should not leave any stone unturned to ensure early
rehabilitation of the affected people and to undertake reconstruction process to ensure that
they start their normal life at the earliest. The Committee understands that the
Government have taken up several relief measures. In regard to construction of permanent
houses, the Committee feels that the permanent shelters should be at locations which are
high on ground near the earlier habitations as the livelihood of the people requires them
to continue residing there. Similarly, while constructing the houses, use of local material
such as bamboo, wood, etc., should be preferred as they are earthquake-resistant and give
better protection from sun. The Committee also takes note of the fact that some people,
who met the Committee during its visit, desired that money may be provided to their
families so that they can construct their houses themselves. This is a better proposition
because it will engage the families in the reconstruction work till the completion of the
construction. The Government may therefore, consider providing them financial help besides
other required material to enable the families engage themselves in the reconstruction
work. (Para 19)
The Committee has noted that revival package for small traders consists of waiver
of loans and interest thereon, etc. The Committee recommends that the Government may
consider increasing the package of Rs. 57.15 crore further. It also recommends that the
Government may consider providing interest-free fresh loans for at least two years to
enable them to start their business afresh. Though the Government has given compensation
for loss of agricultural crops which is now Rs. 22,231 per hectare, this is a pittance
considering the fact that agricultural land has new become saline and uncultivable and
barren. It can no longer be used for any agricultural activities and even grass will not grow.
Therefore, the Government should consider providing some package for permanent
rehabilibition of the farmers whose agricultural land is no longer useful. The package may
also contain providing assistance for business or employment. (Para 19.1)
The Committee feels that the request of the people in the islands for employment
to at least one person in each affected family needs to be considered. A one-time creation
of employment opportunities would give permanent relief to the families. Besides this,
filling up of 3000 vacant posts would also cover a large number of people. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government may consider these proposals immediately and
take decisions thereon. (Para 19.2)
Pondicherry
The Committee notes that about 800 hectares of agricultural land as well as crops
were affected by the tidal waves in Pondicherry. Much of the land may remain permanently
unfit for farming. The relief given may not give permanent compensation to the affected
people. In all the cases of permanent loss of land, the Committee suggests that the
Government may consider raising the compensation appropriately. (Para 21)
After tsunami, many farmers have been severely affected with many children
getting orphaned. Though Government has provided relief package and rehabilitation, it
may also consider providing permanent compensation in the form of reservation in

38
employment to such victims. This is all the more necessary in the case of orphaned
children. (Para 21.1)
In regard to construction of permanent houses, the Committee expresses its concern
that out of 10,061 houses, only 341 houses have been completed so far and it feels that this
way it is going to take a long time for completing all the houses. The Committee
recommends that the pace of construction may be increased and all the houses may be
completed within a definite time frame. Land acquisition for construction of houses may be
completed at the earliest so that construction may start at the earliest. (Para 21.2)
The World Bank aided project is an appreciable effort of the international agency.
Government may monitor the project so that targets are achieved within the given time
frame. (Para 21.3)
Legislature for Chandigarh
The Committee notes the view of the Home Secretary that the present arrangement
is working satisfactorily. However, when the Committee visited Chandigarh, various political
leaders and general public informed that there was no forum to ventilate their grievances.
The Committee is also constrained to learn that it is very difficult for the general public
to meet the Administrator and that they felt that the present arrangement is not able to
solve their problems. The Committee is of the view that the Municipal Corporation cannot
solve all the problems of the people and the Advisory Council cannot help things to the
extent people want their aspirations to be fulfilled. Thus, there needs to be some
mechanism by which people have better access to the administration and which can address
and redress their grievances. Such mechanism, besides solving the problems of the people,
would also fulfill their aspirations. Therefore, keeping in view the aspirations of the people’s
representatives and the general public at large, the Committee recommends that some kind
ot arrangement should be put in place in the UT of Chandigarh which should be easily
accessible to the public and which could effectively and adequately redress their grievances.
(Para 23.4)
Metropolitan Planning Committee
The Committee notes that the Metropolitan Planning Committee can go a long way
in solving the problems of the people of Chandigarh and fulfilling their aspirations. Even
though the Metropolitan Planning Committee is not the ultimate solution to the elected
legislative body, it can, to a large extent, address the problems of the masses. The
Committee suggests that suitable legislation may be brought in at the earliest so that steps
may be initiated for setting up of the Metropolitan Planning Committee. (Para 24.2)
Advisory Council to Administrator
The Committee understands that infrequent meetings of the Advisory Council to
Administrator might be causing problems in redressing the grievances of the people. In the
absence of a legislative body, at least, other bodies such as the Advisory Council should be
given the necessary teeth to address the people’s grievances. The Committee agrees with
the Home Secretary that the Council should meet more frequently. The Committee,
therefore, suggests that necessary steps may be taken in that direction to ensure that the
Council meet more frequently. The Committee also agrees with the view of the Home
Secretary that members of the Advisory Council should be adequately empowered. It
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take necessary steps to redefine the
powers and functions of the members of the Advisory Council and steps may also be taken

39
to give more powers to the Council as such. As regards the suggestion of Home Secretary
that the Council needs to be broad-based, the Committee has not received any concrete
proposal from the Ministry. The Committee, however, feels that the issue needs to be
deliberated upon and steps taken in this direction too. (Para 25.3)
Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh
The Committee is constrained to learn from the Mayor and Councillors of Municipal
Corporation of Chandigarh that it has more responsibilities with limited authority and
financial resources. The Committee has noted the MCC’s request for a share of 23 per cent
of the tax revenue. The Committee is of the view that a municipal body functions closest
to the people and needs to solve problems at the quickest possible time. For this purpose,
it requires sufficient resources. The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of
Home Affairs may discuss the issue with the Mayor and Councillors of MCC on its
requirement of resources for a better upkeep of the city. Steps may be taken for early
implementation of the Second Delhi Finance Commission recommendations for devolution of
17 per cent share of tax revenue until the Third Delhi Finance Commission takes a decision
on the proposed devolution of 23 per cent tax revenue. (Para 26.9)
The Committee understands that the Zila Parishad and the Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) in 18 villages would come to an end should the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation
of Chandigarh be extended to these villages. And in the absence of any demand from the 18
villages for extension of jurisdiction of the MCC into their areas and the orientation of MCC
being urban, these villages may lose their rural identity without entailing any benefits and
urban taxation of the municipality may add to their woes. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the rural identity of the 18 villages may not be disturbed. (Para 26.10)
Scheduled Caste Certificates
The Committee is constrained to note that such an important issue has been kept
unresolved for so long and the people belonging to the SC community had to suffer. Such
issues need to be attended to without delay. The Committee trusts that Home Secretary
would stick to the assurance made before the Committee and the issue would be resolved
immediately. (Para 27.4 )
Career prospects and other grievances of Government teachers in the UT
The Committee gathers that the Chandigarh Administration is either ignorant of or
non-responsive to the problems and issues of Government Teachers. Such inept handling of
their problem would demoralise them. The Committee recommends that the problems faced
by the teachers may be addressed properly. (Para 28.1)
Air, Rail and Road Transport for Chandigarh
The Committee recommends that considering the growing importance of the
Chandigarh city, the Government should explore the possibility of upgrading the Civil
Airport to an International Airport and make it twenty-four hours airport. The railway
service may also be further improved keeping in view the requirement of the city and the
region. (Para 29.1)
Building bye-laws
The Committee feels that the situation that has arisen in Chandigarh is more or

40
less similar to the situation that arose in Delhi in the recent past. The Committee takes
note of the serious situation that arose in Delhi when Courts passed orders for demolition/
sealing of unauthorized constructions in Delhi leading to a public outburst as a large
number of buildings/houses were found to be affected by the said drive. Consequently, the
Central Government had to step in to prevent the situation from further worsening and
Parliament enacting a special legislation for the purpose. To avoid such a situation in
Chandigarh where too alteration/additions in houses have been made on a large scale, the
Committee feels that the Government should bring about a practical solution to the problem
by having a re-look at the building bye-laws of Chandigarh, which are quite old and also
keeping in view the needs of expanding families. Government may also in this context
consider giving a one time relaxation to the building bye-laws in Chandigarh. (Para 32)

41
MINUTES

XXXIV
THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 22 August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Shri Kalraj Mishra
6. Dr. L.M. Singhvi
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
9. Shri Drupad Borgohain
10. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
11. Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
13. Shri Anadi Sahu
14. Shri Manabendra Shah
15. Shri M.O.H. Farooq
16. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
17. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
18. Shri Adhi Sankar
19. Shri P.H. Pandian
20. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
21. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
22. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
23. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
43

44
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Bhandari, Special Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Hooja, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Naresh Kumar, Director
2. The Chairman in his opening observations recapitulated the previous day’s deliberations in
the Committee on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir. He recapitulated in brief the presentation
of Shri Ram Jethmalani and the views and observations of other Members. He then invited those
Members who were not present on the previous day, to make their observations. The Chairman
also took the opportunity to mention that since the election process had already begun in Jammu
and Kashmir, the suggestion as to the need for imposition of President’s rule or Governor’s rule
before holding elections in that State, had became infructuous. The Chairman also took the
opportunity to inter alia clarify that the discussion in the Committee was purely an academic
exercise.
3. A Member initiated the discussion by supporting the views of Shri Jethmalani on the need
for militants’ participation in the election process, setting off the political prisoners free to enable
them to contest elections and postponement of elections. The Member expressed his views on the
issue of inviting foreign observers. He stated that the Government should have supported the
initiative of the Kashmir Committee led by Shri Jethmalani. He, however, felt that the imposition
of President’s rule in Jammu and Kashmir would not help.
3.1 Another Member while citing the example of the Mizoram Accord, was of the view that
elections were the best opportunity to bring militants back to the mainstream. He felt that there
was no need for extra-constitutional mechanism like inviting foreign observers as only the Election
Commission of India was the Constitutional Body responsible for free and fair elections. He said
that the Government should make efforts to persuade the militant groups to participate in the
elections.
3.2 Another Member felt that the Government should not allow foreign observers to oversee the
elections in Jammu and Kashmir. He hoped that the elections would bring back normalcy in that
State.
3.3 A Member was of the opinion that since 1998 the issue of Jammu and Kashmir had been
internationalised, which was evident from frequent interventions by the United S tates of America
in the matter. He further stated that the Government of India had no clear policy as to what it
wanted to do in the State owing to which, the credibility of the elections itself was at stake.
Speaking on the issue of foreign observers, he said that India was capable of holding elections
better than the foreign countries. He felt that the Government should have taken advantage of
Shri Jethmalani’s initiative besides making public a policy framework on Jammu and Kashmir.
3.4 A Member felt that there was no need for discussing the issue when the Committee was
not going to make any recommendation to the Government. Besides, he also stated that the Election
Commission was responsible for free and fair elections and it was not right to presume that
without the imposition of the President’s Rule, free and fair elections could not take place.
3.4.1 Responding to the point raised by the Member, the Chairman clarified that it was on the
request of Shri Jethmalani that the discussion on the subject had been included in the Committee’s
agenda. He further clarified that the idea was to hear the presentation of Shri Jethmalani on the
initiative taken by the Kashmir Committee and thereafter allow members to articulate their views/
observations in the matter.

45
3.5 Another Member, in her observation, inter alia stated that the Kashmir problem could not
be an issue between the Government and the Opposition and opportunities thrown open by the
forthcoming elections and other initiatives could be utilised by the Government to resolve the
problem.
3.6 A Member was of the view that the feelings of the common man of Jammu and Kashmir
should have been heeded to and as a goodwill gesture political prisoners could be released. Another
Member wondered whether conducive conditions were prevailing to ensure free and fair elections.
4. The Chairman agreed with the overwhelming majority view that free and fair elections
should be held in Jammu and Kashmir and wanted to know from the Government representatives
their assessment of the situation and the likely turnout of voters in the elections. He further
enquired whether the Government was interested to have the peace process started through
initiatives like the one taken by the Kashmir Committee. In addition, he wanted to know whether
security arrangements were adequate in the State for holding elections. In the context of security,
the Chairman wondered if the deployment of forces for election duty would not affect the normal
vigilance and security arrangements. He also wanted to know as to whether adequate CPMFs were
available for the election duty. He linked his apprehension to the Kargil intrusion during which
internal security grid was affected because of the withdrawal of large contingents of BSF from the
valley for protecting the borders. He also enquired about the Government’s position regarding
release of political prisoners. A Member, while supplementing the Chairman asked whether the
Embassies were deputing their representatives for observing polls in Jammu and Kashmir.
5. Replying to the points raised by the Chairman and Members, the Special Secretary, Ministry
of Home Affairs stated that some officers of British and Japanese Embassies had been visiting
Jammu and Kashmir for making their own assessment of the situation. He stated that there was
no embargo on foreign Ambassadors visiting Kashmir. While referring to the security measures
taken by the Government, the Special Secretary referred to the assurance of the Deputy Prime
Minister for rendering every help to the State Government during the elections. Besides, he
informed that security forces deployed for Amarnath Yatra and Independence Day celebrations were
being detained in the State keeping in view the forthcoming elections. He mentioned that besides
CPMFs, personnel of the Railway Protection Force and neighbouring State Police forces were also
being deployed for the purpose. Further, he stated that adequate security cover would be provided
to the candidates. He also made a mention of the composition, functions and the role of the Unified
Command Headquarters. Regarding arrangements for elections, he stated that they were at the final
stages of preparation. He also stated that Pakistan’s policy towards Jammu and Kashmir had not
changed from its earlier posture. He mentioned about the increase in infiltration and stated that
Army and CPMF officers as well as the political workers were being targeted by the militants.
5.1 Reflecting on voters’ turnout, he felt that people were keen to participate in the elections
which could be inferred from their enthusiasm for issuance of V oter ID Cards. While touching
upon the issue of the release of political prisoners, he stated that there were criminal cases also
against them.
5.2 On a query of a Member whether airtime had been allotted to the political parties for
canvassing through electronic media, the Special Secretary replied that he would revert to the
Committee after collecting information in the matter.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up further consideration of the Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2002. Resuming the discussion on the Bill,
the Chairman recapitulated earlier discussions on it and expressed the view that the Committee, in
its report on the Bill, could say that it was not in favour of endorsing legislation where there was

46
no basic principle involved. He opined that since there was no principle involved in the matter, there
was no need to have further discussion on the Bill. He was of the view stated that the Government
might try to find out some other way to extend the intended benefit to those retired Judges of the
Supreme Court who were directly appointed from the Bar. He felt that the Committee should not
be a party to the proposed legislation and criticised the Government for not applying its mind while
drafting the Bill. He stated that if the present legislative proposal were meant for granting
pensionary benefits to all Judges irrespective of the fact whether a Judge had served one day or
ten years, the Committee could have considered it.
6.1 The Committee endorsed the views expressed by the Chairman.
6.2 A Member, however, felt that the views expressed against the Bill did not provide sufficient
ground so as to deny the intended benefit to the Judges. He opined that it was unfair that junior
Judges were getting higher pension than their seniors. He was of the view that all retired Judges
should get the same benefit.
7. The Committee then decided to visit some of the Union Territories viz. Chandigarh, Daman
& Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli to assess the functioning of their administrations tentatively
between 23 and 26 September, 2002. Accordingly, it authorized its Chairman to seek the permission
of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the proposed visit.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 9 September, 2002.

47
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 8 October, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
4. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
5. Shri Kalraj Mishra
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7. Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
8. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
9. Shri Swaraj Kaushal
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Lal Bihari Tiwari
11. Shri Jaisingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Anadi Sahu
13. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
15. Shri Manabendra Shah
16. Begum Noor Bano
17. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
18. Shri Subodh Ray
19. Shri Adhi Sankar
20. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
21. Shri Holkhomang Haokip
22. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
23. Shri E. Ponnuswamy
24. Shri Suresh Chandel
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri A.K. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
47

48
WITNESSES
Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. Subhash C. Jain, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
3. Dr. S.D. Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Finance
1. Shri S.K. Choudhari, Director, CBDT
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He
then apprised them of the postponement of the study visit of the Committee to Lakshadweep due
to logistics problem. Instead, he proposed the Committee to consider a study visit to Andaman and
Nicobar Islands during the same period i.e. 24 to 29 October, 2002, as part of the ongoing study
of the Administration of Union Territories, which was endorsed by the Committee. He briefly
explained the tentative schedule of the study visit to the Members according to which the
Committee would assemble at Chennai and disperse from Kolkata on 24 and 29 October, 2002,
respectively. Thereafter, the Committee authorised its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha for grant of permission for the proposed study visit.
3. The Committee then took up further consideration of the Election and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2002. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministries of Law and
Justice and Finance.
3.1 The Chairman recapitulated the discussion held in the previous sittings of the Committee on
the Bill. He sought clarifications on certain points on which the Ministry had not responded earlier.
He also flagged the important areas on which Members had made their observations.
3.2 To begin with, the Chairman raised issues which included inter-alia how a political party
could maintain the records of all the small donors which list would be too long, there should be
a ceiling on such donations below which the submission of reports by the political parties would
not be necessary; how a political party could ascertain the eligibility of a person or company to
donate as provided in sub-section (2) of the proposed Section 29C of R.P. Act, 1951; intrusion into
the affairs of the political parties as provided by sub-sec (2) of the proposed Section 29 D through
the power of auditor to inspect any document and premises of political parties at any point of time.
The Chairman also raised the point as to why Chartered Accountants auditing the accounts of
political parties need to be approved by the CAG whereas those auditing accounts of trusts need
not be approved by it. He desired that the term ‘otherwise’ in relation to expenditure on
general party campaign in Explanation (b) to the proposed Section 29 D(3) of the R.P. Act, 1951
should be clearly defined. Thereafter, he requested other Members to express their views on the
Bill.
4.0 A Member wanted to know the need for an enabling provision in proposed Section 29B
while donations could be regulated under the existing provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961,
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 1976 and the Companies Act, 1956. He opined that it was
impossible to give the certificates of eligibility of the donors and maintain list of all donors.
Furthermore, segregation of income of political party from donation and expenditure therefrom
would be cumbersome as the income of political parties came from various sources including
donations and deposited in a consolidated account of the party and expenditure incurred therefrom.

49
4.1 Other Members were of the view that the proposed amendment in Section 29C i.e. the
qualification to the expression “treasurer” by the words “or any other person authorised” was not
required as Section 29A of the R.P. Act, 1951 clearly mentioned about the party functionaries and
proposed Sections 29B to 29D should be read in conjuction with the existing provision.
4.2 Many Members objected to the idea of piecemeal reforms and wanted that the Government
may come out with a comprehensive electoral reforms Bill rather than these piecemeal reforms. A
large number of members felt that this Bill if passed in its current form would open the floodgates
of litigation and would complicate the matters and make it difficult for political parties to function.
They also felt that even the companies would hesitate in donating to political parties in this kind
of arrangement.
4.3 Some Members raised the point as to how only donations could be audited and not the
other form of income of the party; what the expression ‘leader’ meant for the purposes of
Explanation (b) to Section 29D(3). Other points raised included the query about the date from
which the expenditure on general party campaign and constituency campaign would be segregated.
5. The Secretary, Legislative Department responded to some of the queries. He stated that any
suggestion/amendment by the Committee would be duly considered in the Ministry.
6. At this stage the Chairman enquired from the Secretary the objective which Government
sought to achieve through the Bill. He added that instead of helping the political parties the Bill
would make matters difficult for them. He urged upon the Secretary to have a second look at the
provisions of the Bill with a view to make the scheme of the law simple and uncomplicated. He
further felt that expenditure on security and general party campaign should be segregated by
devising some methodology. Winding-up the discussion the Chairman asked the representatives of
the Ministry and the Secretariat to work out alternative formulations in the light of the views,
observations and objections made/raised in the Committee.
7. The Committee deferred clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill to a later date.
8. The Committee adjourned at 4.47 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the
9 October, 2002.

50
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 16 July, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Hansraj Bhardwaj
3. Shri Motilal V ora
4. Shrimati Ambika Soni
5. Shri B.P. Singhal
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
LOK SABHA
7. Begum Noor Bano
8. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
9. Adv. Uttamrao Dhikle
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal
12. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann
13. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra
14. Shri Subodh Roy
15. Shri Anadi Sahu
16. Shri P.A. Sangma
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
18. Shri Manabendra Shah
19. Shri Abdul Rashid Shaheen
20. Shri Ramjilal Suman
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Director
Shri N.S. Walia, Under Secretary
Shri Narendra Kumar, Research Officer
Shri A.K. Sahoo, Committee Officer
50

51
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Home Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, AS (BM)
Shri P.K. Jalali, JS (UT)
Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, DS
Shri Vivek Wadekar, DS
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary along with his colleagues and
representatives of both the Union Territories i.e., Chandigarh and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
He, then briefly mentioned about the Committee’s visit to Chandigarh and the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands. During these visits, the Committee had an interaction with the local administration, Chief
Secretary, the Administrator and the Governor. He mentioned about the questionnaire prepared in
this regard and the response of the Ministry of Home Affairs thereto.
2.1 The Chairman then, invited the Home Secretary to clarify the status of these Union
Territories so that the Committee can place a Report before the Parliament.
3. The Home Secretary gave an overview of the positions of the Union Territories of
Chandigarh and the A&N Islands in respect of their revenues, plans and funds allocated to them.
He stated that Chandigarh’s budget showed a healthy surplus on the non-plan side and that its
Tenth Plan focused on infrastructure and human resource development. Its major thrust areas in
Urban development was laid on environment, cleanliness, green coverage, quality of water and its
recycling and road network.
3.1 Touching upon the issues related to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Home Secretary gave
a brief overview of the geographical situation of the islands, its administrative divisions, its
resources and the problems related to it. Among the problems he mentioned about intrusion foreign
poachers, growing influx of people from main land in search of employment, the increasing
unemployment and its impact on law and order . Another major problem is bootlegging. He further
mentioned that conviction rate was high and law and order situation in islands was quite
satisfactory. He also mentioned some of the instances supporting as to how the administration was
strengthening the democracy at grassroots levels. About the major prospects of development of
islands as identified by the Island Development Authority, he enumerated: as eco-tourism, marine
fisheries and high value agriculture and offshore violent gas exploration. Lastly, he mentioned about
the other potential of growth in various fields in the islands.
4. The Chairman sought information related to the conservation of the ecology of the
Andamans and the ethnic diversity of the tribal species of the islands.
5. Members raised issues related to the A&N Islands, intrusion by p oachers, influ x from
mainland for employment, increasing unemployment, urbanisation, bootlegging and drinking water
scarcity and rehabilitation of people engaged in wood based industries which was stopped by the
order of Supreme Court.
6. Many Members raised questions regarding the Supreme Court order banning the felling of
trees, closure of saw mills and import of wood from neighbouring countries to maintain the
business, rehabilitation of the people whose livelihood depended upon it and about paddy
procurement by the Food Corporation of India. The problem of poaching, unlawful entry of foreign
national into the island territories causing security threats were also raised by members of the
Committee. They also sought for stringent punishments for such trespassers.

52
7. Some of the Members sought clarifications regarding the steps taken by the administration
to preserve and promote the ethnic diversity of the rare species of tribals living in the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands. Issues related to their health rehabilitation were also raised.
7.1 Some members raised clarification related to the security of the island waters of the Indian
territory, reasons as to why some islands of the Andamans could not be developed for eco-tourism,
the security issues related to it and of developing the said area into an EEZ, why steps to rain-
water harvesting, as a method to solve the water crisis in the area had not been taken up by the
administration.
7.2 Another Member suggested the formation of an elected Assembly on the lines of
Pondicherry, to address local issues and problems of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for
better administration. Some of the Members sought clarification regarding the steps taken by the
administration to preserve the environment, about the progress after the Committee’s visit for
substituting bamboo instead of wood, about the institutional arrangements if any contemplated by
the administration for an expeditious trial and disposal of cases relating to poaching. One of the
Members also wanted to know further about the functioning of the Elected Council of the Islands.
8. The issues relating to the modernisation of the police force for Chandigarh and steps for
relieving the city from busy traffic were raised. A few members also suggested for modernisation
of education for improving the quality of education in Chandigarh. The recruitment of SC and ST
candidates to various vacant posts and steps taken to do so, the recruitment of staff nurses from
SC and ST population and such other problems were also raised by the Members.
9. The Chief Secretary, Andaman and Nicobar Islands replying to some of the queries apprised
that the Supreme Court had allowed use of 30,000 cubic metres of wood for local needs hence
it was not likely to be in shortage. He further informed that the import of timber had already
started to run the saw mills and for that no order of Supreme Court was required to be taken.
About the removal of encroachers he informed that they were in the process of getting a
rehabilitation package which would be finalised by the middle of August. Further he stated that
there was no flat land available in the island and for hilly areas Supreme Court’s persmission was
required. He mentioned that initial solution was that about 5000 sq. metres of revenue land to be
given for dwellings which was not covered under the area of deemed forest and the rest be made
available later. The approach was agreed upon by the Central Power Committee. He informed that
the work of settlement of encroacher would commence soon.
9.1 About the issue of poachers he informed that due to intensive patrolling the number of
poachers in the current year was less compared to previous years. He also stated that a proposal
was to be sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs for stringent punishment for poachers. Replying
to the query regarding paddy procurement, he stated that a MoU had been signed between the
Government of India and the local forest development corporation to finalise the procurement. He
felt that keeping on procuring at minimum support price would jeopardise the future development
of high value crops.
9.2 Later the advisor to the administrator, Chandigarh replied to some of the queries and
informed the Committee that steps were taken to improve, remove and relocate the slums. He
further mentioned that even for ineligible categories it was being planned to offer something.
Regarding congestion in the city he informed that due to some links to Mohali and Panchkula lying
incomplete the problem existed and stated that efforts were on to complete them. Besides, the
completion of flyovers as per the plans would ease the traffic problem.
9.3 Replying to the queries related to quality education, he mentioned that although it was better
than the rest of the country however steps were taken afoot to improve it further. He also
mentioned about the development technological park in the city. On the issue of recruitment of

53
scheduled caste candidates in Chandigarh he stated that the matter was lying with the Supreme
Court, High Court and CAT, so with the finality on the issue, the rule would be rectified. In
medical education, the steps were taken to fill up the posts, however it was being managed with
contractual assignments.
10. The Chairman thanked the officers and made some suggestions regarding the issue of
recruitment of Scheduled Castes.
11. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then, adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

54
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 9 September, 2004 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri N. Jothi
6. Shri Janeshwar Mishra
7. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri T.K. Hamza
11. Shri Naveen Jindal
12. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
13. Prof. K.M. Kadar Mohideen
14. Shri Ashok Pradhan
15. Prof. M. Ramadass
16. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
17. Shri Bajuban Riyan
18. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
19. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan
20. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
21. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Dhirendra Singh, Home Secretary
54

55
2. Shri P. V . Bhide, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
1. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary
2. Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary
Representative of Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Shri D.P. Sharma, Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson made general observations regarding the agenda of the day and
informed Members of the reference of the subject of ‘Criminalisation of Politics’ by the Hon’ble
Chairman to the Committee for examination and report on 20 August 2004.
2.1 Chairperson then apprised the Committee of the proposed study visits to Chandigarh,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Pondicherry during the third week of October and first week
of November, 2004 as part of its examination of “Administration of Union Territories”. The
Committee authorised its Chairperson to finalise dates of proposed study visits and obtain the
permission of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for undertaking these study visits.
2.2 Chairperson also requested the Members to attend the informal interaction with five-Member
delegation of the French Senate, jointly led by Mr. Xavier de Villepin, Senator representing French
Expatriates and Mr. Pierre Fauchon, President of the Senate “India-France Friendship Group” to be
held at 12.00 noon on 14 September, 2004.
2.3 Chairperson thereafter welcomed the Home Secretary, Secretary (Legislative Department)
and representative of the Department of Legal Affairs of Ministry of Law and Justice and invited
the Home Secretary to make a presentation on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
3. The Home Secretary after introducing his team of officers made a power-point presentation
on the Bill, dwelling on the main features of the Bill, namely, to provide punishment to any person
who threatens or induces witnesses to give fake evidence in court; to provide measures with a
view to preventing increasing incidence of witnesses turning hostile and thereby thwarting justice;
to provide for enhanced punishment for perjury; to introduce the concept of ‘plea bargaining’; to
make the offence under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code (cruelty to woman by her husband
or his relatives) compoundable and to increase the number of scientific experts who could give
evidence in cases relating to fake currency notes.
4. With regard to witnesses giving fake/false evidence, some Members wanted to know
whether a separate case would be instituted if witness gives false evidence or the court will give
punishment in the same case. Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs apprised the
Committee that a separate case is required to be instituted. The Committee opined that this
provision should have been reflected in the Bill. Some other Members expressed their concern
about the protection of the witness who could muster courage to disclose the name of person who
induced or threatens him. With regard to protection of witness in order to prevent witnesses
turning hostile, Members sought clarification as to how conclusion would be drawn that the
witness has been influenced.
4.1 Members apprehended that police officer being Investigating Officer (IO) may use force in
obtaining signature of the witness on his statement. Further the methodology adopted by the police
officer for eliciting information for recording statement is different from the way the statement
voluntarily made before the judicial magistrate. The statement made before the magistrate u/s 164
of Cr. PC is voluntary but statement before the police officer through interrogation may effect the

56
voluntariness of the witness, thus, jeopardize the investigation. Some Members even went to the
extent of making police authorities also responsible and not only the witness, as there is every
possibility of manipulation by the police which would lead to dangerous consequences. Another
Member, on the other hand welcomed the amendment and feels that the provision as provided in
the Bill should be strengthened so as to bring in more safeguards in this regard. He further stated
that a specific time limit may be prescribed for sending the signed statement of the witness to the
Magistrate.
4.2 While touching upon the ‘plea bargaining’ the Home Secretary informed the Committee that
about 1.56 crore cases were pending in various courts as on 1 August, 2003. He further elaborated
that the accused have to undergo mental torture and also have to spend considerable amount by
way of legal expenses. The Law Commission considered this issue in its 142nd and 154th Reports
and recommended the same. The Malimath Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System has
also recommended for such a concept. The Chairperson desired that details of number of criminal
cases, under-trial cases to which the proposed ‘plea-bargaining’ settlement would be applicable,
may be furnished to the Committee to gauge the anticipated impact of the amendment on the
pendency of criminal cases. Some Members expressed apprehension that under the scheme of plea
bargaining, it is not the court which would decide the quantum of concession as well as
punishment but the public prosecutor would decide on these matters who can manipulate the case
and thereby leading to more corruption. In this context, the Chairperson wanted to know what was
the vacuum in the Act which was expected to be filled up through the proposed plea-bargaining,
since there already exist Section 321 which provides for withdrawal of case with the permission
of Magistrate/Court and Section 320 which provides for compromise between the accused and
complainant in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 coupled with Sections 357, 358 and 359.
4.3 As regards compounding of the offence under Section 498-A of IPC which provides for
punishment for husband or relatives of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty, Members
opined that the punishment should also be made bailable as it has been proposed to make the
punishment compoundable.
4.4 Some Members also expressed that permission for a party to cross-examine his own witness
by amending Section 154 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 would only delay the cases further.
4.5 The Committee welcomed the provision for summary trial for perjury and enhanced
punishment for the same, as perjury is rampant in the country. In that context, the Committee
pointed out that since summary trial is being proposed for the punishment below six months in the
Bill, necessary amendments to Section 262 (2) of Cr. PC, 1973 has to be carried out to give effect
to proposed amendment.
4.6 It further proposed that Amendments should be brought out to provide facilities to witnesses
at court premises.
5.0 The Committee decided to issue press communique inviting public opinion on the subject
matter of the Bill. It also proposed to invite legal experts, retired police officers, representatives
of National Commission for Women and Human Rights Activists to depose before the Committee.
The Chairperson requested the Members to suggest names of persons who would be invited for
giving their opinion on the Bill to the Committee.
5.1 Thereafter, Chairperson requested the Ministry to send written replies to the queries/
clarifications sought by Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 10 September, 2004.
7. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.

57
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 27 October, 2005 in Room No. G .074,
Ground Floor, K. Block, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri N. Jothi
5. Shri Sitaram Yechury
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Shri T. K. Hamza
8. Shri Naveen Jindal
9. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Bajuban Riyan
12. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri K.P. Singh, Special Secretary
2. Dr. K.S. Sugathan, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Aindri Anurag, Director
4. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Deputy Secretary
Representatives fr om UT Administrations
5. Shri D.S. Negi, Chief Secretary, A&N Administration
6. Shri Naresh Kumar, Resident Commissioner, A&N Administration
57

58
7. Shri Chetan B. Sanghi, Commissioner (Finance), A&N Administration
8. Shri C.S. Khairwal, Chief Secretary, Pondicherry,
9. Shri Sridharan, Director (planning), Pondicherry
Representatives f rom Administrative Ministries and Planning Commission
10. Shri V .S. Senthil, Joint Secretary, M/o Finance
11. Shri R. Sridharan, Joint Secretary, Planning Commission
12. Dr. Joseph Ibrahim, Joint Advisor, Planning Commission
13. Shri T. Jacob, Joint Secretary, DoP&T
14. Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary, M/o Civil Aviation
15. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director, M/o Civil Aviation
16. Shri Anjum Pravez, Director (Works), Railway Board
17. Shri B.S. Kharmawthlang, Director, M/o Tribal Affairs
18. Shri Manoj Kumar, Superintending Engineer, M/o Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
19. Shri Dinesh Kumar, DS, M/o Shipping
20. Shri Shaleen Kabra, Deputy Secretary, M/o Urban Development
21. Shri J.K. Prasad, Addl. DG (Forest), M/o Environment and Forests
22. Shri A. Chaturvedi, Director, M/o Tourism
23. Shri M. Lall, Additional Commissioner (Crops), M/o Agriculture
24. Shri N. Parmeswaran, DDG (PG), Deptt. of Telecommunication
25. Shri M.K.R. Nair, Joint Commissioner (Fisheries), Department of Animal Husbandry and
Dairying
2.0 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee. She also
welcomed Shri Sitaram Yechury, a newly nominated member to the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Committee that it had selected “Administration of Union Territories” as one of
the subjects for examination and report and also visited three Union Territories viz. Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Pondicherry and Chandigarh to have first hand experience of the working of the
administrations of those UTs and had interacted with a number of public representatives/senior
officers in that connection. She also informed the members about the exemption sought by the
Home Secretary from personal appearance before it in view of his meeting with the Home
Secretary of Bangladesh and requesting that the Special Secretary (Home) may be permitted to
attend the sitting of the Committee on his behalf. She told the members that she had granted the
request of the Home Secretary.
2.1 The Chairperson, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and
other Ministries/Departments to the meeting and briefly mentioned the purpose of the visits of the
earlier and the present Committees to three UTs, viz. Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Pondicherry
and Chandigarh. She also shared the views of the local representatives of the respective UTs as
gathered by the Committee during its visits, with the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs. She
stated that the Committee’s Secretariat had received the replies to the questionnaire on those issues.
Lastly, she mentioned that the Committee would view/hear the presentations/views of Chief
Secretaries of UTs of Pondicherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Chandigarh in that sequence.
2.2 She then referred to the visit of the Committee to Pondicherry and the issues which came
before the Committee like statehood to the UT with special category status and the rehabilitation
after the Tsunami disaster. She invited the Chief Secretary of Pondicherry to express his views
freely on the issue of statehood and governance, problems related to it, etc.

59
3.0 The Chief Secretary, Pondicherry thanked the Chairperson and Members of the Committee
for the visit to Pondicherry. He mentioned that unlike Delhi, law and order and police had been
entrusted to the UT Administration of Pondicherry. He then stated that, at present, the financial
position of the UT Government was very weak as a result of which it had to depend upon the
Centre for assistance upto the level of sixty to seventy per cent of its budget. Grant of Statehood
to Pondicherry without special category status, would halt the progress of developmental projects
of the UT (Airport and port in Karaikal region) due to lack of resources. He stated that the flow
of resources from Centre upto the extent of 60-70% was a must for the all-round development
of Pondicherry. Furthermore, UT of Pondicherry also received support from Union Ministries/
Departments in view of its position as Union Territory. He therefore, laid emphasis on conferment
of special category status as part of the issue of granting statehood to Pondicherry.
3.1 The Special Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that per capita income of UT
of Pondicherry is double that of Tamil Nadu, which was attributable to tremendous inflow of
central funds for the UT. He also apprised that the matter of granting special category status had
been examined a number of times by the Union Government and it was not found to be a viable
proposition for several reasons.
4.0 Some Members also sought clarification on the grant of statehood to Pondicherry. A
Member was of the view that it was not the question of financial position of the UT rather it was
the aspirations of the people which had to be respected. In that context, he referred to the
resolutions passed by the Legislative Assembly of Pondicherry for special category status alongwith
statehood to Pondicherry. He also referred to the graduation of Goa to a State from the position
of UT even though being financially weak. He argued that the difference between special category
state and ordinary state in terms of central assistance is only forty per cent. He requested Chief
Secretary and Special Secretary, Home to examine the recommendations of Twelfth Finance
Commission with regard to flow of resources to States where under States were bound to gain
more compared to Union Territories. He also brought to the notice of the Committee that ninety
per cent of population belonging to SC/ST were not enjoying the benefit of reservation in
employment and education since 1996. Moreover, State Government had very limited role in grass-
root level planning. He also suggested that after the grant of statehood, the UT would be able to
borrow at low interest rates from World Bank, Asian Development Bank and to finance its
development activities/infrastructure like airport, ports, roads, etc. and summed up by saying that
the will of the people must be respected.
4.1 In response to the query of the Chairperson regarding granting special category status to
Pondihcerry, the Special Secretary mentioned that Pondicherry did not fulful the criteria decided
upon by the Planning Commission for the purpose, although Eleventh Finance Commission
recommended for special category status in the event of graduation of the UT of Pondicherry to
a State. He also stated that at the moment, statehood was not a viable proposition, which might
materialize within the next five to ten years. To a query of the Chairperson as to the availability
of administrative power to Chief Minister, the Chief Secretary conceded that all important files
went to the Lt. Governor which was not the case in States where Chief Minister was the final
authority to decide.
4.2 Another Member was of the view that the criteria for statehood like economic status, threat
perception from adjoining country, strategic locations, tribal population etc. as laid down by the
Planning Commission had been fulfilled by Pondicherry. He also referred to a Committee appointed
to look into the viability of granting special category statehood to Pondicherry whose suggestion
in this regard was agreed in principle by the Government headed by Shri P.V . Narsimha Rao.
However, it was shelved thereafter.
4.3 Replying thereto the Joint Secretary in the Planning Commission stated that the decision
with respect to Special Category status was taken by the National Development Council (NDC).

60
The Committee was subsequently informed that the issue of statehood to UT of Pondicherry was
not referred to the National Development Council as it was rejected by the Planning Commission
itself.
4.4 Another Member wanted to know when was the last time special category status granted
to a State; the name of the State; when were those criteria drawn; and whether those had since
been reviewed. It was also queried whether all States which had been accorded special category
status fulfilled the criteria laid down by the Planning Commission and whether the Constitution of
India was ever amended to accord special category status to the State.
4.5 A Member also raised the issue of functioning of four private medical colleges in
Pondicherry, which were not following the reservation policy. The action taken by the Ministry in
that regard was also enquired.
4.6 Yet another Member brought to the notice of the Committee that the capital city of
Pondicherry did not enjoy the status of B-II for HRA purpose although for CCA it enjoyed that
status. Like a small village in A & N Islands, the city of Pondicherry enjoys C-class status for that
purpose. Port Blair and Panaji had been accorded B-I status having a population of 93,000 and 1.25
lakh, respectively. But Pondicherry having a population of 5.5 lakh (2.2 lakh in Pondicherry
municipality) had been denied B-II status. He opined that B-II status to the city of Pondicherry was
long overdue, which drew support from the Chief Secretary as well as the Committee, in view of
the historical importance of that capital city. He also pointed out that the demand for according
Scheduled Tribe status to five communities (Irular, Malaikuravan Kattunayakan, Yerukula, Kuruman)
who are original inhabitations of Pondicherry had been pending for more than fifteen years with
the Government of India. That was due to the confusion primarily created by the office of
Registrar General of India treating them as migrant tribals even though T. Subramanyam Naidu
Committee as well as Pondicherry Legislative Assembly through its resolution had recognized them
as original inhabitants of Pondicherry. Those communities were not recognized as ST as they did
not conform to the five indicators laid down by the Lokur Committee. A member wanted to know
as to whether any Committee reviewed the essential characteristics laid down by the Lokur
Committee for identifying tribals; whether those criteria were defined while States were being
reorganized, etc. Another member sought modification of the indicators prescribed by Lokur
Committee. A member mentioned that STs of other States were entitled to get the benefit of
reservation in Pondicherry thus discriminating and denying social justice to those communities.
Some Members felt that those tribals should be immediately given reservations for the sake of
equity and social justice.
4.7 A Member raised a query regarding rehabilitation in Tsunami affected area and wanted
immediate release of funds for constructing permanent houses. He also raised the questions of not
granting freedom fighter’s pension to about 50-60 freedom fighters allegedly on the ground of lack
of evidence of their imprisonment; power to transfer Government lands to private party and vice
versa; and creation of Pondicherry Civil Service Commission and the Police Service Commission, etc.
4.8 Members were of the view that the elections to the Panchayati Raj Institutions should be
held at the earliest and those should be involved in implementing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
A Member enquired from the Chief Secretary about the administration in the Pondicherry prison
where spurious liquor was being smuggled leading to death of prisoners.
4.9 The Special Secretary (Home) and Chief Secretary, Pondicherry replied to some of the
queries of the Members and promised to furnish the detailed replies to the rest later.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5.0 The Chairperson then welcomed the Chief Secretary, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and his
colleagues and sought the vie ws of the Administration about creation of the Legislative Assembly

61
for the UT; representation in Rajya Sabha; powers available with the UT administration vis-a-vis
the Ministry of Home Affairs, etc.
6.0 The Chief Secretary apprised the Committee that all the developmental activities in the
Islands were being done through the District Rural Development Authority headed by the
Development Commissioner. However, Tribal Councils were involved wherever necessary. He also
stated that although power had been devolved to Panchayati Raj/Zila Parishad but the process was
slow, which needed to be expedited to meet the aspirations of the people which was in favour of
creation of Legislative Assembly for the UT. He then observed that the issue whether there should
be an Assembly or not, may be decided by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the matter may be
left to them. He stated that the main problem of the Administration was with regard to recruitment
of the staff as all the recruitments were routed through the Union Public Service Commission
(UPSC) or the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and the Administration had no power for direct
recruitment. The ban imposed by the Government of India on recruitment had also created a lot
of problem for the Administration which was grappling with the matter of shortage of staff.
6.1 Speaking on the issue of creation of a Legislative Assembly for the UT, the Special
Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the matter had been examined time and again
in the Ministry and did not find favour. He stated that in 1997 the Union Cabinet had rejected the
demand for the Assembly for the UT.
6.2 The Chairperson made a query relating to the history of the demand for the Assembly and
the fora at which that demand was placed by the Ministry of Home Affairs and with what results.
The Special Secretary replied that a written note would be furnished to the Committee.
6.3 Members also raised queries such as use of Andaman and Nicobar Islands as an Exclusive
Economic Zone; commercial exploitation of the hydrocarbons; and improvement of aqua-maritime
culture to enhance the income of the Islands and the country. Issues such as intrusion by foreign
poacher, growing influx of people from the mainland in search of employment, bootlegging and the
problems connected with development were also raised. It was opined that those issues led to
increase in crime rates and suffering of the people, and thus justifying the demand for an Assembly.
6.4 Some members also raised queries regarding recruitment; the need for one time relaxation
of ban on recruitment, problem arising out of Tsunami tragedy, future plans for bringing the tribals
to mainstream, etc.
6.5 The Special Secretary, Home and the Chief Secretary, Andaman and Nicobar Islands replied
to some of the queries and promised to furnish written replies to the rest.
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
7.0 Due to paucity of time the Committee deferred the oral evidence of Administrator of UT
of Chandigarh to 3.00 pm on 8 November, 2005.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The committee adjourned at 2.10 
P.M. to reassemble at 3.00 P.M. on 8 November, 2005.

62
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 8 November, 2005 in Room No. G.074,
Ground Floor, K. Block, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V . Narayanasamy
3. Shri Rishang Keishing
4. Shri R.K. Dhawan
5. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
6. Shri N. Jothi
7. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
8. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
9. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
10. Shri Biren Singh Engti
11. Shri Rahul Gandhi
12. Shri T.K. Hamza
13. Shri Naveen Jindal
14. Shri Tek Lal Mahato
15. Shri Sachin Pilot
16. Prof. M. Ramadass
17. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
18. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
19. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Home Secretary
2. Dr. K.S. Sugathan, Joint Secretary
62

63
3. Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Ms. Aindri Anurag, Director
5. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Deputy Secretary
Representatives of Chandigarh Administration
1. Shri Lalit Sharma, Adviser to Administrator
2. Shri Krishna Mohan, Home Secretary
Representatives from other Ministries
1. Shri V .S. Senthil, Joint Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
2. Shri R. Sridharan, Joint Secretary, Planning Commission
3. Dr. Joseph Ibrahim, Joint. Advisor, Planning Commission
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs
5. Shri Sanjay Narayan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
6. Shri A.K. Misra, Member (Planning), Airports Authority of India
7. Shri Sanjeev K. Lohia, Director, Railway Board
8. Shri Manoj Kumar, Supdt. Engineer, Ministry of Transport and Highways
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and apprised
them about the nomination of Shri Sanjay Raut, M.P. to the Committee and also welcomed him on
her own behalf and on behalf of the Committee. Thereafter, she welcomed the Home Secretary
along with other representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Chandigarh Administration and
other Ministries/Departments of Government of India. She then informed the Committee that the
discussion on “Administration of Union Territories” was inconclusive in the last meeting of the
Committee held on 27 October, 2005 due to constraints of time and mentioned that the presence
of Home Secretary in this meeting would certainly be helpful as he had been Advisor to the
Administrator of Chandigarh. She then pointed out the issues which came up before the Committee
during its visit to Chandigarh. The Chairperson also enquired from the Home Secretary about the
feasibility of an elected body like Pradesh Council in the absence of a Legislative Assembly and
whether the Government had any plan to revive the post of Chief Commissioner. She then asked
the Home Secretary to express his views on the feasibility of having a Legislative Assembly for
Chandigarh.
3.0 The Home Secretary briefly touched upon the administrative set-up of Chandigarh starting
from the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, under which the Union Territory of Chandigarh was
constituted, to the present dispensation headed by an Administrator. He also touched upon other
mechanisms viz. Home Minister’s Advisory Committee and Advisory council to Advisor in addition
to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh (MCC) which came into being in the year 1995. He also
informed the Committee that Chandigarh was also represented in the Northern Zonal Council, which
held a meeting in October, 2005 where the issues relating to inter-State co-ordination were
discussed. He stressed upon the need to broadbase the Advisory Council by giving representation
to political parties therein and holding meetings more frequently to fulfil the aspiration of the
people. But he was of the view that until and unless there was a permanent solution to
Chandigharh, which was a political issue between two states (Haryana and Punjab), it would be
impractical to have a Legislative Assembly there. However, he was not in favour of creation of a
Pradesh Council and revival of the post of Chief Commissioner of Chandigarh. However, he
advocated the proposal for creation of a Metropolitan Planning Committee consisting of Urban
Chandigarh and eighteen villages.

64
3.1 On the issue of widening the power of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh, the Advisor
to the Chandigarh Administrator was of the view that there was no problem in transferring the
entire area of UT of Chandigarh including eighteen villages to the Municipal Corporation alongwith
functions and the funds but the problem might crop up while transferring functionaries from the
Administration to Corporation.
4.0 One Member while raising the view of violation of building byelaws wanted to know about
the relaxations given in the past and also proposal for making one time relaxation in the building
by-laws. The Advisor to the Administrator stated that he was unaware about the grant of relaxation
and expressed his reservations in granting relaxation of building byelaws for balconies in view of
the seismic zone level of the Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Home Secretary supplemented
the Advisor by saying that there was an element of sacrosanctity with regard to the UTs
architecture and planning.
4.1 On the issue of increasing the number of police force, the Home Secretary was of the view
that there was no need to increase the same as Chandigarh was over policed.
4.2 Regarding the implementation of recommendations of the Second Delhi Finance
Commission, the Advisor replied that those recommendations were accepted in July, 2005 and
seventeen per cent of the revenue had already been transferred to the Corporation. He also stated
that the MCC had been requested to consider taking over the administration of the eighteen villages
so that their financial requirements could be projected before the Third Finance Commission, which
had been constituted recently. The Advisor assured the Committee that the increase of function and
jurisdiction would be commensurated by the increase of revenue.
4.3 Some Members expressed unhappiness about the growing uncleanliness in the city and
stressed upon the need to improve sanitation so that Chandigarh remained the model city for the
other centres.
4.4 One Member suggested that the Chandigarh Airport being the common airport for Punjab
and Haryana should be open for twenty four hours. The representatives of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation agreed to consider the suggestion and take it up at appropriate level with the Indian Air
Force.
4.5 On the query relating to issuance of SC certificates, the Home Secretary replied that it
would be sorted out within a week’s time.
5.0 A verbatim proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.0 The Committee adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.

65
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, 10 January, 2006 in Main Committee Room,
PHA, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri R.K. Dhawan
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
4. Shri Sitaram Yechury
5. Shri Sanjay Raut
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
7. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti
9. Shri Tapir Gao
10. Shri Naveen Jindal
11. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
12. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
13. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
14. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
15. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting and apprised them of the agenda
i.e. , the internal discussion on the subject “Administration of UTs” which had been under
consideration of the Committee for a long time. She briefly recapitulated the developments since
the subject was taken up by the then Committee.
3. While initiating the discussion the Chairperson, stated that there seems to be unanimity on
the issue of an Assembly for Andaman and Nicobar Islands but immediate creation of it might
hamper the rehabilitation efforts of the UT Administration.
65

66
3.1 However, some members were of the view that creation of Legislative Assembly may not
hamper rehabilitation works and could be recommended. Some were of the view that in a
democratic country like ours, all the UTs should have Legislative Assemblies. One Member was of
the view that Legislative Assembly may be created early but the allocation of work relating to
Tsunami rehabilitation should continue with the Lieutenant Governor. The Committee then decided
unanimously to recommend creation of a Legislative Assembly for Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
4. The Chairperson then touched the issue of full statehood to the UT of Pondicherry and
invited the views of Members.
4.1 The Committee was unanimous with regard to granting full statehood to Pondicherry,
however, members felt that it should be statehood with special category status. Some felt that
Pondicherry having a good economic development may become self-sustainable very soon. One
Member felt that it would be difficult to sustain its economy as it would be a very small State.
Another Member, however, was of the view that the grant of full statehood should be in
accordance with the norms for granting the same. He expressed apprehension on the effect of
granting special category status to it on the neighbouring States. He felt that all aspects must be
carefully studied before taking the decision.
5. On the issue of Chandigarh and creation of Legislative Assembly for the UT, the Committee
was of the view that in view of the sensitivities of the UT between two States the Committee
should refrain from recommending Assembly for the UT as it might be interpreted in a different
way and might lead to fresh controversy. However it felt that the area of Municipal Corporation
should be broadened and Chief Commissioner system should be revived. One Member felt that
remapping of the urban and rural Chandigarh was required for equity in civic facilities to all the
residents. Members also suggested that Advisory Council should meet regularly to address people’s
grievances.
6. The Chairperson then announced the cancellation of the meeting scheduled to be held on
20 January, 2006.
(The Committee adjourned for tea and reassembled thereafter)
7. The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, DoNER alongwith her colleagues to the
meeting. The Chairperson briefly mentioned the jurisdiction and functioning of the Committee and
apprised the Secretary about the itinerary of the Committee’s visit to North East Region from
1-7 February, 2006 to assess the internal security scenario and economic and infrastructural
development of the region. She invited the Secretary to make a presentation on the economic and
infrastructrual development in NER and about the ongoing projects of the Ministry of DoNER.
8. The Secretary thanked the Committee for giving her an opportunity and made a power-point
presentation on various projects, schemes in progress or commissioned in the region.
9. Thereafter the Chairperson made several queries like whether there was any c1ear-cut
demarcation between the responsibilities of the NEC and the Ministry of DoNER; amount available
in the Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR); demand in the current year; feedback
of the States as regards raising of loans by them; improvement in the development of NE region
after the creation of the Ministry; sports schools for coaching boys and girls, etc.
9.1 Members also raised several issues such as whether any new subjects were allocated to the
Ministry on its upgradation from Department to a full fledged Ministry; number of cases/projects
in which CAG raised specific objections; details of their rectification, the areas covered under the
NE Vision-2020; employment orientation of the vision proposal of NEC to Defence Ministry for a
military Centre or Sainik Schools for recruiting the NER people increasing the frequency of

67
organizing seminar to educate people for entrepreneurship initiatives by the Ministry for processing
agricultural produce viz. ginger, orange, etc. and in floriculture.
9.2 Some Members also raised queries regarding drastic reduction in amount sanctioned for
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Tripura during the previous year thus creating further regional
imbalance; methods of execution of the money allotted; estimated amount required to fulfil the NE
Vision-2020; person/authority responsible for drawing the guidelines for administering the NLCPR;
basis on which educational institutions were identified for financial assistance, etc.
9.3 Members also made certain suggestions such as involving the people through widest
possible consultation for the Vision-2020; grant in aid of 10% of the plan outlay to the States in
NER instead of asking them to raise the loan for the same; formulating guidelines for using the
money for regional development; setting up of good institutions like ITI, polytechnics, etc. to train
the youth of the region; introduction of barter trade with China through Nathula; development of
tourism infrastructure; encouraging the entrepreneurs to join hands in the development of the NE
States; inclusion of inter-faith dialogue for Vision-2020; bringing necessary changes in the rules and
regulations of NEC to promote schemes for neglected and backward areas, like Bodo Land.
9.4 Some Members enquired whether insurgents who surrendered were included under the self-
employment scheme and imparted any training; basis on which schemes were sanctioned in a year
and dropped the next year; whether people who lost their land in Loktak project were properly
compensated; whether the Ministry were coordinating the work of Tourism Development
Corporations of various States; whether there was any restriction in prompting tourism due to
security reasons; questions regarding monitoring on working of institutions like Dr. B Barua Cancer
Institute, activities of NEDFI and NERAMAC, Airports yet to be completed in the region, etc. were
also raised.
9.5 The Secretary, DoNER and other officers replied to all queries.
10. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 2.25 
P.M.

68
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 6 June, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
3. Shri Sanjay Raut
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
LOK SABHA
5. Shri C.K. Chandrappan
6. Shri Tapir Gao
7. Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
8. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
9. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
11. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Committee Officer
2. The Committee resumed further consideration of the Communal Violence (Prevention,
Control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005. The Chairperson briefly recapitulated the
discussions held in the Committee on the Bill on the previous day. Thereafter, she invited the
Members who were not present in the previous day’s meeting to express their views on the Bill.
3. Some Members expressed certain reservations about the need of the Bill and made
comments on its implications on the Federal structure of Indian polity but agreed to the proposal
of obtaining views of the State Governments and recognized political parties and also for taking
evidence of legal/constitutional experts on the Bill.
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft One Hundred Twenty First Report
on “Administration of Union Territories” (Pondicherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Chandigarh) and adopted the same with minor amendments.
68

69
5. The Committee authorized its Chairperson to decide date of presentation/of laying of Report
to Parliament during the Monsoon Session. The Committee also authorized its Chairperson to
nominate one Member of Rajya Sabha and two Members of Lok Sabha to present/lay the Report
to/in Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M.

ANNEXURES

Study Note
on the visit of the Department-related
Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs
to Pondicherry, Nagapattinam (Tamil Nadu)
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(16 to 22 June, 2005)
73

Study Note
on the visit of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs to
Pondicherry, Nagapattinam (Tamil Nadu) and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(16 to 22 June, 2005)
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs
visited Pondicherry, Nagapattinarn (Tamil Nadu) and Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16 to
22 June, 2005 in connection with the examination of the “Administration of Union Territories” of
Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Disaster Management Bill, 2005, referred
to it by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha for consideration and report. The Committee held detailed
interaction with the Lt. Governors of both the UTs, key officials of the administrations, local
peoples’ representatives, NGOs and Tsunami affected people, as given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
16 June, 2005
Pondicherry
2. The Committee called on the Lieutenant Governor, Pondicherry at Raj Bhawan and held
discussion with him on various aspects of the UT Administration.
17 June, 2005
Nagapattinam
Meeting with District Level Officers and interaction with local
citizen groups/NGOs working in area of disaster management.
3. The Committee held interaction with the District level Officers of Nagapattinam in Tamil
Nadu at the District Collectorate on their experience in providing rescue, relief and rehabilitation in
the aftermath of Tsunami.
4. The District Collector, Nagapattinam and his colleagues apprised the Committee in detail of
the devastating effect of Tsunami on the coastal areas of the district and the measures taken by
the Government to rescue the victims and provide relief and rehabilitation to the affected people,
through slide presentations. 187.9 km coastline of the district was affected by Tsunami, which hit
it within five hours from the epicentre at Sumatra. The loss of human life was 6650 in
Nagapattinam out of the total figure of 8018 killed in the State of Tamil Nadu, Tsunami waves rose
30-60 feet high and hit the coastal habitation causing widespread loss of lives, destruction of
houses and vegetation. The number of casualties was more in case of women than men. A number
of tourists were also there. Chief Minister of the State visited the affected places on 26,
27 and 30 December, 2004. All the affected persons were shifted to temporary shelters on
6th January, 2005. 419 NGOs came forward to provide helping hand to the administration in this
gigantic task. It was estimated by the administration that twenty one thousand permanent houses
would have to be constructed for the rehabilitation of the affected people. The State disbursed
75

76
Rs. 113 crore as relief to the victims, opened orphanage for adolescent girls, provided free text
books and notebooks to Tsunami affected school children, exempted fees and gave special focus
to widows and aged persons. The strategy to restore their livelihood, develop port, reclaim
agricultural field, skill upgradation, training, capacity building was in the process of finalization.
5.0 The Chairperson appreciated the work of the administration and sought the opinion/
suggestions of the district authorities on the provisions of the Disaster Management Bill, 2005 in
the light of the experiences gained during the rescue, relief and rehabilitation operations in the
district. The District Collector sought time and assured to furnish written comments on the
provisions of the Bill later on.
5.1 A Member asked about the provisions made regarding supply of drinking water to the
affected people. Another Member enquired about the status of primary aid received by State
Government and relief provided after the first week of the tragedy. It was enquired as to whether
any study had been made about satisfaction level of affected people regarding relief measures
provided by administration, the details of missing persons and reasons of their not been declared
dead; relief provided to non-fishermen as their agriculture land had been adversely affected by
saline water of the sea; coordination with NGOs etc.
5.2. The District Collector replied that on Sunday, 26 December, 2004 when Tsunami hit the
district, all communication systems collapsed. As a result there were some problems in
communication system initially but it was made operational at the shortest possible time. Financial
Powers of District Collector were relaxed as there were problems in providing immediate relief
NGOs relief was distributed through District Collectorate to facilitate distribution of relief in an
equitable manner. Administration had a programme for providing compensation and for treatment
of soil affected by Tsunami which was Rs. 2500/- and Rs. 12500/- per hectare, respectively.
Regarding missing persons, the DC informed that there was a proforma of checklist for checking
missing persons and in most of such cases 50% of the compensation was paid immediately and
50% was to be released after nine months by vetting of the case by Taluka Committees.
5.3 Another Member enquired about the component of loan and subsidy in the relief provided
to the affected people and Action Plan about treatment of the affected land of farmers within three
years and the provision for orphanages.
5.4 The District Collector replied that 60%  subsidy and 40% loan had been provided as relief
to those whose boats were lost. But it also depended on the type and value of the boat. Relief was
also provided for repairing the boats. Cranes were mobilised to retrieve the material and mechanised
boats. 670 boats could be retrieved Some of the boats had been washed away even upto Sri Lanka.
The issue of retrieving them was being taken up with that country through the Ministry of External
Affairs. So far only 8 such boats could be taken back. The Government had posted a Relief
Commissioner on 31st December, 2004 and had posted three Collectors for relief and rehabilitation
purposes. He further informed that many of the affected people wanted their permanent shelter at
places away from their earlier homes. 85 locations for construction of permanent shelters along
with some of the NGOs had been identified. Each home was estimated to cost Rs.1.25 lakhs.
5.5 A Member asked whether orphanages included only children or even old people who are left
with 110 one to take care of and what was the role of local communities in the rehabilitation and
relief efforts.
5.6 The District Collector replied that local people played the most important role in all the
efforts made by administration. He also replied that orphanages were for old people also.
6. The Committee then visited, alongwith the District Officers, the temporary/intermediate
shelters, Nursery school; at ITI complex near District Collectorate meant for the Tsunami affected

77
people and interacted with the people regarding difficulties faced by them. The Committee asked
the Officers to look into the problems narrated by the affected people and take into account the
suggestions given by them regarding rehabilitation programme while providing them the permanent
shelters.
Visit to Pattanicherry, Karaikal
7. The Committee also visited the Tsunami affected areas of Pattanicherry in Karaikal district
of Pondicherry, which was the worst affected area of that Union Territory and interacted with the
affected people in the temporary shelters provided by the administration. The administration showed
the breakdown of parapet wall constructed by the French for protection of Karaikal region trom
sea intrusion. The Committee was apprised of the difficulties faced by the people such as heat due
to shelters made of tin. Some fishermen had grievances against the administration which had not
provided the relief as yet. Some were feeling insecure due to the ensuing monsoon and the delay
in construction of permanent shelters.
Meeting with District level officers at Karaikal, District Headquarter
8. The Committee then held an interaction with the District Level Officers/local MLAs, citizen
groups and NGOs working in the area for providing relief and rehabilitation. The Committee also
discussed with them the issues of relief and rehabilitation in the light of their experiences in the
matter.
9.0 The District Collector while making his presentation showed slides inter alia depicting
damage caused to main coastal roads, Medical College, parapet walls, displacement of catamarans
and mass burials. He stated that more damage was caused by receding water. Casualties of women
and children were more as it being Sunday morning, children were playing and fishermen were
collecting fish while women were at their homes. He mentioned that 492 deaths were reported in
Karaikal region alone including that of 252 children and 164 women.
9.1 Elaborating upon the relief operations, the DC stated that 15000 people were brought to the
22 relief camps within ten days of Tsunami tragedy. They were provided with rice, kerosene and
other cooking materials. NGOs also helped by way of community kitchen. The Government also
provided relief to fishermen who lost their boats depending upon the fishing craft. The
compensation of Rs. 3750/-  per hectare, as immediate relief, was given for sea water intrusion in
the agricultural fields. Another Rs. 60000/- per hectare would be given to them to take steps to
restore the productivity of land. For loss of cattle also compensation was provided on a certain
yardstick. He mentioned that 1200 temporary shelters were constructed and Rs. 1000/-  per family
was provided for repair of houses. For constructing permanent shelters land had been identified and
required modalities were being worked out.
10.0 The Chairperson enquired about the actual disbursement of relief and whether all the
affected persons had been identified and provided the relief and were there cases of compensation
not reaching the concerned persons. She also sought clarification about tin roofs at Pattanicherry
as temporary shelters which were very hot in summer and why thatched roofs could not be
provided as was done at Nagapattinam.
10.1 One Member expressed doubts about the goal of the administration to complete the
construction of permanent shelters within three months and felt the need for a realistic time-frame
for completing the permanent shelters. He wanted to know whether the administration had
evaluated the relief given to the affected people; reasons for not taking any action about 19 missing
people; plantation of casuarinas as a check to devastation of Tsunami in future; modernisation of
fishing sector; jobs for children who had been orphaned.

78
10.2 Another Member sought clarifications regarding difficulties faced by fishermen due to
identifying land for permanent shelters 500 mts. away from the sea; compensation in terms of
reservation of jobs to the children of affected people; educational facilities in the temporary and
permanent shelters, etc. He urged upon the administration to take the tragedy as an opportunity to
modernise the fishing sector. He was also of the view that there should be special recruitment
camps for recruiting Tsunami affected people in various paramilitary forces. Another Member was
of the view that local representatives should be co-opted in the rehabilitation measures. The issue
of construction of parapet wall on priority was also raised.
10.3 Replying to the queries the District level officials stated that though Rs. 180 crores has not
been received so far from World Bank for permanent shelters, but 36 hectares of land had been
acquired for construction. 17 NGOs had agreed to construct 2400 houses. Elected Panchayats are
not there in Pondicherry but Panchayat like set up by consensus do exist. The Committee was also
informed that Karaikal was one of the districts identified for Pilot Project for Multipurpose National
Identity Cards.
11. The representatives of several NGOs appreciated the support, which the administration
provided in execution  of projects and disbursal of relief and rehabilitation to the affected people of
the region. However, most of them were of the view that the precondition of the Government to
deposit 10-20 per cent of project cost as security deposit for construction of permanent shelters
was a bottleneck and would create problem for the NGOs in executing the construction work of
permanent shelters. They also expressed doubts about the suitability of the site selected for
permanent shelters which was a low lying area. It may cause cost escalation. Tax exemption on
steel and cement and excise duty exemption on material were also demanded.
18 June, 2005
Pondicherry
Meeting with the Chief Minister and other Ministers of UT of Pondicherry
12. The Committee held discussion with the Chief Minister and his ministerial colleagues on the
working of the Union Territory administration and the aspects related to relief and rehabilitation
after Tsunami, in the Chamber of the Chief Minister, Pondicherry.
13.0 The Chief Minister, Pondicherry stated that lack of powers to the Council of Ministers in
even day-to-day matters is very dissatisfying and as a result of which the elected Government was
unable to fulfil the democratic aspirations of the people. He stated that the Lieutenant Governor was
the head of the Government but all decisions of the Council of Ministers in Pondicherry were to
be approved by him and advise of the Council of Ministers was not binding on him. Thus, the real
powers were vested with the Lieutenant-Governor and in turn with the Union Home Ministry. The
representatives of the people who constituted the Council of Ministers were not in the reckoning.
The MLAs of the Union Territory of Pondicherry are not even part of the electoral college for
electing the President of India. According to him the Council of Ministers was of the overwhelming
view that the political aspirations of the people of Pondicherry could be fulfilled only when the
Council of Ministers was given real powers, which could be through the grant of full statehood
to Pondicherry. A resolution in that regard had been passed by the Assembly for the sixth time in
a row. While granting the statehood, it was desired that Pondicherry should also be accorded
Special Category Status. Alternatively, it was suggested to look into the Union Territory Act, 1963
affesh, according to which Pondicherry was being ruled till now.
13.1 The Members of the Committee belonging to Pondicherry raised issues, viz. recognisation
of ST population in Pondicherry by census; upgradation of Pondicherry city into B2 class city as

79
its population including Vulgarai is 5.52 lakhs. While Port Blair having 92,000 population and Panaji’
having 1.2 lakh population have been granted B2 status but Pondicherry has still not been granted
that status. Similarly there is no separate Calamity Relief Fund for UT of Pondicherry, etc.
13.2 Another Member raised the issue of not holding elections to Panchyati Raj Institutions for
the last thirty years in the UT in violation of constitutional requirements.
Meeting with the Members of Legislative Assembly
14. The Committee held discussion with the Members of Legislative Assembly (Annexure) at
Chief Secretariat on various issues arising mainly  out of the status of Pondicherry as a Union
Territory with Legislature.
15. The Members of the Legislative Assembly highlighted that though they are elected
representatives of people but have no powers like other Legislatures. Their concern was the
absence of any real powers to the legislators. A Member expressed concern over the neglect of
the Karaikal region by the Pondicherry Administration. However, one MLA felt that the status of
UT to Pondicherry should continue in its present form but the majority of MLAs wanted full
statehood with special category status for Pondicherry.
Meeting with the Officials of the Government of Pondicherry
16. The Committee interacted with Chief Secretary and Senior Officials of Pondicherry
Administration at Chief Secretariat, Pondicherry. The Chief Secretary made an audio-visual
presentation, which included location, expansion and demography of Pondicherry with special
reference to the socio-economic indicators. He mentioned the plan outlays and expenditure in the
previous five-year plans. His presentation also included the status of electrification of villages, road
length, villages connected by roads, length of surfaced roads, health status, tourism, sectoral
distribution of employment, etc. E1aborating further upon the Ninth Plan, he touched upon the
breakup of the Plan and major achievements made during the Plan in the areas of agriculture,
animal husbandry, fisheries, power, industries, port, housing, social welfare, women and child
development, police, information technology, education, health, community and urban development,
etc. As regards the Tenth Plan, he underlined the important targets envisaged in the Plan for various
sectors.
16. Elaborating upon the improvement of finances of the Union Territory, the Chief Secretary
mentioned about the pattern of funding, which reflected that the central assistance had declined
from 73.4% during Seventh Plan to 52.79% in the Tenth Plan. He also mentioned that the outlay
of Rs.810 crore for 2005-06 was approved by Planning Commission which included Rs. 100 crore
as one time assistance for Tsunami relief work. He then explained the major heads of outlay for
the year, of which social services alone had a share of 48.6%. Among the important projects/
schemes for the annual plan 2005-06, he mentioned about the fishing harbour at Karaikal,
development of Airport at Karaikal and extension of Pondicherry Airport, development of Tourism
Infrastructure, development of Thirunallar Temple T own, grant to Technical Institutions for
strengthening their infrastructure, construction of Women and Children Hospitals, implementation of
Perunthalaivar Kamarajar Housing Scheme with financial assistance of Rs, 50,000 per beneficiary,
extension of sewerage facilities to urbanisable area of Pondicherry, free supply of text books,
stationery and clothing to school children, welfare programmes for disabled persons, Backward
Classes and Scheduled Castes, distribution of free clothing to poor and economically backward
people, etc.
17.0 Thereafter, the Senior Superintendent of Police made a powerpoint presentation on the law
and order situation in the Union Territory. She mentioned that the law and order situation in the

80
Union Territory of Pondicherry was well under control and the territory was free from communal
and caste-based violence. She apprised that ‘India Today’ in its August, 2004 edition had
rated Pondicherry as No.1 in maintenance of law and order in the country describing it as
“Pondicherry—A Small Wonder” under the category of smaller States. According to her, in the
current year, i.e., from January to May, 2005, the heinous crimes had further decreased by 16%
as compared to the corresponding period of 2004, conviction rate at Pondicherry was at 86.4%
compared to the national average of 40.1%, She informed that Pondicherry Police was the first in
the country to start ‘Mahila Desk’ in alI the Police Stations of the UT. Periodical drive on eve-
teasing, counselling, interaction with NGOs, school children and rural women were being done to
boost their morale and confident. Gender sensitization for Police Personnel was being undertaken.
Pondicherry Police has established 3 All Women Police Stations, 2 at Pondicherry and 1 at Karaikal,
exclusively for women complaints. The Pondicherry Police have started two Counselling Centres,
one at All Women Police Stations (A WPS), Pondicherry and the other at Karaikal. These Counselling
Centres were exclusively meant for the women, who were either under distress or being harassed
by in-laws on various issues. The Central Social W elfare Board had sanctioned two Women
Helplines for AWPS, one at Pondicherry and the other at KaraikaI. Women Helplines would be
started shortly to help the woman complainants. About community policing initiatives she stated that
Permanent Peace Committees, Community Liaison Groups, Fisherman Watch Groups,
Neighbourhood Watch Scheme, etc. were working in the UT.
17.1 Throwing light upon the Modernisation of Police Force, the Sr. S.P. mentioned that the
focus was being given on modernization of the Police Stations. Each Police Station had been
provided with a computer, web camera, internet facility and Xerox machine. The Police Stations
were sending ‘Daily Occurrence Reports’ and various important reports through e-mail to the
Police Headquarters. She stated that a Five-Year Perspective Plan to modernise the Pondicherry
Police had been sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs on 10.02.2005. The Perspective Plan involves
a total amount of Rs. 54.48 crore for the year starting from 2005-06 to 2009-2010.
18.0 The Relief and Rehabilitation Commissioner also made an audio-visual presentation on the
Tsunami devastation in the Union Territory and the relief and rehabilitation work undertaken by the
administration.
18.1 At the outset he gave a demographic profile of the Union Territory and showed some slides
describing the devastation caused by Tsunami in the different regions of Pondicherry. He then
presented an overview of loss of lives and damage to material which accounted for a total number
of 599 deaths and the total population affected was 43, 432. The majority death of 492 persons
was in the Karaikal region.
18.2 Reflecting upon relief and rehabilitation measures he stated that there were 22 relief centres
at Karaikal and 26 at Pondicherry. Ex gratia payment of Rs. 1 lakh each was made to the families
of the deceased and an amount ranging from Rs. 5000 to Rs. 4.5 lakh were given for various items
such as funeral expense, medical expense, housing subsidy for damaged houses, purchase of
catamarans/boats, wooden mechanized boats, etc. Besides this, Rs. 3750/- was also immediately
given to each farmer for damage to crops.
18.3 Regarding Post—Tsunami activities of Government of Pondicherry, the Relief  and
Rehabilitation Commissioner stated that a State level Relief and Rehabilitation Committee was
constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief Minister and its Members being the Ministers, coastal
zone MLAs, Secretaries and other high officials to decide policy matters on relief. A meeting of
the said Committee was convened under the Chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Pondicherry to sort
out Housing and NGO interface Policy. A High Powered Committee was also convened under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Pondicherry to ensure co-ordination among various Departments.
The Development Commissioner was appointed as Relief and Rehabiiitation Commissioner,

81
Pondicherry. District Disaster Management Committee was convened under the chairmanship of
District Magistrate, Pondicherry to efficiently extend immediate relief measures to tsunami affected
people. Village Level Core Teams were also constituted with officials from Revenue and Fisheries
Department to undertake a comprehensive survey of affected areas. He also informed the
Committee that a total of Rs.465.99 crore of financial assistance was sought when the Central team
of Government of India visited the UT.
18.3.1 About the approval of Tsunami relief by the Government of India, he informed that under
Rajiv Gandhi Rehabilitation Package an amount of Rs. 155.62 crore was sanctioned, out of which
an amount of Rs. 70.83 crore was released, of which an amount of Rs.61.21 crore had already
been spent. Apprising the Committee about the medium and long-term proposals submitted to Joint
Assessment Mission of World Bank, ADB and UNDP on 4th February, 2005, he stated that a
demand for Rs.409.50 crore was projected. He also informed that World Bank Assistance for
Tsunami Reconstruction of Rs. 158.27 crore was approved. About the Society sponsored by
Government of Pondicherry for Tsunami Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, the Commissioner
stated that a Project Implementation Agency (PIA) at Pondicherry had been created for the benefit
of tsunami affected people. About the scope of PIA, he stated that it was an umbrella agency to
implement the assistance given  by the World Bank and to undertake various other activities related
thereto for relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction in various sectors. He mentioned that 4575
houses were proposed to be constructed in Pondicherry Region and 3600 in Karaikal Region. He
also mentioned about participation of civil society, offer for providing relief and rehabilitation from
NGOs. A policy decision for involving NGOs, in reconstruction of houses and infrastructure for
tsunami affected people had been taken with the following salient features:
(i) Reputed NGOs with good track record will be given preference.
(ii) NGOs offering to construct more than 100 houses will be allowed to construct houses
by themselves.
(iii) An MOU will have to be signed by the NGOs with Government of Pondicherry before
award of work.
(iv) Land will be identified by the Government.
(v) Land will remain in the name of Government; but inalienable right to beneficiary
family jointly in the name of husband and wife.
(vi) Ban on selling new houses/plots by any beneficiary or transfer to any person or
change of use.
(vii) S tate Level Empowered Committee headed by Chief Secretary, Pondicherry to shortlist
proposals from NGOs.
(viii) Executive Committee to supervise execution of work in the field in consonance with
MOU signed.
The policy had the following safeguards:
(a) For project costing. more than Rs. 1.0 crore, NGO to deposit 15-20% of the total
project cost.
(b) For project costing less than Rs. 10 crore, NGO to deposit 25% of the total project
cost.
18.3.2 He then reflected upon the preparedness to meet future disasters which included the
following:

82
(a) Communication system for transmission of early warning
– Activating Emergency Operation Centres (Control Rooms) in all four regions.
– Dissemination of early warning through Revenue and Police Department among
vulnerable population.
– Media – Local TV Channels, AIR.
– V olunteers in Panchayats of fishermen villages identified and trained to act during
emergencies.
– Involvement of NGOs.
(b) Evacuation
– Evacuation Drill has been formulated
Announcements made by Relief and Rehabilitation Commissioner/Collectors in local
TV and radio for evacuation: to prevent rumors/false starts
Police/Revenue/Land and Development and other Departments help in evacuation
Vulnerable population evacuated consequent to tsunami alarms raised on
30.12.2004 and 28.3.2005
Involvement of NGOs
(c) Coastal Protection Systems
– Plantation of shelter belt in coastal areas
– Casuarina, cashew, coconut planted in coastal area
– Plantation of Mangrove saplings in tidal areas/estuaries and river mouths
Strengthening of embankments with boulders, etc.
– Fresh coastal protection system near habitation
– Extending the length of existing protection wall
– Strengthening the existing protection walls
(d) Construction of Disaster Resistant Houses/Structures
– Pucca disaster resistant houses for tsunami affected families
– Revision of construction norms in coastal areas by Town and Planning Department
– Coastal Zone regulations to be kept in mind
– Hazard safety cell under Chief Engineer, PWD for structural soundness
(e) Capacity Buildlng
– Training of Relief officials
– Training and orientation of village volunteers
– Participation of NGOs/UNDP
– Training of Teachers/Students: NSS; NCC, etc.

83
(f) Preparation of Disaster Management Action Plan (National Calamity Relief Manual)
– Relief Manual scheme of actions to be undertaken by every department during
natural calamities. It ensures immediate response from Government machinery.
– Manual updated every year/being updated after Tsunami
18.3.3 Lastly he mentioned the duties of various Departments of the Government in the proposed
action plan.
19.0 The Chairperson enquired about the idea behind 15% to 20% deposit with Banks by NGOs
for construction of permanent shelters and reasons for selection of low lying land for permanent
shelters and money required for filling up the land for construction of permanent shelters.
19.1 Members made certain suggestions inter alia regarding establishment of public address
system in every coastal village; monitoring mechanism agency for verifying the use of
compensation provided by the administration; short course training from Japan on disaster
management; use of Tsunami disaster as an opportunity for modernizing fishery in consultation
with Swaminathan Foundation; cold storage in each village; and a task force for expediting the
construction of houses.
19.2 Members also raised queries such as implementation of centrally sponsored scheme in the
absence of Panchayati Raj Institutions; reasons for absence of Scheduled Tribes in the demographic
presentation; reason for not holding elections of Panchayati Raj Institutions which was a
constitutional obligation, etc.
19.3 The Chief Secretary replied that the requirement of deposit of 15-20% safeguard money by
NGOs had been introduced keeping in view the fact that NGOs may not leave the project midway
without completion. There would be a tripartite agreement amongst the bank, the concerned NGO
and the Government regarding withdrawal of safeguard money from Bank by the NGOs. About the
low-lying area, the Chief Secretary mentioned that column pillar would be raised for the building.
About delay in holding PRI elections, the Secretary, Panchayati Raj informed the Committee that
court’s stay was the reason for not holding PRI election, which had then been vacated. The
Administration was ready to hold election any time.
19.4 The Committee expressed its overall appreciation of the relief and rehabilitation measures
taken by administration for the Tsunami affected people.
19 June, 2005
20. The Committee arrived at Port Blair on 19 June, 2005 in the second phase of its study visit
to Pondicherry, Nagapattinarn and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Visit to Brichgunj Intermediate Shelters, Port Blair
21.0 The Committee visited Brichgunj, Port Blair where Intermediate shelters have been
constructed for Tsunami affected people. The Commissioner (Shipping/PWD), made a power point
presentation before the Committee which inter alia covered the effect of severe earthquake
followed by tsunami waves on Port Blair and other Islands in the form of loss of life and property,
the efforts made by the Administration in providing relif, the approach adopted for designing
intermediate shelters. He also mentioned that special attention was given on functional layout with
drainage, water supply and electrification, rain water harvesting, internal electrification, provision
for social infrastructure such as community centre, Balwadi, etc. Intermediate shelters (dwelling
units) measuring 23 sqms have been constructed by using GCI sheets, steel/wooden posts, CFL
lights and fans. LPG cylinders have also been provided to all families in intermediate shelters. About

84
the challenges before the Administration, the Commissioner stated that there was shortage of labour
as labourers were/are leaving the Islands after tsunami. Non availability of building construction
material and heavy vehicles, damaged jetties and roads had made the relief/rehabilitation task
difficult and to construct temporary shelters within the short span of time. He stated that despite
all those odds, a total number of 9565 intermediate shelters have been built at 58 locations spread
all over the Andaman and Nicobar Islands out of which 729 units are in Port Blair only. He
appreciated the role of NGOs in providing relief to the victims of tsunami. To the query about
ownership of land on which intermediate shelters had been constructed and the use of those
shelters after shifting of people to permanent shelters, the Secretary, PWD replied that all those
units have been constructed on Government land and intermediate shelters would be used for
community purposes after their inmates are shifted to permanent shelters. To other queries about
the expenditure per unit on permanent shelter; time required for completion and design thereof, the
Secretary stated that per unit cost would be around Rs. 95,000/- Ministry of Urban Development
would be the nodal organisation and Panchayati Raj Institutions representatives would be involved
in finalizing the designs of the permanent shelters. He mentioned that a Management Committee for
each camp has been constituted to look after management of those camps. The time required for
completion of the permanent shelters would be between one and a half to two years.
21.1 Thereafter, the Committee inspected some of the intermediate shelters and interacted with
the residents. The views of the residents are as below:—
(i) Permanent shelters should be at the place where their own houses had been before
tsunami or near to the city of Port Blair;
(ii) Permanent Government jobs (at least Group D) to the affected family;
(iii) their views on constructing permanent shelter should be taken; and
(iv) Option may be given to them for cash or permanent shelter.
21.2 Some of residents submitted petitions to the Chairperson of the Committee.
Visit to Sippighat and Chouldari Intermediate Shelter
22.0 The Committee also visited Sippighat where the level of Andaman Trunk Road (ATR) was
being raised since the pre-Tsunami road has been washed away. Around 3000 hactares of paddy
fields had been submerged under sea water as a result farmers have lost their livelihood. Even
dwelling units were under sea water. The Committee was informed by accompanying officials that
the inhabitants of Sippighat had been accommodated at the Brichgunj intermediate shelters which
the Committee had already visited.
22.1 It was also informed that 19 km road have been laid by raising its level and 50 km
embankment is to be constructed to protect the village during high tide.
22.2 The Committee then visited another temporary shelter at Chouldari and interacted with
President of Zila Parishad and representatives of the Village Panchayat and residents of that area.
The following main points were raised by the people there:—
(i) The farmers who had lost their paddy fields have not been given any compensation
whereas fishermen have got compensation. They told the Committee that since they
are not Below Poverty Line (BPL), they have not been given free ration. No
compensation have been given to them for the loss of domestic animals and livestock
also;
(ii) They demanded Group ‘D’ Government job per family which has lost its paddy field;

85
(iii) Free text book to children; and
(iv) LPG cylind er for Anganwadi to prepare mid-day meal for children.
22.3 The Deputy Commissioner of Andaman who was present there responded that survey for
loss of agricultural crop was-being done after which compensation would be given to the affected
farmers. The Comminee interacted with NGOs who were working at that site. The NGOs
appreciated the cooperation received from the administration in doing their job of rehabilitation.
Interaction with Local Representatives
23.0 The Committee held interaction with the local MP and tsunami affected people in
Conference Hall, Raj Niwas, where Chief Secretary was also present.
23.1.0 The sitting MP  of the UT explained the effect of tsunami and earthquake on the Islands
and relief and rehabilitation provided by the Government inspite problems of logistics faced by the
officials. 10,000 houses are to be constructed but the various restrictions regarding forest
conservation were an impediment in the rehabilitation work for construction of permanent houses.
He pleaded for the option of receiving cash instead of built up houses for them. He mentioned that
the compensation package for loss of paddy field at Rs. 2000 per hectare was not enough, and
should be raised. Free ration to the farmers who have lost their paddy fields was also demanded
by him. About coconut trees, he said that cutting charges at Rs. 1000 per tree was not enough
which needs to be augmented. Further, he stated that Government should provide interest free loans
for development of trade and commerce which has been totally ruined. Augmentation of helicopter
service in view of the strategic position of the Islands was also demanded by him. He was of the
view that timely disbursement of compensation was very vital for building people’s confidence in
the Government.
23.1.1 His other concern was that Environment and Forest Ministry officials were not working in
tandem with UT Administration. He mentioned that after tsunami tragedy Hon’ble Supreme Court
waived ban for cutting forests for six months which has since lapsed and the ban is again in force
now. For extension of waiver, the matter should be taken up by the Attorney General with the
Supreme Court. He was also of the view that infrastructure should be rebuilt at a fast speed. He
urged upon the Committee to recommend a Legislative Assembly for the Union Territory of A&N
Islands and representation of the UT in the Rajya Sabha.
23.2 The representatives of tsunami affected people were of the view that interest free housing
loan should be provided to them. Every affected family should be provided with atleast one
Government job. Compensation should be granted to the next of kin of those who had died as was
given to the victims of avalanche disaster in J&K. The Members asked about strength of people
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Government service; number of tribals affected by tsunami;
number of them rehabilitated; issue of eviction of tribals from forest lands; whether Government
has taken up the reclamation process; supply of free ration to the affected people especially
farmers; rehabilitation of coconut plantation and package for the affected persons.
23.3 The Chairperson suggested extension of waiver on Supreme Court ban on cutting of forests
in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. She was_also of the view that diversification of fishing to shrimp,
crab and prawn culture and diversification of agriculture to cash crops  such as cashewnut, spice,
coconut should also be encouraged for the benefit of affected. people. Instead of brining the
farming community under BPL, which is a cumbersome process, free ration, may be given to them
as a special case.
23.4 The Chief Secretary informed the Committee that around 4000 posts are vacant in all the
departments of UT,  out of which clearance for filling. 1000 posts have been sanctioned by the

86
Union Government. On the issue of eviction of tribal people from forest land, he mentioned that
post-l978 encroachers of the forest land have been evicted while pre-1978 encroachers have been
given alternate land. Thus around 25,000 people have been given alternate land. He informed that
inhabitants of Chowra Island were rehabilitated in other Islands while other Islanders have been
rehabilitated in the temporary shelters constructed in their respective Islands itself. He mentioned
that 50,000-hectares of paddy fields in entire Andaman and Nicobar Islands have been affected due
to tsunami. The Union Territory Administration has recommended Rs. 30,000 per hectare as
compensation for the loss of paddy field for reclamation and making that useable for cultivation
and Rs.5,000 per coconut tree to Ministry of Home Affairs and the response of the Government
of India is awaited in that regard.
Meeting with Lieutenant Governor
24.0 The Committee called on the Lieutenant Governor, A&N Islands at Raj Niwas and held
discussion with him on various aspects of the UT Administration and the relief and rehabilitation
measures undertaken by the administration in the aftermath of the tsunami tragedy.
24.1 The Chairperson mentioned about the purpose of the visit of the Committee, its meetings
at Intermediate Shelters with the victims and officials during the day to assess the rehabilitation
measures taken after tsunami. She appreciated the efforts made by the administration for providing
relief to the affected people. She also mentioned about the suggestions made by affected people
for making the permanent shelters. She then shared the experiences of Pondicherry and
Nagapattinam (Tamil Nadu) in building the permanent shelters and requested for exploring the
possibility of either giving money or built houses for tsunami affected persons. She also suggested
for diversification of farming and fishing by promoting shrimp/crab culture, jobs for affected
families, financial support to the educated youth in the intermediate shelters and to give tuition to
the school going children etc.
24.2 Lieutenant, Governor mentioned about the problem of livelihood of the affected people and
that the administration’s efforts to ensure that some regular employment was provided to them. He
also mentioned that the administration had been trying to ensure that studies of students remained
unaffected. He requested the Committee to give suggestions/guidance for better rehabilitation, which
would be taken up with the Government of India.
20 June, 2005
Visit to Car Nicobar
25.0 The Committee visited Car Nicobar Island by an IAF aircraft from Port Blair. The Chief
Secretary and IGP accompanied the Committee to Car Nicobar. At Car  Nicobar, the DC made a
powerpoint presentation describing the extent of damage in the district of Nicobar and the rescue
and relief operations undertaken by the administration. He stated that the damages were more
because of proximity of Nicobar district to the epicenter of the earthquake of 8.9 Richter scale
(Sumatra being 163 km from Great Nicobar) followed by surging tsunami waves. He apprised the
Committee that Teressa and Chowra Islands have submerged. The worst affected Island was
Katchal. Entire ring road along the coast in Car Nicobar have been submerged and new roads in
the middle of Car Nicobar are being constructed. Jetties have been badly damaged; floating docks
were created to bring construction material coming from mainland. A total of 3866 intermediate
shelters have been built only in Car Nicobar. Activation of BSNL mobile service in entire Car
Nicobar after tsunami helped a lot to communicate with mainland.
25.1 Thereafter, the Wing Commander, IAF made a powerpoint presentation covering the rescue,
relief operation by Army, Air Force and damage to the IAF station of Car Nicobar. All residential

87
houses of IAF were flattened due to earthquake. As an immediate measure all Air Force officials
were evacuated and new team took over the Air Force Station and started rescue and relief
operations. Runway was partially damaged. Evacuation took faster pace after repairing of runway.
The work was undertaken on war footing. Half of the Air  Force area was submerged under water.
He also mentioned about request to allocate another piece of land to construct residential units for
IAF officials.
25.2 The Committee then visited the Tsunami affected villages (Tamaloo and Chuk chuka) of Car
Nicobar to see the intermediate shelters and interacted with the people and their representatives
called Captains, Vice-Captains. They appreciated efforts made by the administration in providing
relief after tsunami. However, they had reservations about the permanent shelters proposed to be
built of concrete and steel. They wanted construction of permanent shelters with local materials
which could be expanded later on for accommodating more members of their families. Since Iron
is prone to rust due to salinity it was told to be unfit for rehabilitation units by tribals. Though
far from the mainland and from main city of Port Blair, the people of Car Nicobar Island were
very understanding and were able to put their point of views before the Committee in a lucid
manner. The Committee also interacted with the representatives of NGOs i.e. CARE and UNICEF
who are, doing rehabilitation work in that Island.
25.3 The Committee also visited Mus jetty to see damages caused to it by the devastating
earthquake.
25.4 The Committee returned to Port Blair by IAF plane in the afternoon.
21 June, 2005
Port Blair
Meeting with the Chairman, Port Management Board (PMB)
26.0 The Committee visited Haddo wharf and saw the damaged passenger terminal which was
considered to be the biggest in Asia along with the jetty. The Committee inspected central godown
of the wharf where relief goods were lying for transportation to other Islands through ships.
26.1 The Chairman, PMB  made a powerpoint presentation on board the ship Nicobari. He
informed the Committee that his organisation played an important role in supplying relief and
rehabilitation material from Port Blair. There were twenty-three noted ports in A&N Islands.
Reflecting upon the damages to Port infrastructure on 26 December, 2004, he informed that
damage to wharves and jetties included collapse of berthing portion (60 M) of fisheries jetty,
collapse of Junglighat jetty including passenger hall, total damage to passenger terminal at Haddo,
extensive damage to dry dock complex and two local navigational structure. At Hut Bay harbour,
the berthing jetty collapsed, crane over jetty fell in to the sea. Extensive damage to port buildings,
collapse of approach to wharf and damage to PCT building were also mentioned. Similarly, he
mentioned that at Campbell Bay harbour 80 M approach jetty collapsed, sea water ingressed into
port area due to subsidence of land mass resulting in breakwater dislocation and subsidence of
Tetrapods and loss of two local navigational structures. He also displayed with the help of slides
the damage to Katchal, Chowra, Teressa, Campbell Bay Harbours and Nancowry Islands.
26.2 He then showed slides containing relief work undertaken by the PMB and its achievements
in restoration of damaged harbours, jetties and other structures at different Islands. He mentioned
that at Port Blair, Haddo wharf, Chatham wharf and Phoenix bay harbour complex were made
operational from 27.12.2004 onwards; at Hutbay, temporary jetty for vessels of 2.5 M draft
constructed and commissioned on 1.2.2005, damaged portion of breakwater rectified for providing

88
access to temporary jetty; wharf crane was made operational and utilised for cargo operations. A
mobile crane was deployed which was received from Mumbai Port Trust and Hydrographic survey
was also taken up. At Car Nicobar temporary ramp, near sunken portion of approach jetty, was
provided and similarly at Nancowry and Katchal temporary jetty for vessels was constructed. While
presenting the action plan for restoration of damaged port structures, he informed the Committee
about the cost and targeted time for their completion.
26.3 He also touched upon some of the key projects covering the development of Katchal
Harbour for berthing mainland vessels, construction of alternate jetty at Safed Balu, Teressa,
development of additional dry dock for mainland vessels at Port Blair, extension of breakwater and
construction of additional berth opposite to existing berth at Mus, Car Nicobar, construction of
breakwater at Malacca, Car Nicobar and feasibility studies for transshipment port at Campbell Bay,
Great Nicobar.
26.4 A presentation on Relief Inventory Management was made by an Officer of the Indian Navy
to keep tab on use of relief material received trom different quarters. The Committee desired that
the entire inventory system should be put on internet to enable the public at large to know about
the relief material sent and its use.
Visit to Mini LPG Bottling Plant, IOC at Hope Town
26.5 The Committee visited Mini LPG bottling plant of Indian Oil Corporation located at Hope
Town, Bamboo Flat, Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Officers there informed that the plant
commenced its operations on 20 April, 2003 and the pipelines and plant were not affected by the
earthquake. The plant has the capacity to provide LPG Cylinders to entire Islands. To the query
of Chairperson whether the Indian Oil Corporation is in a position to supply additional cylinders
to all Anganwadis in case administration places a request for the same, the officer of Indian Oil
Corporation replied in affirmative.
Meeting with the NGOs working in the area on Tsunami relief
27. The Committee held interaction with the NGOs (total 13) working in the area of providing
relief to Tsunami victims on their experiences in providing rescue, relief and rehabilitation in the
aftermath of tsunami, in the Conference Hall, Megapode Nest.
27.1 The representatives of NGOs lauded the support of the Administration in providing relief and
mentioned about areas in which they were working such as education, psychosocial issues,
construction of toilet/permanent and temporary shelters, disaster management etc. and their
contribution like fishing boats for victims, mosquito net, gas stoves, besides doing social service
amongst the tsunami victims.
Meeting with the Officials of the UT Administration
28. The Chief Secretary made an audio-visual presentation, which included geography of
Islands, Disaster Management Bill, Administrative Issues, Environmental Issues, Tourism,
Decentralization of District Administration, Personnel Issues, Empowerment of Tribal Council,
Economic Issues and Transport for the Islands.
28.1 Reflecting upon the Disaster Management Bill, 2005, he mentioned that detailed deliberations
on the Bill has not been possible due to paucity of time. However the first impression about
the Bill is that it is a very welcome proposal. He stated that, there is no mention of UTs in the
Bill which should be done. The Administrator may be designated as the Chairperson of UT
Authority for management of any disaster. He further mentioned that guidelines for NGOs should
be drawn up and local Defence forces may have representation at State and District level

89
authorities. The Chief Secretary had agreed to send detailed comments on the Bill in writing in due
course.
28.2 R egarding administrative issues and the need for development of land, the CS stated that
34,000 hectares land were declared as deemed forest, as per Supreme Court orders. The islands
have 85% forest cover against the norm of 33%. The 4000 hectares land sub-merged due to
tsunami and 4000 families (post-1978) require about 300 hectares of land for settlements. He
further stated that drinking water projects, tourism and transportation projects, etc. have suffered
due to the Supreme Court restrictions on forest land use. He also mentioned about the need for
modification of the Supreme Court’s order.
28.3 About the environmental issues, he mentioned that major drinking water projects such as
Dhanikhari Project, Rutland Project, Flatbay Scheme, and Kalpong Downstream Usage were held
up for environment clearance. He further stated that compensatory forestland was not available due
to environmental restrictions and for similar reasons no large-scale storage of rainwater was
possible.
28.4 The Chief Secretary further informed the Committee that though tourism was identified a
thrust area in the islands but only a few areas were opened for tourism. He stated that more islands
were required to be opened for exploring the full potential and for international tourism there is a
need for an international airport in the UT.
28.5 Emphasizing the need for decentralization of District Administration, he stated that creation
of new districts in North and Middle Andaman was needed to improve disaster response and
for checking poaching. It is also needed in view of strategic location of Coco Island which is
under Chinese occupation. He also felt the need for creation of two sub-divisions in Nicobar
District.
28.6 Further reflecting upon the personnel issues, he mentioned that the Islands being far off
from mainland, the best talent was not attracted unless special incentives are provided. He
demanded increase in recruitment age, grant of higher scale of pays to appointees on deputation,
and three free passages to government servant to visit mainland instead of existing one free
passage, every year.
28.7 Pointing out the need for review of instructions, of Central Government the CS placed
before the Committee that UT should be exempted from ten per cent cut in existing vacant posts;
ban on filling up of vacancies; five per cent ceiling on compassionate appointment to dependents
of Government servants who died in tsunami. He also mentioned that power to create new posts
should be vested with Administration. He felt that genuine demands from Tribal Council for
development should be agreed to Permission to give development grant through Deputy
Commissioners were required for which MHA and Ministry of Finance were the competent
authorities.
28.8 T ouching upon the issue of connectivity to Mainland, he stated that faster ships at least
having 20 knots speed were required. Faster clearance to replace old ships and purchase of new
ships were also needed. He mentioned that as Indian Shipyards take very long time, these should
be provided through global tender, which would be cheaper for the Government. Four vehicle
ferries were required to facilitate movement of passengers and cargo.
28.9 Similarly about Air Transport, he stated that the administration had only one helicopter to
cater to 38 islands. The islands were 1200 KMs trom mainland and were spread over 700 KMs.
It makes the administration totally dependent on commercial flights or even army during crisis. He
stated that Pawan Hans Ltd. was unable to lease more helicopters hence it was more economical
to purchase two fixed wing and two helicopters through HAL.

90
28.10 Emphasising the need for improvement in Telecommunications, he stated that the present
bandwidth was 40 mbps for 65,000 connection. In next three years, 400 mbps bandwidth would
be required. According to him, satellite connectivity was neither feasible nor cost effective hence
he suggested that optical fibre cable tram Chennai to Port Blair was necessary and wanted the
Ministry of Communications to expedite the same.
28.11 Lastly he presented before the Committee the post tsunami proposals such as the revised
agricultural package, package for industrial units, package for cooperatives, revised package for
animal husbandry, re-construction assistance to Panchayat Raj Institutions/Port Blair Municipal
Corporation.
28.12 He m entioned that Zila Parishad system has b een introduced in no n-tribal area s of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands in accordance with 73rd Amendment of the Constitution. But Captain System
exists in tribal areas of the islands, who have been elected through their own system.
28.13 A view was expressed by a Member that Village Council has been recognized as panchayat
in North Eastern States in accordance with 73rd amendment of the Constitution, which could be
adopted in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. He was of the view that the Central Sponsored Scheme
(CSS) should be routed through Panchayat Raj Institutions. Another Member wanted to know the
modalities of implementing rural schemes. Yet another Member was of the view that the Captain
system was the most democratic one and functioning smoothly and so he desired to maintain the
traditional organizational set up. Efforts should be made by the administration to bring the
tribes-Jarawas, Sompen and Sentinels to the mainstream of civilization which is lagging on the part
of administration.
28.14 The Chief Secretary, quoting the vibrant system of grassroot democracy (Badagaon System)
of 70s in Arunchal Pradesh, held the view that division in that society has cropped up after the
introduction Panchayati Raj Institutions and the Badagaon system has gone to background. He was
of the opinion that devolution of power should be made to the tribal people without distorting their
cultural set up.
28.15 Thereafter, the Development Commissioner while making a powerpoint presentation on
livelihood issues and plan for post tsunami developments in Andaman and Nicobar Islands inter alia
stated the issues such as general information on the Islands, damage due to tsunami, sector-wise
livelihood plan for agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, rural deveiopment, industries and other
departments besides displaying the role of NGOs. General information covered the aspect of main
occupation of the people viz. agriculture, fishery, animal husbandry, services and tourism related
activities. Reflecting upon damage due to tsunami he mentioned that 38 Islands were affected.
10,000 houses and 50,000 people were affected. He also mentioned that 6 islands viz. Chowra,
Little Nicobar, Trinket, Bambooka, Kondol and Pillowmillow were fully evacuated after the tragedy.
28.16 About the damage to the agricultural land due to tsunami, he stated that the total area
damaged was 10837 hectares out  of which paddy and other field crops were on 1730 hectares
whereas plantation crops were on 9107 hectares. The total area under submergence was 4339
hectares comprising paddy and other field crops. The total reclamable area was 6561 hectares
which consisted of 694 hectares of paddy and other field crops and 5867 hectares of plantation
crops. He mentioned that a total no. of 6020 farmers were affected out of which 1743 were
in Andaman district and 4277 in Nicobar district. The total loss in financial terms was to
the tune of Rs. 321 crores. He then showed slides reflecting the package sanctioned by
Government of India for tsunami relief and the strategy prepared by the administration for
implementation of the package. About procurement of agriculture inputs, he stated that process was
in progress for purchase of fertilizer, organic manure, neem cake, gypsum, farm implements, plant
protection equipment, vegetable seeds and planting materials. About reclamation of land, he

91
mentioned that a total of 1417 hectares area was cleared for cropping till date, which will generate
16265 mandays.
28.17 T ouching upon the issue of loss and rehabilitation in animal husbandry sector, the
Commissioner mentioned that out of a total livestock/poultry of 10,85,739 in the islands before
tsunami, 1,57,577 livestock/poultry were lost due to tsunami for which Rs. 11.83 crore as
compensation was sanctioned by Government of India. However, a revised package of Rs 26.72
crore has been proposed for approval of Government of India. He also mentioned about the
components proposed in the package, strategy applied so far for rehabilitation of animal husbandry
and the strategy adopted for the year 2005-06 for the same.
28.18 About the fisheries sector, the Commissioner informed the Committee that the total number
of fishermen in the UT was 4157, the total number of boats prior to tsunami was 2281 and the
total quantity of fish caught a month was 26940 tons. He stated that tsunami affected 2323
fishermen, partially damaged 765 fishing boats, fully damaged 938 fishing boats and the total
loss to the sector accounted for Rs. 35.22 crores for which a compensation package of
Rs.21.05 crores has been sanctioned. His other slides showed the component of package covering
the amount of subsidy and compensation for replacement or repair of different types of boats and
nets. He further mentioned the strategy for implementation of package such as assessment of
losses, payment of advance of Rs. 10,000 to meet initial expenditure, preparing a medium term
perspective to develop the fisheries as a thrust area and a road map for fisheries development in
the islands.. Further mentioning about the strategy for the year 2005-06, he stated that it includes
repair and replacement of boats to restore fishing, purchase and supply of fishing materials and
accessories through the A&N Fisheries Cooperative Federation Ltd., verification and finalisation of
the list of affected pisciculturists, assessment of fishery related projects and crab/lobster fattening
units. In all these would generate 24485 mandays.
28.19 On the rural development front, he stated that 516210 mandays would be generated through
the Panchayati Raj Institutions in the event of sanction of Rs. 54.35 crores as projected by Zilla
Parishad. Reflecting upon Industries Sector, he presented the extent the damage to SSI units after
earthquake and tsunami, the economic losses to the industries and the challenges for livelihood
restoration such as problem of logistics-sheds, transport, electricity, drinking water, etc. and skilled
manpower for construction related skills, IT related repair and servicing, basic engineering related
servicing, training to be conducted. He also showed the strategy for restoration of livelihood
through vocational training programme, revival of Industries Training Centers, etc. He then listed
the areas identified for livelihood vocational training by the Industries Department such as general
engineering, construction, textile, food processing, IT, etc.
28.20 Lastly, he enlisted the contribution of 34 NGOs working in area of livelihood matter, their
sector-wise involvement and the livelihood generation.
28.21 The Chairperson winding up the discussion appreciated the efforts of administration in
providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims of the tsunami. However, she drew attention of the
administration to a few problems encountered by the people of Andaman and Nicobar Islands such
as augmentation of bus service to intermediate shelters for school going children; engaging
educated people in the temporary shelters to provide tuition to the children. She also mentioned that
LPG stove and cylinder should be provided to each of the 547 Anganwadi centers where mid-day
meal is cooked for school children. Recalling the grievances of farmers at Sippighat that their total
agricultural land had been lost causing loss of livelihood to them for which a compensation of
Rs. 7000/- have been provided. She suggested issuance of tsunami relief card as per the order of
Supreme Court and thereby providing free ration under the Antyodaya Anna Yojna. About the
Bambooflat shop owners whose shops were submerged, the Chairperson suggested that
rehabilitation should be provided to them. Mentioning the difficulty in temporary shelters due to tin

92
sheets at Car Nicobar, she suggested that traditional type of houses made of local materials would
be better as it maintains low temperature and easy to expand to adjust their joint families. She also
suggested that instead of material, money should be provided to them so that they can get their
houses made by themselves. Similarly she suggested for giving money and material instead of
making houses to South Andamanese as individual entrepreneurship is always better. She also
shared the experience of Pondicherry Administration with the A&N Administration in making
allotments after identifying the plots but before starting construction. For residents of Campbell
Island, she mentioned that affected people have been settled somewhere else with family members
not getting any relief or compensation and suggested that in such situations the standard rule
should be relaxed. Mentioning about the Campbell Bay, she suggested that settlers at Campbell Bay
should be somehow persuaded to remain there for which separate package maybe formulated.
Lastly she suggested for creation of a Grievance cellforum for dealing with the problems of
affected people.

93
ANNEXURE
COPY OF THE RESOLUTION PASSED ON 30.7.2004 BY
THE PONDICHERRY LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
ON
THE GRANT OF SPECIAL CATEGORY
STATUS STATEHOOD TO PONDICHERRY
The Legislative Assembly have passed resolutions on 9.6.2000 and 26.6.2001 and sent to
Government of India to confer Statehood with Special Category Status to the Union Territory of
Pondicherry; whereas Government of India have not conferred the Statehood with Special Category
Status so far; hence taking into consideration the future economic growth and employment
opportunities of the Territory, this House urge Government of India to take immediate action to
grant Statehood with Special Category Status to Union Territory of Pondicherry.
93

Study Note
on the visit of the Department-related
Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs
to Chandigarh
from 13 to 14 September, 2005
95

STUDY NOTE
The Department-related Committee on Home Affairs undertook a study visit to Union
Territory of Chandigarh from 13 to 14 September, 2005 as a part of its examination of
“Administration of Union Territories”. At Chandigarh, a number of Organizations/Associations
including some political party delegations called on the Committee and submitted their memoranda
to the Chairperson and Members of the Committee, who joined the said visit (Annexure-I) .
1.1 A list of Associations/Organizations who submitted memorandum to the Committee during
its study visit to Chandigarh is appended at (Annexure-II).
1.2 There was wide spectrum of subjects covered in the Memoranda but following are the
salient points raised in those memoranda:—
(i) Extension of Lal dora limit of villages and regularization of construction made on
and around that area on the lines of Lal dora in Delhi;
(ii) Unsensitive bureaucratic setup of Chandigarh to the needs of people;
(iii) Upgradation of Chandigarh Civil Airport to International Airport as the city is
gateway to the States of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and
Kashmir;
(iv) Electrification of Chandigarh-Ludhiana railway line;
(v) Four laning of Kalka-Chandigarh-Ambala Highways;
(vi) Flyovers and Mass Rapid Transport System (MRTS) to decongest traffic jams in
the city;
(vii) CNG propelled transport system to ensure green and clean environment;
(viii) Need to constitute Inter-state Development Council consisting of representatives
from Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Union Territory of Chandigarh;
(ix) 3.7% share in power generation from BBMB;
(x) Delimitation of wards of Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh (MCC) and direct
election of Mayor and the tern should be extended to five years from the present
tenure of one year;
(xi) General Power of Attorney (GPA) should be recognized as the mode of transfer of
property;
(xii) Conferment of ‘A’ grade status to the city of Chandigarh;
(xiii) Restricting heavy capitation fee in private schools;
(xiv) All women police stations and reform in Chandigarh police;
(xv) All party representation in Advisory Council to the Administrator of Chandigarh;
(xvi) Issuance of license to footpath hawkers and Rehri-Pheri wallas;
(xvii) Official language status to Punjabi and Hindi in addition to English language in Chandigarh;
97

98
(xviii) lmplementation of Value Added Tax (VA T);
(xix) Central Acts for Chandigarh instead of adopting Acts of States of Punjab and
Haryana;
(xx) Speed governors for local buses, trucks and school buses;
(xxi) Check on mushrooming of road side liquor vendors;
(xxii) Large scale power pilferage and huge arrears of power and water bills on
Government offices of States of Punjab and Haryana in the UT of Chandigarh;
(xxiii) Shortage of Staff in Excise and Taxation Department leading to loss in revenue
collection;
(xxiv) Updating websites of Department of Chandigarh Administration, as Chandigarh is
projected as next IT destination in India;
(xxv) Revival of post of Chief Commissioner which was replaced by the present post of
Administrator;
(xxvi) Establishment of Civil Defence Training Organization;
(xxvii) Introduction of paid parking system;
(xxviii) Allotment of forty per cent land earmarked for housing to the cooperative societies
for construction of low-cost houses;
(xxix) No promotional avenues for the teaching community in Education Department.
Proposal regarding promotion of teachers to the post of lecturer in Senior
Secondary School in Chandigarh is pending with the administration. Administration
has fixed 25% as deputation quota and takes lecturer from States on deputation.
Some of those deputationists have got proforma promotion to the post of Principal
in view of their promotion in their parent State(s) and lecturers of UT without
getting the benefit of promotion are working under the supervision of the
deputationists who got promotion in view of the position explained above. Demand
for scrapping of the rule which allows teachers to come on deputation from other
States to the UT of Chandigarh was raised in the memoranda. Besides that,
restoration of six weeks summer break which is at present reduced to four weeks;
change of format of Annual confidential Report (ACR); confirmation in the post of
teacher after completing three years of service; filling up of vacant posts of
teacher; introduction of Sanskrit as subject in all Senior Secondary School
alongwith Hindi and Punjabi; restoration of post of Director, State Institute of
Education to the School cadre;. creation of post of vice-principal in all senior
secondary Schools; stoppage of allotment of houses to the person on deputation
from States of Punjab and Haryana as these States have their own pool of
accommodations; special housing scheme by Chandigarh Housing Board for
teaching community of UT cadres;
(xxx) W ithdrawal of Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. 14012/2/88 CHD
dt. 13.1.1992 under which State Service Rules of Punjab is made applicable in
Chandigarh, in the place of Central Government Rules, as envisaged in Ministry of
Home Affairs Notification No. 12/1/66 CHO (ii) dated 1.11.1966;
(xxxi) Non-implementation of decisions of CAT and Punjab and Haryana High Court
regarding regularization of services of  daily wages and work charge employees;

99
(xxxii) Stoppage on purchase low floor buses which have been declared defective by
expert Committee of MCC;
(xxxiii) Revocation of ban imposed on payment of bonus to the employees of UT
Administration;
(xxxiv) Restoration of compassionate appointments;
(xxxv) Allotment of E.W.S. Houses in Sectors 37 and 38 to Administration/MCC employees;
(xxxvi) Issuance of Schedule Caste Certificate after 1995 to those SCs as on without
asking for production residence proof prior to 1.11.1966 (date of creation of UT
of Chandigarh);
(xxxvii) Implementation of Punjab and Haryana High Court direction of December 2001 for
allotting sites to the schools (220) currently functioning from the residences and
allowing them to function till alternate sites are allotted;
(xxxviii)Exorbitant conversion charges for conversion of industrial sites into commercial
sites in industrial area, like Phase I and Phase II Chandigarh Scheme for IT/IT-ES
and BPO activities in the industrial areas. It was alleged that area conversion charge
(Rs. 18,000 per square yard) is higher than the rate given to companies like Infosys
and DLF in IT park. Level playing field between big players and local industrial
units was demanded; and
(xxxix) R egularisation of need-based alternations effected in the residential buildings (malra
house/flats) by the owners by making one time relaxation in building bye-laws.
2.0 The Committee. thereafter interacted with the local Member of Parliament, Chandigarh. He
submitted the following points for the consideration of the Committee:—
(i) Legislature for the UT of Chandigarh is not a viable idea at this point of time.
Instead, elected Pradesh Council and Executive Councillors is the need of the hour
in the UT. Estimate Committee of Tenth Lok Sabha has recommended that all files
except such files which relate to reserve subjects be routed through respective
Executive Councillors to the Administrator. The present Local Advisory Council of
the Administrator is no substitute for the elected Pradesh Council on which powers
to exercise financial and budgetary expenditure control need to devolved upon;
(ii) Need of Mass Rapid Transport System (MRTS), Science city with Planetarium, etc.
in the city. The entire surplus revenue deposited in Consolidated Fund of India
should be ploughed back to Chandigarh itself;
(iii) The actual population of Chandigarh has crossed one million and therefore the UT
is entitled to have a Metropolitan Planning Committee. Even District Planning
Committee is yet to be constituted therein. In the absence of those important
bodies, as postulated by the Constitution, there is denial of participation of elected
body in the planning process. In the Action Taken Note to the Report of Estimate
Committee of Tenth Lok Sabha, the Government had accepted that under Article
243 ZD, every UT has to constitute a District level planning Committee to prepare
draft development plan for the district as a whole after consolidating the plans
prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities in the district;
(iv) Indifference of administration towards the enforcement of building bye-laws has led
to alternations/additions in over 90 per cent houses/flats particularly in the phase II
of the city. Mass scale issuance of notice and occasional demolitions have only

100
added woes to the people. There is need to make one time relaxation of building
bye-laws to regularise the need-based alterations/additions in flats/houses as a
pragmatic approach;
(v) Acceptance of transfer of property through GPA; Issue proprietary rights to the
owners of tenements allotted on lease (Convertible to Hire and Purchase) in 1970’s
without making it contingent on demolition of additional constructions;
(vi) Separate Selection Committee for Chandigarh with members from UPSC, Ministry
of Home Affairs, and UT Administration for timely recruitment as making
appointment through UPSC is time consuming;
(vii) Regularisation of services of daily-wage and work-charged employees, who have
been working for more than ten years. In that context of assurance of Government
to the Estimate Committee of Tenth Lok Sabha for regularisation of  ad-hoc
appointment made against permanent vacancies in Andaman and Nicobar Islands to
the UT of Chandigarh was sought;
(viii) Chandigarh Administration has scrapped the practice of five per cent compassionate
appointment. Instead Rupees five lakh to be distributed amongst all the dependents
(as followed in the State of Haryana) of the person who dies in harness;
(ix) Consideration of transferred employees of administration to MCC on deemed
deputation without deputation allowance;
(x) Payment of bonus particularly to employees of Chandigarh Transport Undertaking
(CTU) as profit was earned by that body;
(xi) Need to permit and regulate road side hawkers;
(xii) Rehabilitation of slum dwellers;
(xiii) Transparent transfer policy;
(xiv) Issuance of SC Certificate to bonafide SC residents of UT of Chandigarh by making
applicable the decision of Delhi government mutatis mutandis to the UT of
Chandigarh
(xv) While acquiring land, adequate compensation be given to the land holder or he be
made partner in the development; and
(xvi) Need for institutionlised grievances, redressal machinery, as the bureaucratic
dominated administration is apathetic to the grievances of the people. Doing away
of all discretionary quota available over the administration.
3.0 The Committee thereafter interacted with Sehior Officers of Administration  (Annexure-III) .
The Advisor to Administrator initiated official presentation of Chandigarh Administration by stating
that technically power remains with Ministry of Home Af fairs. Under the present dispensation, the
Administrator can frame rules under Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 and
the Central Government can by notification extend any State Legislation to UT Chandigarh through
Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966. Thus the set of rules which governs the UT of Chandigarh have
been either taken from States of Haryana/Punjab or Central Government which creates confusions
in the mind of the people.
3.1 Devolution of powers to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh has already taken place and
some more powers would be devolved upon the MCC in due course. As to the financial status,
he mentioned that Chandigarh is financially surplus UT having highest per capita income. Municipal

101
services are proposed to be extended to the villages located outside the Sectors of Chandigarh. He
stressed that efforts of administration is to sustain the tempo of growth and ensure that the
benefits of growth reaches to every inhabitants of the UT of Chandigarh. Rupees 300 crore were
deposited last year in Consolidated Fund of India. MCC has also imposed three per cent property
tax on commercial building since last year. The Committee was informed that all children upto class
eight would be provided free education w.e.f. September, 2005 and in health sector, Chandigarh has
specialised hospital known as PGI which also caters to the need of residents of Himachal Pradesh,
Haryana, Punjab and J&K. Co-operative type of organisation is in the pipeline to give the benefit
to the workers working in unorganised sectors. He mentioned that grid system of public transport
is being encouraged to satellite towns of Mohali and Panchakula. He mentioned about proposed
inauguration of IT Park by Prime Minister very shortly and the availability of information relating
to administration in Jan Sampark Centre. He stated that the Chandigarh is geared to fulfil the vision
of Union Government to make India a developed Country by the year 2020. He then left the floor
to Horne Secretary for making presentation on health and education sectors.
4.0 Home Secretary made powerpoint presentation on the said sectors. He began his
presentation on primary level health care (Community Health Centres, polyclinic, A YUSA etc.) and
secondary level health care (general hospital in Sector 16, Government Medical College Hospital,
Sector–32). He submitted that emphasis is more on primary level hospitals so that burden on
specialised hospitals is reduced.
4.1 While comparing demographic data of Chandigarh with national figure, he mentioned that
Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) is fourth lowest ( i.e. 19) in the country. The UT of Chandigarh has
achieved the target fixed under National Pupulation Policy for 2010 for National Mortality Ratio and
Total Fertility Rate in 2005 itself. Furthermore, all targets in TB, Leprosy have been achieved by
the Chandigarh Administration. Under the National Rural Health Mission, mobile dispensary have
been put at service to provide basic minimum health services to the villagers not having any
dispensary/sub centre. He brought to the notice of Committee the requirement of additional medical/
para-medical staff to cater to the needs of present population of 9.1 lakhs. He mentioned that the
administration has felt the needs of one more hospital in southern sector, as the density of
population is more in southern sector than northern Sector. He shared proposal/projects regarding
regional trauma centre, centralised ambulance service, artificial limb centre, etc. with the Committee
4.2 On the education sector he shared the statistics with regard to colleges (private and
Government) schools (Government Aided, recognised, Kendriya vidyalayas, Navodaya vidyalaya
etc). He highlighted that every child has access to school within one km. of radius and success
rate in school is highest in India. Chandigarh imparts vocational educational in collaboration with
industry at school level (like skill training in pottery in school at Kumhar Colony). Computer aided
learning process have been introduced. A Memorandum of Understanding has been signed with
Azim Premjee Foundation in that regard. English has been introduced from class I onwards on
public demand.
4.3 He also touched views like tree education upto class VIII, no tuition fees from girls upto
class VII, free text books and uniform to the student of Non-model Schools, (where medium of
instruction is Hindi/Punjabi) upto class VIII w.e.f. academic session 2006, free text books, uniform
and stationery to SC/ST students, tree mid-day meal etc. About 900 posts of teachers have been
filled up. 240 teachers have been recruited under Serva Shiksha Abhiyan. Seven new school
buildings are under construction. Self-auditing and self-appraisal in the ACR of teachers have been
introduced to ensure their accountability.
5.0 Thereafter, the Finance Secretary presented an overview of Budget of Chandigarh for the
year 2004-05 which projects revenue surplus of Rs 288.74 crore. He submitted breakup of revenue
receipts (taxes:–51.7% i.e. Rs 554.2 crore and 43% as non tax revenue i.e. Rs. 418.57 crore) and

102
breakup of non tax revenues {Power (72.48%), Road Transport (16.97%), printing and Stationery
(2.61%) Medical and Health (3.09%) and others (4.85%)}. Most of tax revenue comes trom Sale
Tax i.e. 68.16%. Growth of capital receipts is mainly from the sale of lands, which is not likely
to sustain beyond four to five years as sale of land is expected to State-wise.
5.1 As to recommendations of Second Delhi Finance Commission all recommendations have
been accepted by Chandigarh Administration which includes devolution of 17% tax revenue of the
Administration to Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh (MCC), payment of street light bill to MCC,
50% matching grant to MCC for new taxes levied by it.
5.2 He outlined existing as well as proposed major projects which are as under:—
Existing Major Projects
• Augmentation of Water supply to ensure 24 hrs availability.
• Solid Waste Management.
• Sewerage Treatment Plant.
• Recycled Water Supply Network.
• Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32.
• Power: Revamping of distribution Infrastructure to ensure uninterrupted quality power.
• Chandigarh Technology Park (CTP).
• E-Governance, E-Sampark and Jan Sampark.
• Modernisation of Public Transport System.
• Development of 3rd Phase Sectors.
• Roads and Bridges.
Proposed Major Projects
• Substitution of physical interface bye-interface with citizens.
• Rehabilitation of Slum Dwellers and Housing for all.
• Desilting of Sukhna Lake.
• Creation of Second lake.
• Decongestion of Traffic by Mass Rapid Transport System.
• Elevated Road from Transport Chowk to Housing Board Chowk, Manimajra.
• Development of infrastructure in 3rd phase and periphery area of Chandigarh.
• Upgradation of Airport.
• Popularization of Solar Power in the city.
• Power: Revamping of distribution Infrastructure to ensure uninterrupted quality power.
5.3 He summed up his presentation by saying that Chandigarh is non-plan surplus UT since
2000-01 and it is in the process of evolving self-sustaining development model.

103
6.0 After that IGP, Chandigarh made presentation on law and order situation in the UT of
Chandigarh. In that presentation he brought to the notice of the Committee the recommendation of
BPR&D on augmentation of man-power/PCRof Chandigarh Police and mentioned about the shortage
of manpower in the force.
6.1 BPR&D had recommended sanctioning of 870 additional posts for the Police Stations, 205
posts of Traffic Police, besides 60 separate posts for the special units i.e. Economic Offence Wing
and Women and Child support unit. BPR&D has also recommended strengthening of Police Control
Room (PCR) with replacement of motorcycles with gypsies. IGP submitted that no additional
manpower has been sanctioned for Police Station since 1988. Even three of the eleven Police
Stations i.e. P.S. Sector 36, Sec-19 and P.S. Industrial Area do not have any sanctioned manpower.
Special Units like Women and Child Support Unit and Economic Offences Wing have no sanctioned
manpower. Recruitment T raining Centre (RTC) has no sanctioned manpower. Proposals are pending
with MHA for sanction of 1081 posts for Police Stations, 450 posts fot Traffic Police. He
mentioned that 10 demonstrations per day on an average are staged in the city of Chandigarh being
capital of two States. Thus the augmentation of staff strength of Chandigarh Police is the need of
the hour. Inspite of manpower shortage, conviction rate is 72%, which is one of the highest in
the country.
6.2 He mentioned that Community Relation Unit (CRU), Community Liasion Groups (CLG) have
been set up in each police station for community policing projects. Round the clock women desk,
all woman police post at PGI are some of the important achievements of Chandigarh Police.
7.0 The Director, Information Technology and Tourism also made power-point presentation on
IT vision for  the year 2010 by which the city would be an automated city/State where total
e-governance would be available to the common man. The application of IT for providing
information and facilitation to the residents of Chandigarh would be through e-sampark,
e-jansampark, e-sampark through its multi-service single window system (presently at seven
locations). The residents of Chandigarh have 80,000 transactions per month with various public
dealing departments. Through e-jansampark project (total 70, one in each sector/village) provides
information to common man through kiosks. Society for Promotion of IT in Chandigarh (SPIC)
is running C-TOSS programme in schools and colleges to develop skilled professional for lTES/
BPO.
7.1 A 370 acres Technology Habitat to support IT/ITES infrastructure earmarked for
Chandigarh Technology Park is ready and would be inaugurated on 24 September, 2005.
8.0 Members sought clarifications/comments of administration on the presentations made and
also offered certain suggestions for consideration of administration which are summarized as
under:—
(i) The Committee noted that funds pertaining to health projects have been surrendered.
It also sought reasons for surrendering of good amount of money on health projects;
(ii) The Committee felt that there is a need for systemic change to increase the role of
elected representatives as they are not involved in the District Planning Committee.
Representation of political parties on the basis of their strength in the Advisory
Council of Administrator;
(iii) Need to have Legislative Assembly for Chandigarh on the lines of Pondicherry having
10 lakh population;
(iv) Reasons for charging high conversion rate for IT and ITES works located in
Industrial Areas;

104
(v) Reasons for not allowing schools on private land;
(vi) Reasons for not having transparent promotion policy for teachers;
(vii) Need for rehabilitation of slum dwellers;
(viii) Reasons for non-issuance of SC certificates to genuine SC candidate after the year
1995 as a result they are deprived of benefits granted to them by the Constitution;
(ix) Need for increasing housing for Non-Gazetted Officers in Chandigarh police;
(x) Backlog in ST reservation;
(xi) There is a delay in transferring subjects to MCC by the administration;
(xii) Maintenance of tourist spots;
(xiii) Not many CGHS dispensary in the city having of large number of Government
servants;
(xiv) Efforts should be stepped up to popularize/advertise Chandigarh Technology Park
(CTP) as it is going to give facelift to the city after Bangalore and Hyderabad;
(xv) Reasons for not extending Lal dora of Kishangarh village;
(xvi) Need-based change in building-bye-laws required to, cater the problems faced by
common man;
(xvii) Reasons for not transferring ownership right to owners of houses constructed by
Chandigarh Housing Board;
(xviii) Revival of post of Chief Commissioner which was considered to be people’s
friendly;
(xix) Insensitive bureaucracy dominated administration to the needs of people; Need for
change in approach of bureaucratic dominated administration.
8.1.0 The Advisor to Administrator responded to the issues raised by the Committee which is as
under:
8.1.1 Creation of some posts in the health sector is pending with Ministry of Home Affairs.
Salary of the projected posts were reflected in the budget in the anticipation of those posts, which
were not actually sanctioned in the financial year leading to surrender of money on health projects.
8.1.2 As to Advisory Council to Administrator, the Advisor mentioned that previous council had
more than fifty members and had many sub-committees but met only once even though it is to
be convened once in three months. District Planning Committee has also not constituted.
8.1.3 As to conversion rate for IT/ITES and BPOs the administration held the view that those
services are not considered as industries, thus conversion rate is very high. Further the rate in IT
park though appears to be lower, investment condition is very stringent which is possible in the
case big players only.
8.1.4 As to running of schools in residential areas, Advisor replied that extensions have been given
to those schools to continue in that area and with reference to play schools in residential areas the
policy for such schools would be framed soon.
8.1.5 Referring to rehabilitation of slum dwellers, it was informed that houses on rent are
available to them. As  to issuance of SC certificate to bonafide SC inhabitants of Chandigarh, the

105
matter has been taken up with MHA. The issue is in advanced stage of consideration of
Government of India.
8.1.6 W ith regard to extension of Lal Dora of Kishangarh village, he replied that the village of
Kishangarh is a part of Mani Majra. 980 houses have been exempted and 104 houses are scattered
and not  in continum and constructed after the issuance of notice, have to be demolished. Those
houses if exempted would make the administration to leave large chunk of land which would be
required for proposed IT park. The original Kishangarh village has not been touched.
8.1.7 As to regularization of the need-based violation of building bye-laws he stated that need-
based violation is treated as greed-based violation by Punjab and Haryana High Court. However, the
sub-committee of Advisory Council of Administrator has recommended change of building bye laws
which is five decade old, but final decision is yet to be taken.
8.1.8 As to revival of post of Chief Commissioner, the Advisor responded by saying that without
elected body, the bureaucratic setup having whatever nomenclature would have the same
characteristics and not be too different.
8.1.9 While responding to traffic problems, he replied that the city of Chandigarh qualifies for the
system for  MRTS and further steps are being taken to introduce the same.
8.2 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that Administration is not responsive to the
needs of the people. It was also brought to the notice that the Administrator is not accessible to
the representatives of  the people and public to hear their grievances. The Commiittee felt that
involvement of  elected representatives in decision making process is very much required in the
absence of any elected body for running the affairs of Administration in an effective manner.
9.0 The Committee thereafter interacted with the Mayor and Councillors of MCC  (Annexure-IV).
Municipal Co mmissioner made powerpoint presentation inter-alia touching upon different initiatives
under taken by MCC i.e. augmentation of  water supply scheme, paid parking, Sehaj Safai Kendras,
garbage processing unit, idle truck parking, multi-level parking, etc.
9.1 The Mayor of MCC welcomed the members of the Committee and mentioned that MCC is
an elected body with a lot of responsibilities but has limited authority and suffers from financial
constraints. She presented written memorandum to the Committee. Thereafter she left the floor to
other Councillers of MCC to put forth the view of MCC. The following points were raised by the
MCC in the meeting:—
(i) The following functions have been transferred either wholly or  partly as indicated
against each to the MCC, viz. (i) Public Health (partly), (ii) Horticulture (partly),
(iii) Fire (wholly), (iv) Enforcement (partly), (v) Sanitation (wholly), (vi) Building and
Roads (partly), (vii) Electrical (partly), (viii) Estate (partly), (ix) Tax (partly). Some
of the obligatory functions viz.  pest control, registration of births and deaths.
Eradication of malaria, regulatory work under Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954 and Town and Urban Planning have not been transferred to MCC as yet.
In order to make MCC self sustaining body, all functions enlisted under Twelfth
Schedule should be transferred to it by the Administration;
(ii) Budget of MCC comes from the Administration in the form of grant-in-aid which is
determined without any consultation with the MCC. Furthermore, devolution of 17%
budget, as recommended by Second Delhi Finance Commission has not been
communicated to MCC by the Administration. Moreover, 17% of the budget seems to
be inadequate in the face of large scale work to be undertaken by the MCC. Demand
for 23% of tax revenue to the MCC was raised. Even Mayor has not been invited by
the Administrator any time for interaction.

106
(iii) Regularisation of need based violation of building bye-laws as one time measure;
(iv) Issuance of SC Certificate to the genuine Scheduled Caste population of Chandigarh
which has been stopped w.e.f. 1996; and
(v) Increase of tenure of MCC to six years from present five year having two years
term for Mayor on rotation. A resolution has been passed by the MCC to that effect.
10.0. The Comm ittee also called on Administrator to UT of Chandigarh. He appraised the
Committee about new initiatives taken by it for the betterment of the UT.

107
ANNEXURE-I
LIST OF MEMBERS ATTENDED THE CHANDIGARH VISIT
Sl. Name
No.
1. Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, MP (RS)
2. Shri N. Jothi, MP (RS)
3. Shri V . Narayanasamy, MP (RS)
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti, MP (LS)
5. Shri Tapir Gao, MP (LS)
6. Shri T.K. Hamza, MP (LS)
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana, MP (LS)
8. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy, MP (LS)
9. Shri Rahul Gandhi, MP (LS)
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh, MP (LS)
11. Shri G. Karunakara Reddy, MP (LS)
107

108
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF ASSOCIA TION/ORGANIZATION/INDIVIDUAL WHO TENDERED
MEMORANDUM TO THE COMMITTEE DURING ITS VISIT TO CHANDIGARH
Sl. No. List of Association/Organisation
1. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha), Chandigarh
2. Mrs. Anu Chatrath, Mayor of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh
3. Mayor and Councillors of Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh
4. Government Teachers’ Union (UT) Chandigarh
5. Co-ordination Committee of Government and M.C. Employees and Workers U.T.
Chandigarh
6. Chandigarh Scheduled Castes Welfare Association, Chandigarh
7. Association of Private Educational Institutions, Chandigarh
8. Recognised Schools Management Association, Chandigarh
9. Chandigarh Housing Board Residents’ Federation, Chandigarh
10. Chandigarh Industrial Association, Chandigarh
11. Industries Association of Chandigarh
12. Rastriya Swamsewak Jagriti Manch, Chandigarh
13. Kishangarh Niwasi Sudhar Kalyan Sabha Kishangarh, Chandigarh
14. Chandigarh Beopar Mandai, Chandigarh
15. Bharatiya Janta Party, Chandigarh
16. Janta Dal Secular, Chandigarh
17. Janta Party, Chandigarh
18. Shiromini Akali Dal (B), Chandigarh
19. All party delegation – Bahujan Samaj Party, Samajwadi Party, Shiromini Akali Dal,
Janta Dal Secular, NCP, CPI, Janta Party and CPM
20. Chandigarh State Federation of Co-operative House Building Societies Ltd.,
Chandigarh
21. Income Tax and Sales Tax Bar Association, Chandigarh
108

109
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF OFFICERS OF CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION, WHO
AT TENDED THE MEETING IN CHANDIGARH ON 13.9.2005
Sl. Name
No.
1. Shri Lalit Sharma, Adviser to the Administrator, Chandigarh
2. Shri Krishna Mohan, Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh
3. Shri S.K. Sandhu, Finance Secretary, Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh
4. Shri P.S. Aujla, Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh
5. Shri Satish Chandra, Inspector General of Police, Chandigarh
6. Shri R.K. Rao, Deputy Commissioner, Chandigarh
7. Shrimati Renu Saigal, Chief Architect, Chandigarh
8. Shri Vivek Atray, Director, Information Technology, Chandigarh
109

ANNEXURE-IV
NAME OF MAYOR AND COUNCILLORS OF MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
OF CHANDIGARH, WHO ATTENDED THE MEETING ON 13.09.2005
Sl. No. Name
1. Mrs. Anu Chatrath, Mayor
2. Pushpa Sharma, Sr. Deputy Mayor
3. Sohan Lal Vaid, Deputy Mayor
4. Brig. Sant Singh, Councillor
5. Amar Kulwant Singh, Councillor
6. K. Atmaram, Councillor
7. Dr. K.S. Raju, Councillor
8. P.C. Sanghi, Councillor
9. Maj. Gen. A.S. Kahlon, Councillor
10. Dr. B.R. Verma, Councillor
11. C.K. Sawhney, Councillor
12. Dildar Khan, Councillor
13. Chander Mukhi Sharma, Councillor
14. Lalit Joshi, Councillor
15. Shyama Negi, Councillor
16. Kamla Sharma, Councillor
17. Balraj Singh, Councillor
18. Surinder Singh, Councillor
19. Harjinder Kaur, Councillor
20. Vijay Singh Rana, Councillor
21. Harmohinder Sanch Lucky, Councillor
22. Rajesh Gupta, Councillor
23. Harpreet Kour, Councillor
24. Subhash Chawla, Councillor
25. Kuldip Singh, Councillor
26. Kamlesh, Councillor
27. Pradeep Chhabra, Councillor
28. Geeta Rani, Councillor
29. Jitinder Bhatia, Councillor
110

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.