 1 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
183  
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT 
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY REFUGEES AND DISPLACED PERSONS IN J & K 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22 nd  DECEMBER, 2014) 
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 nd  DECEMBER, 2014) 
 
 

 2 
Hindi version of the publication is also available 
 
C.S. (H.A.)-______      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT 
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY REFUGEES AND DISPLACED PERSONS IN J & K 
                                    
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22 nd  DECEMBER 2014) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 22 nd DECEMBER 2014) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2014/Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3 
ACRONYMS 
ALC  Actual Line of Control 
CDPRA Chhamb Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Autho rity 
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust For Micro and Sm all Enterprises 
DPs Displaced Persons 
DM Divisional Magistrate 
EP Evacuee Property 
GOI Government of India 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services  
IAY Indira Awaas Yojana  
J&K  Jammu & Kashmir 
LoC Line of Control 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Gu arantee Act 
MSE Micro & Small Enterprises 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
PoK Pakistan occupied Kashmir 
PRO Public Relation Officer 
PoJK Pak occupied Jammu & Kashmir 
PRC Permanent Resident Certificate 
SC/ST/OBC Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Bac kward Class 
SGRY Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar 
TSC Total Sanitation Campaign 
SLBC State Level Bankers Committee 
WPR West Pakistani Refugees 

 4 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
                      PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
                                                                   
( i - iv)  
2.  PREFACE  
 
( v )  
3.  REPORT  
 
1  - 34  
4.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CO NCLUSION 
AT A GLANCE 
 
35 -44  
5.  *RELEVANT MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF 
COMMITTEE  
 
   
     6.  ANNEXURE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE 
45  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at the stage of printing 

 5 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2012) 
 
Rajya Sabha 
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu -  Chairman          
2. Vacant^ 
3. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
 ℜ 
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
6. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
8. Vacant 
# 
9. Vacant ♣ 
10. Dr. V. Maitreyan %  
  
Lok Sabha 
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
12. Shri L.K. Advani 
13. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
14. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
15. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
16. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal* 
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
18. Shri Ramen Deka 
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
20. Shri Naveen Jindal 
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.  
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
25. Shri Lalu Prasad 
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh 
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed 
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
29. Shri Navjot Singh Siddhu 
30. Shri Ravneet Singh 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
                                                           
ℜ Shri Santiuse Kujur, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 7 th  August 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due t o the resignation of Shri 
Rishang Keishing, Member, Rajya Sabha from the Membership of the Committee on Home Affairs w.e.f. 22.02.2013.  
♣ Due to the Appointment of Shri Tariq Anwar as Minister of State for Agriculture  and Food Processing  Industries on 28 October 2012.  
^Shri D. Raja, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f.  28 th   December, 2012 to the Committee on Home  Affairs due to the appointment of Shri K. 
Rahman Khan as Minister of Minority Affairs in Unio n Cabinet on 28 October 2012 and Shri D. Raja, Memb er, RS ceased to be Member of the 
Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th  July, 2013 
*Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w .e.f. 7 th  August 2013 to the Committee on Home Affairs due t o the Appointment of Smt. 
Santosh Chowdhary as Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 17 June 2013. 
# Smt. Kanimozhi ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expiration of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th  July, 2013 
% Dr. V. Maitreyan  ceased to be Member of the Committee due to expirat ion of term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 th  July, 2013 and  Dr. V. Maitreyan, MP, 
Rajya Sabha was re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27 th  July 2013. 
(i)  
 

 6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 7 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2013) 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu -  Chairman          
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
6. Shri Santiuse Kujur  
7. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
9. Shri D. Raja 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 
  
 Lok Sabha 
11. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
12. Shri L.K. Advani 
13. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal  
14. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
15. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer  
16. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
17. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
18. Shri Ramen Deka 
19. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
20. Shri Naveen Jindal 
21. Shri Aaron Rashid J.M.  
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
24. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
25. Vacant 
♣ 
26. Shri Rathod Ramesh 
27. Shri Hamdulla Sayeed 
28. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
29. Shri Navjot Singh Sidhu 
30. Shri Ravneet Singh 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Assistant Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Committee Officer 
(iii) 
                                                           
♣ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 30  September 2013 in terms of the provisions 
of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India r ead with Section 8 of the Representation of the Peo ple Act, 1951, he ceased to be a Member of the 
Committee. 

 8 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (re-constituted w.e.f. 1 st  September, 2014) 
 
1.  Shri P. Bhattacharya   - Chairman  
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shri K. Rahman Khan 
3.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
5.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
6.  
♦Vacant 
7.  Shri Derek O'Brien 
8.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
9.  Shri D. Raja 
10.  Shri Sitaram Yechury 
 
      LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
12.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13.  Shri Selvakumara Chinayan S. 
14.  Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
15.  Shri Ramen Deka 
16.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
17.  Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
18.  Shrimati Kirron Kher 
19.  Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
20.  Shri Kaushal Kishore 
21.  Shri Ashwini Kumar 
22.  Shri Harish Meena 
23.  Shri Nagarajan P. 
24.  Shri Baijayant "Jay" Panda 
25.  Shri Dilip Patel 
26.  Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
27.  Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
28.  Shri Bheemrao B. Patil 
29.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
30.  Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
31.  Shri B. Sreeramulu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Director 
Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Assistant Director 
 
(iv) 
                                                           
♦ Vacancy due to appointment of Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  as Minister of State w.e.f. 9 November 2014.   
  

 9 
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this One Hundred Eighty Third Report on the Problem s being faced by Refugees and Displaced 
Persons in J & K. 
2. The erstwhile Department-related Parliamentary S tanding Committee on Home Affairs  on 
receiving request from representatives of Refugees and Displaced persons in J&K, heard the 
presentation of the Home Secretary and representati ves of the following organizations on the 
problems being faced by them:- (i) West Pakistan Re fugees; (ii) Pakistan Occupied Kashmir 
Refugees; and (iii) POJK (CHAMB) of 1947, 1965 and 1971 in its meeting held on 30 
th  July, 2013. 
3.  The  previous Committee had constituted a sub-Committee on Action Taken on 137 th  Report 
on Rehabilitation of J & K Migrants (List of Member s of sub-Committee-Annexure). The sub-
Committee visited Jammu and Kashmir from 5 th  to 7 th  November, 2013.    During the visit, the sub-
Committee had also occasion to meet representatives  of Refugees and Displaced persons in Jammu 
and Kashmir also whose historical background and pr oblems were found to be different from J& K 
Migrants.   The sub-Committee apprised the Committe e that it would be better if the Committee gave 
a separate report on the problems being faced by Refugees and Displaced Persons in J & K.   Keeping 
in mind the complexity of the issues involved and n ature of long pending grievances of the affected 
communities, the Committee decided to give a report  on the subject separately. However, the 
previous Committee could not consider the report due to general elections, 2014. 
 
4. The present Committee in its meeting held on 16 th  September, 2014 took up this subject for 
detailed examination and report. The Committee in i ts meeting held on 21 st  October, 2014, heard the 
presentation of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject.  In its subsequent 
meeting held on 11 th  November, 2014, the queries of Members raised duri ng its sitting on 21 st  
October, 2014 were duly replied by the Home Secretary and representatives of Government of J&K. 
 
5.       The Committee while finalizing its report, relied on the following papers/documents:- 
(i)    Background note and supplementary background  note furnished by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs; 
 (ii)   Oral evidence of non-official witnesses and  official witnesses; 
(iii) Comments of Ministry of Home Affairs on the m emoranda received from various 
organizations; and 
(iv)   Replies to the queries of Members raised dur ing its sittings.  
 
6.  The Committee in its sitting held on 18 
th  December 2014 considered and adopted the report.  
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, obser vations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
New Delhi 
 
18 th December, 2014                                                                                
  
P. BHATTACHARYA  
CHAIRMAN  
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
                                          (v) 

 10 
CHAPTER I 
THE REFUGEES AND DISPLACED PERSONS IN  J&K 
1.1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1.1 The background note as furnished by the Minis try of Home Affairs states that at the time of 
partition which was followed by tribal invasion, mo re than 7000 families crossed to this side of the 
LoC and International Border from PoJK and the then  Western Pakistan.  Later on, during Indo-Pak 
wars of 1965 and 1971, nearly 10,000 families got d islocated from 47 villages of Chhamb area.  The 
families who had to migrate on various occasions since 1947, are categorised as under:- 
(i)  West Pakistani Refugees of 1947;    
(ii)  PoJK Refugees of 1947; 
(iii)  Chhamb Displaced Persons of 1965; 
(iv)  Chhamb Displaced Persons of 1971 (Camp); 
(v)  Chhamb Displaced Persons of 1971 (Non-Camp).  
   
1.2 WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES           
1.2.1 The background note points out that as per th e report of the Wadhwa Committee of 2007 
constituted by the Government of J&K, around 5,764 families consisting of 47,215 persons migrated 
from West Pakistan and got settled mainly in differ ent areas of Jammu, Kathua and Rajouri Districts 
of Jammu Division.  No land was allotted to them by  the State Government.  However, these families 
had occupied 45,466 kanals of land (State land 10,4 78 kanals, Evacuee land including other types of 
land 25,976 kanals and other land (10,012 kanals) w hich was allowed to be retained by them without 
conferring upon them the title of land because of t heir non-permanent resident staus of the State.  
Lands upto 12 acres of Khushki (unirrigated) or 8 a cres of Aibi Land (irrigated),  subject to certain 
conditions were allowed to be retained by them.  As  a result, 46,466 kanals of State/EP land stands 
retained by these refugees under Cabinet Order No. 578-C of 1954.          
1.2.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs further informed  that the West Pakistani Refugees settled in 
Jammu and Kashmir  are very much the citizens of India. They have the right to vote in Parliamentary 
Elections but they do not enjoy voting rights to th e State Assembly and Local Bodies.  There is no 
provision of separate citizenship for the State.  However, they are not permanent residents of the State 
in terms of the J&K Constitution, therefore, these families could not be provided the benefits which 
had been provided  to PoJK refugees. The West Pakistani Refugees families can't avail the benefits of 
various social welfare schemes launched by the Stat e Government and the members of their families 
can seek neither Government employment in the State nor admissions in various professional colleges 
of the State.  No other benefits of any kind have been granted to these refugees.   
1.2.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Com mittee about the problems/issues concerning 
West Pakistani Refugees which are enumerated  below:- 
(i)  Permanent Resident Right, right to contest in State  Elections, right to purchase property and 
recruitment to State Services, issuance of Domicile  Certificate/Caste Certificates :- The most 
important issue of Permanent Resident Right to West  Pakistani Refugees is under 
consideration of the Cabinet Sub Committee headed b y Finance Minister of the State.  The 

 11 
Committee has not yet formed a view.  Once the issu e is decided about the Permanent 
Resident’s Right, all other subsidiary benefits would follow automatically.   
(ii)   Right to Education in Technical/Professional Instit utes in the State :  The State Government 
was requested to consider the issue.  However, the State Government has not yet examined the 
possibility of issuing appropriate executive directions in this regard.  State Government should 
consider this issue as it is not linked to the Permanent Resident status  of these persons. 
(iii)  Extension of Credit facilities by banks with out collateral security : The State Government had 
informed that directives were issued to all the Dep uty Commissioners and as a result, no 
collateral security is required for loan upto Rs. 1 0 lakhs, and the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust 
for Micro and Small Enterprises extends loans of ab ove Rs. 10 lakh without collateral 
guarantee . 
(iv) Special financial package for rehabilitation :  It was informed by the State Government that 
they are in the process of submitting financial pro posal for rehabilitation to this Ministry.    
The total number of WPR families settled in the Sta te is 9,823 and retention of land was 
allowed by the State Government on per family basis .  State Government informed that it is 
not possible to say whether these refugees were all owed to retain land in proportion to the 
land left behind in the West Pakistan.    As per status in 1947, 4,745  families were 
given 45,466 canal of irrigated/unirrigated land.   No West Pakistani refugees settled in J&K 
received any assistance from the Ministry of Rehabi litation by way of allotment of 
construction of houses. 
1.3  DISPLACED PERSONS FROM POJK OF 1947.  
1.3.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Com mittee that in the wake of Pakistani 
aggression in Jammu and Kashmir in 1947, mass exodu s of population from Pak occupied area of 
Kashmir (POK) took place.  The Ministry of Home Aff airs also stated that as per the available 
records, 31,619 families were registered with the R ehabilitation Organisation, out of which 26,319 
families opted to settle down within the State itse lf and 5,300 families settled outside the State of 
J&K (Delhi 1,901 families, Maharashtra 123 families , Rajasthan 495 families and other States 2,781 
families).  Out of 26,319 families, around 22,719 families opted to settle in rural areas, whereas 3,600 
families settled in urban areas.  However, no claim s for compensation in lieu of the properties left 
behind by these displaced persons were invited by t he Government of India as POJK was treated as 
an integral part of India. The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 and the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 are not applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
1.3.2 In order to mitigate the hardship of these fa milies, the Government of India decided to provide 
ex-gratia/rehabilitation assistance.  The details o f the rehabilitation assistance sanctioned   from t ime 
to time are given below:-  
(a) Assistance sanctioned in 1947-48: 
Rural Settlers 
  (i) 2-3 acres of irrigated land or 4-6 acres of uni rrigated land per family;  
(ii)  Rs.1,000/- per family as ex-gratia payment;   
(iii) For the State land allotted, ownership rights  were conferred on allottees in 1965;   

 12 
(iv) For evacuee land allotted, the State Govt. has  stated that occupancy tenancy rights 
were given under the Agrarian Reforms Act.  (These rights are more or less absolute in 
the sense that the allottees can transfer the right  of occupancy tenancy by sale, gift or 
exchange without permission of Government);   
(v) 46 Basties constructed by rural settlers on the ir own were regularized under the Slum 
Improvement Scheme of J&K.   
 
Urban Settlers  
(i)  Ex-gratia cash payment of Rs.3,500/- per family;   
(ii)  1600 residential quarters were constructed and allo tted by the Government of Jammu & 
Kashmir in Udhampur and Nowshera. Cost of the struc ture was deducted from the ex-
gratia grant of Rs.3,500/- per family.   
(iii)  In 123 cases, plots were allotted in Jammu by the State Housing Board free of cost.   
 
(b)  Rehabilitation packaged sanctioned in 2000 : The rehabilitation package sanctioned by 
Govt. of India in 2000 comprised of the following:  
(i)   Ex-gratia payment of Rs.25,000/- per family;  
(ii)   Cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency @ Rs. 5,000/- per kanal;  
(iii)            An amount of Rs.2 crore to be prov ided for the allotment of plots to  the displaced 
persons who have already been settled in urban area s of  J&K and who have not been 
allotted plots  in the past;  
(iv)              Rs.25 lakh for improvement of civic amenities in 46 regularized colonies.   
 
(c)   Rehabilitation package sanctioned in 2008: In 2008, Govt. of India sanctioned Rs.49 crore 
to the State Govt. of J&K for providing cash compen sation in lieu of land deficiency by increasing 
the amount from Rs.5,000/- per kanal to Rs.25,000/-  per kanal subject to a ceiling of Rs.1.5 lakh per 
family and Rs.2 lakh to be provided in lieu of plot s to the urban settlers, who have not been allotted  
plots in urban areas.   
 According to report of the State Govt. of J&K, in order to rehabilitate the Pakistan occupied 
Kashmir displaced persons of 1947.  For this, about  6,80,850 kanals of EP land and about 2,43,000 
kanals of State land were allotted to these familie s by the State Government.  Absolute ownership in 
respect of the State land allotted to Pakistan occu pied Kashmir Displaced Persons of 1947 was also 
granted by the State Government.  The State Govt. h as also granted occupancy right in respect of EP 
(Evacuee Property) land allotted to these displaced  persons.  As per the occupancy right given, the 
displaced persons will have 99% share and the perso ns who have migrated to PoJK will have 1% 
share.  The displaced persons who chose to settle i n urban areas, have been provided 1,628 quarters 
and 793 plots in 6 colonies.   
 
(d)    Disbursement made by the State Government  
Between March 2002 to March, 2004, an amount of Rs. 6.17 crores was released to the 
Government of J&K for providing relief assistance t o DPs from PoJK for implementation of the 

 13 
relief package announced in 2000.  In 2008, on the recommendation of the State Govt. of J&K, an 
amount of Rs.49 crore was released to the State Gov t.  It was also informed that out of Rs.55.17crore 
released so far, 2550 families have received the cash compensation to the tune of Rs. 31.07 crore.   
1.3.3  As per the scheme the following disbursement has be en made by the State Government till 
September, 2014: 
 
(i) Ex-gratia payment of Rs.25,000 per family :- Ou t of 1011 applications received  and 
verified, 1010 applications have been rejected and only one reimbursement has been made. As 
reported by the State Government the verifying comm ittee has rejected 1010 applications on  
the  ground that their monthly income  was more tha n Rs. 300 per month at the time of 
migration and in many cases only application forms were received without the supporting 
documents;   
(ii) Cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency @  Rs.5000 per kanal which is now revised to 
Rs.25,000 per kanal subject to a maximum of Rs.1.5 lakh per family:- The Committee was 
informed that out of 4988 claims received, 3948 cla ims have been verified.  Of these, 1028 
claims have been rejected, 2841 approved and cash c ompensation given in 2524 cases and 79 
cases are being re-verified;   
(iii) Allotment of plots to the DPs who have alread y been settled in urban areas of the State but not 
allotted any plot, payment of Rs.2 lakh per family instead of plot:-  As per the report  received 
from the State Govt., out of 198 applications recei ved by them, 48 applications were found 
complete. Out of these, 18 applications were placed  before the verification committee, of 
which 6 applications have been approved, 2 have bee n rejected and in 10 cases reverification 
is required. Remaining 30 applications will be placed before the verification committee; 
  (iv) Improvement of Civic Amenities in 46 recogni zed colonies:-  The State Government has 
constituted a Committee to prepare a survey report for improving the civic amenities in the 
recognized colonies.  However, the survey report has not yet been finalized by the State Govt.   
 
1.4 DISPLACED PERSONS OF 1965 (CHHAMB) 
1.4.1  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that during 1965  Indo- Pak 
War, people from Chhamb Niabat migrated to Jammu an d some of them settled in some villages of 
Jammu District.  They did not go back to their nati ve place after the end of 1965 war and settled 
within the State. 
1.4.2 The Ministry also stated that according to th e State Govt. the displaced persons of 1965 war 
have already been rehabilitated.  Though the issues  of conferment of ownership right/occupancy right 
of allotted State/EP land are under consideration o f the State Govt., a proposal to pay cash assistanc e 
in lieu of land deficiency to some of the DPs of 19 65 is under consideration of State Government and 
a proposal in this regard would be submitted to MHA  for consideration. The Ministry also informed 
that the State Government’s proposal is awaited.  
 
1.5 CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS, 1971 (CAMP)  
1.5.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Com mittee that as a result of delineation of the 
Line of Control along the Jammu and Kashmir border following the Shimla Agreement, the Chhamb 

 14 
Niabat area comprising about 39,000 acres of land i n Jammu and Kashmir fell on the Pakistan side of 
the Line of Control.   Over 18,000 persons comprisi ng about 4,600 families who had been uprooted 
from this area, were immediately provided relief as sistance in camps situated at Kishanpur, Manwal 
at a distance of about 70 kms. from Jammu. 
1.5.2 The Committee was intimated that  with a view  to ensuring effective and expeditious 
resettlement of these displaced persons, the then M inistry of Labour and Rehabilitation, Government 
of India set up a joint team headed by Chief Secret ary, Jammu and Kashmir to examine the problem 
of permanent resettlement of the Chhamb refugees and to propose measures.  On the recommendation 
of the joint team, a Central Authority, namely, Chh amb Displaced Persons Rehabilitation Authority 
(CDPRA) was constituted in 1974 under the chairmans hip of Chief Secretary, Jammu and Kashmir.   
Under different schemes implemented through the CDP RA, the families of displaced persons from 
Chhamb were accommodated in relief camps and subseq uently rehabilitated in Jammu and Kashmir 
in a phased manner.  The details of relief granted are as under :-  
(i) Eligible urban families were given grants to th e tune of Rs.14,800/- which included 
housing grant of Rs.7,500/- per family, ad-hoc main tenance grant of Rs.800/- per family, 
special resettlement grant of Rs.500/- per family, milch cattle grant of Rs.1,000/- per 
family, grant of Rs.3,000/- for construction of shop per family, grant of Rs.2,000/- for other 
structural requisites in shop per family, and loan per family of Rs.5,000/-.   
 (ii) The agricultural families were given 4 acres of irrigated or 6 acres of un-irrigated land per 
family.  Government of India had agreed to pay cost  of deficiency of land allotted @ 
Rs.5,000/- per kanal.  In addition, they were given  Rs.13,500/- rehabilitation grant which 
inter alia included housing grant of Rs.7,500/- per  family, ad-hoc maintenance grant of 
Rs.800/- per family, special resettlement grant of Rs.500/- per family, milch cattle grant of 
Rs.1000/- per family, grant of Rs.2,000/- for purch ase of bullock per family, seeds and 
fertilizers grant of Rs.1200/- per family, agricult ural implements grant of Rs.500/- per 
family, in addition to a, loan of Rs.1,875/- per family.   
(iii) Special assistance for widows and destitutes was given which inter alia included pension of 
Rs.60/- per month, ad-hoc maintenance grant of Rs.3 00/-, special resettlement grant of 
Rs.100/-, housing grant upto Rs.5000/- and small housing plots.   
1.5.3 The Ministry further stated that out of total  number of 4600 families in Chhamb 1971 (camp) 
category, 3900 families were allotted land.  Rest o f the families were excluded because some (300) 
families were not agriculturists. Some (182) famili es were serving soldier families and some (218) 
families were widows and destitutes.  These 218 fam ilies/widows and destitute were given cash 
maintenance allowance of Rs. 60/- per month by the CDPRA from the year 1972 onwards.  In the 
year 1984 these widows/destitutes were paid pension  through Social Welfare Department of the State 
Government.  Chhamb Displaced persons of 1971 (Camps) were paid housing grant @ Rs. 7500/- per 
family in three instalments from 1975 onwards.  Mos t of the 218 identified widows/destitute got 
housing grants.  These widows/destitutes were allot ted 3.5 marla of land i.e. half the size of the plo t 
(i.e. 7 marla) given to other families in the year 1975 onwards.  182 serving soldiers and 218 widows 
were given housing plots.   
1.5.4 The ownership right in respect of State land allotted to the Chhamb Displace Persons of 1971 
(camp) has been given during the year 2000.  Their demand for occupancy right in respect of EP land 
is still an issue. All the Chhamb Displaced persons of 1971 (camp) were allotted plots in rural areas in 

 15 
various bastis (about 129) except 27 families.  Tho se families who could not be allotted full quota of  
prescribed scale of land, a scheme for making cash compensation in lieu of deficient allotable units of 
land was worked out.  699 families were identified for cash compensation.  However, 677 families 
have been paid cash compensation ranging from Rs. 1 ,000 to Rs. 5,000 in the year 1992.  There were 
463 left out families who are demanding cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency.   
 
1.6 CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS, 1971 (NON-CAMP) 
1.6.1  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that  the displaced persons of 
Chhamb who were financially well placed and had pro perty in Chhamb Area but were residing 
elsewhere in the State and did not stay in the relief camps were known as ‘Chhamb Displaced Persons 
(Non-Camp)’.  However, the associations representin g this category continued to make 
representations for financial assistance/ex-gratia payment.  A Committee constituted by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs called RD Kapoor Committee had reco mmended for providing ex-gratia payment of 
Rs.25,000/- to each family of non-camp displaced pe rsons.  The Government of India had accepted 
the recommendation and had accorded sanction to the  State Government of J&K for providing ex-
gratia payment of Rs. 25,000/- per family. 
1.6.2 The State Govt. has reported that there were 1965 claims of non-camp DPs of 1971, out of 
which 1502 claims were verified/approved.  Out of t hese 1502 claims, ex-gratia relief @ Rs.25,000/- 
per family has been disbursed to 1230 families and 272 families are to be disbursed compensation for 
which funds to the extent of Rs.68 lakh are availab le with the State Government, after being released 
by the Government of India.  The State Govt. has be en asked to release the amount to the Field 
Officer (PRO) so that the same could be disbursed among the 272 left over families.   
1.6.3 The Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Com mittee that  the RD Kapoor Committee had 
not agreed to treat the non-camp DPs of 1971 at par  with the camp DPs of 1971 on the ground that 
the non-camp DPs were not actually residing in Chha mb Area at the time of Indo-Pak conflict of 
1971, but were continuing to live elsewhere in J&K.  They had some source of livelihood outside 
Chhamb to fall back upon, whereas the camp DPs had lost everything and had to make a fresh start in 
life. 

 16 
CHAPTER II 
PRESENTATION OF HOME SECRETARY AND INTERACTION WITH 
REPRESENTATIVES OF J&K REFUGEES/DPs 
 
2.0 The erstwhile Committee in its sitting held on 30 
th  July 2013 heard the presentation of Home 
Secretary and representatives of J&K Refugees viz. West Pakistani Refugees, Pakistan Occupied 
Jammu and Kashmir Refugees and PoJK (Chhamb) on the  problems being faced by them. The 
present Committee in its meeting held on 21 st  October, 2014, heard the presentation of the 
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject.  In its subsequent meeting held on 11 th  
November, 2014, the Committee heard the Home Secret ary and representatives of Government of 
J&K. 
 
2.1 WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES 
2.1.1 The representatives of West Pakistani Refugee s submitted before the Committee that after the 
partition of the country in 1947 their forefathers arrived from  West Pakistan to settle in Jammu and 
they have been living there for 66 years but they h ave been deprived of the rights conferred to the 
State People.   They have not been provided the vot ing right in the Assembly and their children are 
running from pillar to post in search of permanent source of livelihood.   Whatever recruitment is 
made in Jammu, even if it is done on behalf of Government of India, West Pakistan Refugees are kept 
at bay. Their three generations in Jammu have ruine d completely and at present fourth generation is 
also facing severe problems. West Pakistani Refugee families spread in seven tehsils of three district s 
of the State but have no voting rights for State As sembly and Panchayat Elections though they can 
vote in Parliamentary elections.    
2.1.2 The representatives of West Pakistani Refugee s further informed the Committee that people 
from West Pakistan arrived in India in 1947 even be fore enforcement of Article 370. Article 370 
came into operation in 1957 while they came here in  1947 and they were asked to remain in the 
border villages on the advice of then Prime Ministe r and Sheikh Mohamad Abdullaha.  However, 
they were not considered eligible for Government jo bs even under the Central Government as the 
jobs were created in the name of State Government, which did not treat them as State subjects.   In 
the recruitments for army and para military forces,  domicile certificates are asked, which they do not  
have.   People are living at the land which was giv en on compassionate basis.   However, they are 
now not permitted to get repaired the dilapidated houses.    
2.1.3 The representative of West Pakistani Refugees  added that West Pakistani Refugees consist of  
80% Scheduled Castes, 10% OBC and 10% General Categ ory and Scheduled Castes are not getting 
constitutional benefits.   Majority of them  are li ving in  Jammu, Katwa and Sambha.    Presently, 
WPRs are working as farmers and farm labourers.     
2.1.4 The Committee was further apprised of the dem ands of WPRs which are enumerated below:- 
“
हम  चाहते हअglyph58ढ़ अglyph873क  िजतने भी हमारे और  लोग  देश  के बंटवारे के बाद  यहां आए  थे, वे यहां पर  बड़े मजे से 
िजंदगी जी रहे हअglyph58ढ़।   इसअglyph87धलए  जो हमारे बअglyph206चे हअglyph58ढ़, िजनकअglyph566 बथअglyphधध0 जअglyph225मू मअglyph582 हुई  है, उनको  भी वहां के नागअglyphढ़65रक  
अअglyph876धकार  अglyphढ़66दए  जाएं, िजससे उनके बअglyph206चे आगे  कअglyph566 िजंदगी जी सकअglyph582।   हम  यह  भी चाहते हअglyph58ढ़ अglyph873क  हमारअglyph5ढ़8 चार  

 17 
पीअglyphढ़66ढ़यां वहां पर  बबाअglyphधध0द  हो गई  है।  अglyphढ़66हअglyph220दुअglyph233तान  तो बहुत  बड़ा है, हमअglyph582 कहअglyph5ढ़8ं और  जगह  भेज  दो, अगर  जअglyph225मू 
कअglyph23धमीर  वाले हमअglyph582 वहां नहअglyph5ढ़8ं रहने देना चाहते हअglyph58ढ़। “ 
2.1.5  The representatives of WPRs apprised the Committee that since they cannot vote in Assembly 
elections and local self government,  Members of Le gislative Assembly and  Panch and Sarpanch do 
not care for them.  As a result they are not benefi ted under Indira Awas Yojana and Aanganwadi 
which are sponsored by the Central Government.       
2.1.6 The Committee desired to know the views of Mi nistry of Home Affairs on the citizenship 
rights to West Pakistani Refugees (WPRs), Permanent  Resident Rights in the State of J&K, defining 
and altering the definition of class of persons who  are or shall be the permanent resident of the Stat e, 
Right to contest State Elections and Elections to Local Bodies, Right to purchase property in the State 
of J&K. The Ministry of Home Affairs responded in writing as under: 
 “The West Pakistani Refugees settled in J&K are very much the citizens of India and they 
have the right to vote in Parliamentary Elections.   There is no provision of separate 
citizenship for the State.  However, they are not p ermanent residents of the State in terms 
of the J&K constitution.  They do not enjoy voting rights to the State Assemblies and 
Local Bodies. The Government of India has requested  the State Govt. to consider 
conferment of the benefit of “State Subject” and to  consider issue of Permanent Resident 
Certificate (PRC) to these people.  The State Govt.  has constituted a Cabinet Sub-
Committee to consider the matter.”  
2.1.7 In the Committee's sitting held on 11 th  November, 2014, the representative of Government o f 
Jammu & Kashmir apprised the Committee on the issue as under :- 
"in fact, this issue has been raised by the DPs sin ce 1947 but this is yet to be settled.  
Then the J&K Government constituted the Wadhwa Comm ittee in 2007.  It has also 
submitted its Report and the Report was referred to  a Cabinet sub-committee which has 
already examined the Report of Saghir Committee.  T he Cabinet sub-committee has met 
five times but so far no decision has been taken." 
2.1.8 Clarifying on the issue, the Home Secretary d eliberated in detail before the Committee which 
is as under:- 
"J&K has a particular law known as the Permanent Re sident Laws.  Earlier, it used to be 
known as the State Subject Law when the Maharaja wa s ruling.  Under the Permanent 
Residency Right, you can be deemed to be a permanen t resident only if you fulfil the 
norms prescribed under that law.  And the law says,  that you can be a permanent resident 
if you were the owner of land and property, sahib-e -jaidad, of J&K in the year 1944.  The 
law in 1944 in J&K specified that to be able to purchase land in the State of J&K, you had 
to be a resident in the State for a minimum of ten years.  So, in effect, what it means is that 
if you were living in the State since 1934, you cou ld own land in 1944.  If you were living 
in the State prior to that, you could obviously own  land earlier than that.  The 
fundamental requirement of being a permanent reside nt in J&K was that you should have 
ownership of land.  It could be as small as a few s quare feet or as large as the law 
permitted. A person, who was not a Permanent Reside nt or a State Subject, as it was 
called then, could not own land in the State of Jam mu and Kashmir, and if you did not 

 18 
own land in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, you wer e not a State Subject.  So, you were 
automatically denied or deprived of certain facilit ies that were available to the State 
Subjects.  After 1947, when the nomenclature of ‘St ate Subject’ was converted to 
‘Permanent Resident’, it was called ‘Permanent Resi dent Certificate’.  Earlier, it used to 
be known as ‘State Subject Certificate’.  So, when the Permanent Resident Certificate law 
was brought into being, the fundamental requirement of the ownership still remained."  
2.1.9 The Committee further desired to know as to h ow long the critical issue of permanent 
residency and citizenship of WPRs would continue an d what special efforts were being taken by the 
Union Government in the matter, the Home Secretary submitted before the Committee as under:- 
"Legally speaking, the issue is that these people w ere not the owners of land in Jammu 
and Kashmir in 1944.  They were not ‘sahib-e-jaidad ’.   So, legally speaking, they do not 
have a right of claiming to be the permanent reside nts.  That is the legal part of it.  Now, 
we come to the second part.  They are not the perma nent residents for the very simple 
reason that they were living in the then West Pakis tan.  Because of the partition of the 
country and the things that happened in the afterma th of the partition, they had to leave 
the place where they were living and come and seek shelter here.  In 1947, these 5,764 
families came and settled down in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  The then Government 
allowed them to stay on land.  A part of that land was the State land and another part of 
that land was the evacuee property land belonging t o people of Jammu and Kashmir who 
had left J&K and gone over to Pakistan.  They have been continuing to live there.  Now, 
how and when the State Government will grant them t he Permanent Resident status is a 
political question which we, at this juncture, cann ot give a reply to.  The Central 
Government has been writing to the State Government  frequently.  The last letter was 
written by me on 7 th  November, 2014.  In para 6, this letter written by  me states, “In view 
of the above, I would request you to consider the g rievances of West Pakistani refugees 
also and send a consolidated financial proposal to this Ministry at the earliest.  The State 
Government should also assure that the West Pakistani refugees settled in the State will be 
given the status of Permanent Residents of Jammu and Kashmir.”   
2.1.10  The Committee sought further clarification on the issue that the specific law was in 
force from 1944, that is, from pre-partition time, when there was no question of Pakistan-Occupied 
Kashmir and concept of West Pakistan came into bein g only in 1947 and the residents who came 
from that side was also part of Kashmir, therefore,  if these residents had land in the other side of 
Kashmir also, they would still be Kashmiris. Furthe r clarifying the issue, the Home Secretary stated 
as under:- 
"It is a little complicated matter.  In 1947, we ha d two kinds of people entering the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir.  One was who belonged to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
who fled the districts of Mirpur and Muzzafarabad, which were a part of the Kingdom of 
Jammu and Kashmir, and who came into this side to s eek shelter because of marauding 
mobs that were killing people there.  This is one c ategory.  In their case, there was no 
question of not granting Permanent Resident status because they were permanent 
residents.  There was a second category of people w ho came into Jammu and Kashmir 
from the then Punjab.  Punjab was a State under the  British rule.  It was not a part of 
the Maharaja’s territory.   So, it is a second cate gory of people who came in as refugees 
in 1947, who settled down in the districts of then Kathua and then Jammu, who are the 

 19 
people in whose case we are raising the question to day of the grant of Permanent 
Resident status."  
2.1.11  The Committee pointed out that seven years have elapsed but  there has not been 
effective implementation of recommendations of Wadh wa Committee Report nor there is any 
outcome of consideration of State Cabinet sub-Commi ttee on the issue but people who had left 
India for Pakistan  in  1947 are said to have right s to claim for their land, but WPRs who never 
revolted against the State nor went belligerent to resort to violence are being denied their 
genuine demands which otherwise should have been co nsidered on humanitarian grounds.   
Responding to the issue, the representative of the State Government of Jammu and Kashmiri 
submitted before the Committee as under:- 
"जहां तक  वधवा  कमेटअglyph5ढ़8 अglyphढ़65रपोटअglyphधध0 का ताअglyph228लुक  है, उस  पर  बाज़ाअglyphढ़67बता अglyph233टेट  गवनअglyphधध0मअglyph582ट  ने एअglyph20धशन  लअglyph5ढ़8 है।  
अअglyph20धटूबर , 2014 मअglyph582 कैअglyphढ़67बनेट  ने पीओके  अglyphढ़65रअglyph222यूजीज  के परमानअglyph582ट  अglyphढ़65रहैअglyphढ़67बअglyph87धलटेशन  के अglyph2ज़3पोजल  को 
अअglyph2ज़3ूव  कर  के गवनअglyphधध0मअglyph582ट  ऑफ  इंअglyph875डया को ऑलरेडी रेफर  अglyph873कया है। ....... हमने पीओके  अglyphढ़65रअglyph222यूजीज़  को 
इंअglyph20धलूड  अglyph873कया है अglyph20धयअglyph586अglyph873क  they were Permanent Residents of the State. सर , जब  तक  वेअglyph233ट  
पाअglyph873कअglyph233तानीज  के रेजीडअglyph582अglyph87धशयल  राइअglyph6धज़स  अglyph875डसाइड  नहअglyph5ढ़8ं होते, तब  तक  we cannot include them 
because अglyph20धयअglyph586अglyph873क  वधवा  कमेटअglyph5ढ़8 ने भी रेफर  अglyph873कया है अglyph873क  they should be considered.  लेअglyph873कन  
जैसा अglyph873क  होम  सेअglyph273ेटरअglyph5ढ़8 साहब  ने कहा अglyph873क  that is a political issue. यह  लेिजअglyph233लेचर  के परअglyph230यू मअglyph582 
है।  Once they decide, only can then we give amendments."  
2.1.12  Responding to the Committee's query regardi ng the relevant provisions of the law 
relating to Custodian of Evacuee Property to safegu ard the properties of Muslims who migrated to 
Pakistan in 1947 who have even got the citizenship of Pakistan gets compensation once the claimant 
comes back. The representative of State Government of Jammu and Kashmiri apprised the 
Committee that the land which was allotted to Displ aced Persons (DPs) by the Government was EP 
land as well as the Government land.  Once the clai mant comes back or he claims the rights through 
some of his relations, he would get compensation. 
2.1.13  Further clarifying on the issue, the Home S ecretary deliberated before the Committee 
as under:- 
"In 1947, a very large number of the citizens of th e then Kingdom of Jammu and 
Kashmir left Jammu and Kashmir and went to Pakistan ........The landed property that 
they left behind was decided to be looked after by the Government and an agency was 
created to look after that land. It was called the Custodian of Evacuee Property.  Today, 
all evacuee property in the State of Jammu and Kash mir is under the charge of the 
Custodian who has been looking after this land on b ehalf of such people of Jammu and 
Kashmir who left Jammu and Kashmir and went over to  Pakistan in 1947.  No 
compensation of this land is paid to the people who  had gone to Pakistan, however, if 
any of them decides to come back to India after for egoing the citizenship of Pakistan, 
claims that land and is able to establish that, it is taken up.  There is a legal process 
through which that person has to pass before that c laim can be established. If that 
person is able to establish his or her credentials after passing through the legal process, 
then that land is given back to that person.  That is the way it works."    

 20 
2.1.14  The Home Secretary, however, clarified that  the Enemy Property Act is not applicable 
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  Regarding WPRs not getting money as compensation from the 
Ministry of Rehabilitation as per the DP Act 1954 a nd other related Acts, the Home Secretary stated 
as under:- 
"the issue is that the DP Act of 1954 did not exten d to the State of Jammu & Kashmir.  
Therefore, whatever compensation was paid in 1947 w as paid out of the coffers of the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir.   Since the Act did not e xtend to the State, the natural 
consequences of that did not follow.  However, in t he year 1971, after the Indo-Pakistan 
War, when we lost Chhamb, after the Agreement, the people who were living in the 
Chhamb area came and settled down in and around the  district of Jammu.  In their case 
we had the CDPRA coming into the State of Jammu & K ashmir.  They set up an office 
there and the entire process of looking after the r ehabilitation and compensating them 
was done from 1974 onwards till 1991 by the Governm ent of India.  But in 1947 the 
entire effort was made by the State of Jammu & Kashmir." 
2.1.15  On the issue of right to education in techn ical/professional institutes in the States, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs commented in writing as under: 
“As regards admission of children and grandchildren  of WPRs (West Pakistani 
Refugees) in the higher, technical/ professional in stitution in the State, it is submitted 
that while disposing a Writ Petition filed by Shri Bachan Lal Kalgotra against the State 
of J&K, the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide their judgme nt dated 22.02.1987 had 
suggested inter-alia that the State Govt. may issue  appropriate executive direction 
without having to introduce any legislation in rega rd to admission of children and 
grandchildren of WPRs in the higher, technical/ pro fessional institution in the State.  
The State Govt. has been requested to issue appropr iate executive direction/orders, so 
that children/grand children of WPR could get admis sion to technical/ professional 
educational institutions in the State.  The State Govt. has also been requested to examine 
the feasibility of allocating certain percentage of  seats for the children/ grand children 
of WPRs.” 
 
2.1.16  The Committee in its sitting held on 11 th  November 2014 further enquired as to 
whether the kins of WPRs could be given some reserv ations in educational institutions through out 
the country on the line of J&K migrants and also wh ether separate Kendriya Vidyalaya or Navodaya 
Vidyalaya could be opened for admission of the ward s of refugees and displaced persons, the Home 
Secretary reacted as under:- 
 
"we should examine the possibility of seeing whethe r we can have a Kendriya Vidyalaya 
set up where the children of only these people can be given education.  Sir, we will take a 
look at that.  The Kendriya Vidyalaya regulations a re a little different.  Basically, these 
schools are meant for the employees of the Central Government who are posted in 
different areas.  Hardly anybody amongst them is an employee of the Central Government, 
but nevertheless, we would work out some kind of me chanism.  You have given us some 
indication.  We will work out the best possible mec hanism to have an educational system 
set up for them.  Let me explain, Sir.  The difficulty regarding education for these people is 
not with regard to school education or even college  education.  They get admission in 
schools and they get admission in normal degree col leges.  The difficulty arises when 

 21 
some child wishes to get admission in a technical c ollege.  It could be an Engineering 
college; it could be a Computer Engineering college ; it could be a Medical College or a 
Dental College.  That is the place where the infirm ity lies, because in those institutions if 
you are in Jammu & Kashmir, then the first question  that they ask is for them to show 
their Permanent Resident Certificates.  If they do not show the Permanent Resident 
Certificate , they  are not eligible to get admission there.  So, we wi ll now go back and see 
how best to address this issue.  One of the hon. Me mbers said that when we were already 
giving some reservation in seats in technical and p rofessional colleges in other parts of 
the country to the Kashmiri Pandit migrants and the ir children, why can’t a similar 
facility be extended to the West Pakistani refugees  of 1947, their children and the other 
refugees?  We will take a look at it, Sir.  We will try to resolve the matter to the best of our 
ability.  We will take a serious look at that." 
2.1.17  Responding to the Committee's query as to w hy the Government of India does not 
offer the wards of refugees and displaced persons t he facilities to study in other institutes in the 
country, the Home Secretary deliberated before the Committee as under:- 
 
"No child living in Jammu & Kashmir, especially the  children of the West Pakistani 
refugees, are denied the right to seek admission in any institution in the country, provided 
they make the grade regarding merit.  So, the issue  now is here, in all likelihood, a large 
number of children who pass out from the local schools of Jammu & Kashmir, because of 
the lower educational standards, are unable to meet  that minimum benchmark.  
Therefore, a kind of concession needs to be extended to them.  So, we will examine it from 
this angle too, how best we can extend a concession  to make the children of these people 
eligible for seeking admission in the Central Gover nment recognized colleges and 
institutions." 
 
2.1.18 Pertaining to the special financial package for one time settlement of West Pakistani 
Refugees, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the State Govt. has also been requested to send a 
proposal for financial package for rehabilitation o f West Pakistani Refugees to the Ministry for 
consideration. Their proposal is awaited.  
 
2.1.19 As regards the issuance of Domicile Certific ate and relaxation of age for recruitment to 
Central Services, the Ministry of Home Affairs stat ed that the Central Government had issued a 
notification in 1997 regulating the relaxation of a ge limit in favour of the residents of the State of  
J&K for appointment to Central Services and Posts.  Under the said notification, relaxation in the 
upper age limit of 5 years shall be admissible to a ll persons who had ordinarily been in domicile in 
the State of J&K during the period 01.01.1980 to 31 .12.1989.  Any person intending to avail the 
relaxation shall submit a certificate from the DM/D esignated Authority under whose jurisdiction he 
had ordinarily resided.  The time limit has since b een extended till 31 
st  December, 2013.  The State 
Govt. is issuing Domicile Certificates to the West Pakistani Refugees.  As per the report received 
from the State Govt. they have issued 80 such certi ficates in 2008, 108 in 2009, 219 in 2010, 288 in 
2011 and 89 in 2012.   
 
2.1.20 Pertaining to issuance of SC/ST/OBC Certific ate to WPRs, the Ministry commented that as 
per the report received from the State Govt., they have been issuing Caste Certificates to the West 
Pakistani Refugees settled in the State.  They have  issued 13 Caste Certificates in 2008, 55 in 2009, 
34 in 2010, 72 in 2011 and 38 in 2012.   

 22 
 
2.1.21 The Committee further desired to know whethe r in view of the provisions of the Jammu & 
Kashmir Constitution concerning Permanent Resident Certificate whether there was any proposal or 
whether the Ministry was considering settling WPRs,  outside the State.  Responding thereto, the 
Home Secretary stated that there was no proposal under consideration in this regard so far. 
 
2.1.22 The Committee pointed out the grievance of W PRs that the West Pakistani Refugees living 
on Custodian lands are prohibited by the Government  from repairing their houses or making new 
constructions; and, they are asked to pay rent. In response to that, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
commented as under:- 
 
“the Wadhwa Committee has recommended that the Evac uee Property Department 
should consider and allow the West Pakistani refuge es to repair their houses as per 
norms and rules of the Department. It is mentioned that the Administration of Evacuee 
Property Act, 1950 enacted in the Parliament by the  Government of India which has 
since been repealed in 2005, does not extend to the  State of J&K. The evacuee property 
in J&K is administered by the State Act called “The  J&K State Evacuee Property 
Administration Act, 2006”. This Ministry has requested the State Government vide letter 
dated 05.04.2013  to consider the request of West Pakistani refugees for allowing 
construction/renovation of houses on Evacuee Land.”   
 
2.1.23 Regarding the extension of benefits of Centr ally Sponsored Schemes to WPRs, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs informed the Committee that as per the report received from the State Govt. the 
State Govt. is extending the benefits of Centrally Sponsored Schemes such as MGNREGA, ICDS, 
IAY, Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC).   
    
2.1.24 The Committee sought to know the status rega rding extension of credit facilities by banks to 
WPRs without collateral securities.  The Ministry of Home Affair informed the Committee as under:-   
 
“The matter was taken up with the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE) and Reserve Bank of India by t his Ministry. The RBI has 
informed that they have already advised the J&K Ban k Ltd., which is the convener bank 
in the State, to take up the matter in the State Le vel Bankers Committee (SLBC) meeting 
to impress upon other banks in the State not to accept collateral security in case of loans 
upto Rs.10 lakh extended to units in the Micro & Sm all Enterprises (MSE) sector and in 
turn take guarantee cover under credit guarantee scheme of CGTMSE.” 
 
 
2.1.25 The Committee further desired to know as to what other mechanism is available to address 
the issues relating to the West Pakistani Refugees.  Responding to the Committee's query, the Home 
Secretary stated that the difficulty with regard to  the West Pakistani Refugees emanated from the 
basic issue of the lack of Permanent Resident right s given to them, leading to the consequence of 
plethora of infirmities visiting upon them. He assu red the Committee that all such infirmities are 
being considered in the Ministry and the Ministry i ntend to take certain measures to rectify the 
situation. He submitted before the Committee as under:- 
 

 23 
"we have also been thinking as to how  we can put i n position a system whereby the 
infirmities visited on them could be minimized.  We have now been toying with the idea 
of taking up the matter with NABARD.  There are som e schemes which are possible to 
be implemented there.  After we have negotiated wit h them, spoken with the NABARD 
people and taken them on board. If they agree, we w ill try to implement that part of it.  
We are also looking at the employment part and trying to see if something can be done 
with the Central Armed Police Forces.  After the ho n. Committee had highlighted 
these issues, the Ministry is very seriously lookin g at all of them. We will try to see 
how best to resolve whatever is feasible." 
 
2.2 DISPLACED PERSONS OF PAKISTAN OCCUPIED JAMMU AN D KASHMIR 
 
2.2.1 The representatives of PoJK suggested to the Committee that for the benefit of the present 
generation of POJK, the words ‘Kashmiri Migrants’ m ay be replaced by the words ‘Displaced Person 
of J&K States’  so that the children of POK may get  benefit of admission into professional colleges 
and engineering colleges.   
2.2.2 The representative of PoJK also informed the Committee that their problems are continuing 
since 21 
st /22 nd  October 1947. He further stated that Kashmiri Pand its who migrated in 1989 are 
getting good relief but refugees from PoJK are not fortunate enough to get even sustainable relief.    
2.2.3 The representative of PoJK Refugees further i nformed the Committee that the relief was given 
subject to the conditions i.e. (i) person must be s taying in the camps not with relatives (ii) head of  the 
family also should have migrated and (iii) migratio n should be within September, 1947 and 
December, 1950. Familiies whose head of the family was killed during migration and migrated after 
December, 1950 were left. The Petitions Committee o f Rajya Sabha in 62 nd  Report recommended for 
rehabilitation and compensation, which was not impl emented. Recommendations of the Wadhwa 
Committee set up by the State Government in 2007 were also not implemented. 
2.2.4 The Committee desired to know as to how many persons have migrated from POJK in 1947-
48 and whether they have been registered in the Sta te of J&K, and if so, whether the process of 
registration has been completed and if not, reasons  for not registring of these displaced persons so f ar 
and the responsible authority for this.   In respon se to that the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted 
before the Committee in writing which is produced below: 
“In the wake of Pakistani aggression in Jammu & Kash mir in 1947, mass exodus of 
population took place from Pak occupied area of Jam mu and Kashmir to this part of the 
country.  As per the information received from the State Govt. of J&K, 31,619 Displaced 
Persons (DPs) families have been registered with th e erstwhile Provincial Rehabilitation 
Organisation constituted by the Government in the y ear 1950, which was disbanded in the 
month of October, 1982.  Thereafter, Govt. of J&K c reated a Rehabilitation Cell in 1984 to 
find out a solution for their matters related to th e settlement of these DPs of 1947 from PoK, 
which is under the charge of Custodian, EP, Jammu E x-Officio PRO, Jammu who looks after 
the redressal problems of DPs of 1947.” 
  

 24 
2.3 DISPLACED PERSONS OF PAKISTAN OCCUPIED JAMMU AN D KASHMIR 
(CHHAMB)  
2.3.1 The representatives of PoJK (Chhamb) Refugees  informed that they were displaced three 
times i.e. in 1947, 1965 and 1971 as Chhamb was att acked three times because Chhamb was the first 
post on the way. Pakistan planned to divide Jammu &  Kashmir in two parts.  Due to sudden attack, 
affected persons came to this region who were kept in camps.  About 10,000 people who could not 
settle in camps were to be given Rs. 25,000/- as re lief amount but State Government has not 
implemented the same.  The Committee was further in formed that the persons who were displaced 
three times were not given any special package and as a result, they are compelled to dwell in border 
areas of LoC.  Their children are illiterate becaus e of absence of access to town and cities and 
therefore, there is need for reservation in profess ional colleges. They need reservation in educationa l 
institutions and permanent source of livelihood through employment.   
2.3.2 The representative of PoJK (Chhamb) Refugees further informed the Committee that PoJK 
refugees earned properties in their name but since these properties were destroyed three times, they 
are in dire need for compensation without any discr imination.  Citing a case of discrimination, the 
representative of PoJK informed the Committee that in 1956, a portion of PoJK refugees were given 
compensation of Rs. 10,300/-  but another group was  given compensation of Rs. 3100/- only.   About 
3,500 families were given only relief amount and th ey were informed that the remaining amount 
would be paid later on.    The representatives plea ded that value of Rs. 10,300/- in 1956  must have 
been increased to Rs. 2 crore.   The amount which was earlier given to the tune of Rs. 25,000 has now 
been shown as enhanced amount to the tune of  Rs. 1 ,50,000/-, this amount is not sufficient to 
purchase even one marla land.  The representative p ointed out that whatever property they have left 
there earlier may be compensated to them. Though it  was assured that the same would be given, but 
that has not been done even after a period of sixty  six years.  And now it is being said that in lieu of 
that property only an amount of Rs. 1,50,000 would be given.    The representative also requested for 
adequate compensation since they were having landed  property, house and everything which were 
destroyed.       
2.3.3 Pointing out the non-compliance/implementatio n of announced relief package, the 
representative of POJK submitted as under:- 
“
यहां से जो अglyphढ़65रलअglyph5ढ़8फ  पैकेज  एनाउंस  अglyph873कया जाता है, अglyph233टेट  गवनअglyphधध0मअglyph582ट  उसे इिअglyph225अglyph22धलमअglyph582ट  हअglyph5ढ़8 नहअglyph5ढ़8ं करती  है।   
हालत  यह  है, 1947 वालअglyph586 को जो अglyphढ़65रलअglyph5ढ़8फ  पैकेज  अglyphढ़66दया जाना था, उसके बारे मअglyph582 9 अगअglyph233त , 2000 को यहां से 
लैटर  भी इअglyph23धयू अglyph873कया गया ,  लेअglyph873कन  आज  तक  भी वह  पैकेज  पूरअglyph5ढ़8 तरह  से वहां इिअglyph225अglyph22धलमअglyph582ट  नहअglyph5ढ़8ं हुआ  है।   
हमारअglyph5ढ़8 कोई  सुनवाई  वहां नहअglyph5ढ़8ं है।   जब  चीफ  अglyph87धमअglyphढ़70नअglyph233टर  साहब , जो वहां के एअglyph203ज़ीअglyph20धयूअglyphढ़66टव  हेड  हअglyph58ढ़, वहअglyph5ढ़8 कोई  
अglyphढ़65रअglyph233पाँस  नहअglyph5ढ़8ं देते, अglyph873फर  इिअglyph225अglyph22धलमअglyph582ट  कौन  करेगा? कोई  हमअglyph582 पूछता  हअglyph5ढ़8 नहअglyph5ढ़8ं है।   एक  चीज़  तो हम  यह  चाहते 
हअglyph58ढ़ अglyph873क  एज ुकेशन  और  इअglyph225अglyph22धलॉइमअglyph582ट  मअglyph582 हमअglyph582 कोटा अglyphढ़66दया जाए। " 
2.3.4 The representatives of PoJK (Chhamb)  made the following submissions before the 
Committee:- 
(i)  The migrants should be registered. 31,600 families were registered while 9,500 families 
were not registered as they could not fulfill the c ondition. The properties which were 
lost have not been compensated.  One third of the p opulation of POJK migrated to 

 25 
Jammu. They should be provided with political right s in exile as they spread to the 
whole country.   Children of such families should b e provided reservation in 
professional courses.   
(ii)  Refugee Development Board should be constituted to look after the development needs 
of such migrants.   Out of the ex-gratia payment of  Rs. 3500, Rs. 2500 was deducted 
against provision of land which was never given eve n after 65 years.   Now the 
Government is giving Rs. 1,50,000 on account of non-grant of land promised.   
2.3.5 The Committee desired to know about the statu s and policy for POJK and whether persons 
from POJK are considered as refugee with the status  of internally displaced persons and whether 
these displaced persons have been given any employm ent or any other package.   The Ministry of 
Home Affairs responded as under:- 
“The displaced persons from POJK are not considered  as refugees.  They are the citizens of 
India.  They are also the permanent residents of th e State of J&K.  In order to mitigate the 
hardship of these families and to rehabilitate them , the Govt. of India had announced relief 
and rehabilitation measures from time to time and s anctioned a package in 1947-48, which 
included allotment of 2-3 acres of irrigated or 4-6  acres of un-irrigated land, Rs.1,000/- per 
family as ex-gratia relief and regularization of 46  basties in rural areas for rural settlers.  
Subsequently, ownership rights in respect of State land were also conferred upon them.  In 
respect of Evacuee land, occupancy tenancy rights w ere given under the Agrarian Reforms 
Act, 1976.  For urban settlers, the package include d ex-gratia payment of Rs.3500/- per 
family, construction of 1600 residential quarters a nd allotment of plots in 123 cases by the 
State Housing Board in Jammu.  In 1960, the Governm ent issued another sanction for 
payment of rehabilitation assistance to these displ aced persons.  However, various 
associations of these displaced persons had been ra ising their grievances at different fora 
from time to time.  In January, 1998, Govt. of Indi a constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Shri R.D. Kapur, the then Additiona l Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs to 
consider the grievances of the displaced persons an d submit a report.  Various Associations 
such as Jammu Kashmir Sharnarthi Action Committee, Jammu & KashmirDisplaced Persons 
Refugee Association, Central Committee All J&K Kash miri Refugees (1947), All India J&K 
DPs Association and Mirpur (J&K) Welfare Associatio n were invited by the said Committee. 
The Committee had also considered the representatio ns from other 
Associations/Organisations.  After detailed deliberation on the demands and grievances of the 
displaced persons and taking into consideration the rehabilitation package/assistance already 
sanctioned earlier by the Govt. of India, the Committee had made certain recommendations."  
 
2.3.6 The R. D. Kapoor Committee submitted its repo rt in 1999 and recommended acceptance of 
the following four major demands of the displaced persons from Pak occupied Kashmir:   
 
(i) Payment of cash compensation for land deficienc y @ Rs.5,000/- per kanal subject to 
maximum of Rs.25,000/- per family.   
(ii) Payment of ex-gratia relief @ Rs.25,000/- per family to those displaced persons of Pak 
occupied Kashmir who were held in Pak captivity dur ing the crucial period from 
September, 1947 and December, 1950; those who did n ot stay in camps; and where the 
head of the family did not move along with family before the cut off date.   

 26 
(iii) Payment of Rs.2.00 crore to the State Governm ent of J&K for allotment of plots for those 
who had settled in urban areas.   
(iv) Release of Rs.25.00 lakh to State Government f or improvement of civic amenities in 46 
regularised basties.   
 
2.3.7 The Ministry further stated that as per the r ecommendations of the Committee, the 
Government of India had announced a relief package in 2000.  Subsequently in 2008, the scale of 
cash component for land deficiency was further enha nced.  The State Govt. has reported that a 
separate office to look into the problems of PoK DP s of 1947 have been constituted which is headed 
by Custodian (Ex-officio Provincial Rehabilitation Officer) Jammu.  
 
2.3.8 In 2008, the Govt. of India announced a packa ge in which the scale of cash compensation for 
land deficiency was increased from Rs.5,000/- per kanal to Rs.25,000/- per kanal subject to maximum 
of Rs.1.5 lakh and Rs.2 lakh to be provided to the urban settlers who have not been allotted plots in 
urban areas in lieu of the plots.   
 
2.3.9 Between March 2002 to March, 2004, an amount of Rs.6.17 crore was released to the 
Government of J&K for providing relief assistance t o DPs from PoK for implementation of the relief 
package announced in 2000.  In 2008, on the recomme ndation of the State Govt. of J&K, an amount 
of Rs.49 crore was released to the State Govt.  Out  of a sum of Rs.55.17 crore released so far, the 
State Govt. of J&K has incurred Rs.30.84 crore till June, 2013.   
 
2.3.10  As per the information received from the St ate Govt., a total of 6,80,850 kanals of 
evacuee property land and 2,43,000 kanals of State land has been allotted to the DPs of 1947 and 
1628 residential quarters and 793 plots have been allotted to the Urban DPs of 1947. 
  

 27 
Chapter – III 
ISSUES AND COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
3.0 The Ministry of Home Affairs has furnished its comments, issue- wise, on the various issues 
raised by the representatives of West Pakistani Ref ugees, POJK Refugees, 1947, Chhamb Displaced 
Persons of 1965 and 1971 and also by Members of the  Committee during  the meetings. The issues 
raised as well as comments received from the Minist ry of Home Affairs, and the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1 WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES (WPRs)  
3.1.1 Permanent Resident Certificate and Voting Rig ht  
3.1.1.1 Representatives of West Pakistani Refugees (WPRs) submitted that they are not eligible to be  
member of the Village Panchayat, and not eligible t o take part in State Elections even after being 
residents in J&K for the last 67 years.   They cann ot purchase land in Jammu & Kashmir, hence, due 
to non-protection of their rights, the WPRs are liv ing in the State of J&K as slaves. They demanded 
for right to purchase land in the State, right to v ote for the State Assembly and the Local Bodies, an d 
observation for admission into professional and technical colleges in the State.    
3.1.1.2 The Committee takes note of the Ministry of  Home Affairs that the West Pakistani Refugees 
settled in Jammu and Kashmir are very much the citi zens of India. They have the right to vote in 
Parliamentary Elections but they do not enjoy votin g rights to the State Assembly and Local Bodies.  
There is no provision of separate citizenship for t he State.  The West Pakistani Refugees have 
migrated from such areas which were not part of ers twhile Jammu and Kashmir as such, and could 
not be treated as permanent residents of the State like DPs who had migrated from the areas of PoJK. 
3.1.1.3 The Committee also notes that as per the St ate Constitution, only those persons can purchase 
property or contest elections if they are Permanent  residents of the State and are in possession of 
Permanent Resident Certificate. The West Pakistani Refugees can be declared as permanent residents 
only after the Constitution of the State is amended. The Committee has taken note of the fact that  th e  
West Pakistani Refugees families can't avail the be nefits of various social welfare schemes launched 
by the State Government and the members of their fa milies can seek neither Government 
employment in the State nor admissions in various p rofessional colleges of the State.  No other 
benefits of any kind have been granted to these refugees. 
3.1.1.4    It was also brought to the notice of the  Commiittee that the Government of India has 
requested the State Govt. to consider conferment of  the benefit of “State Subject” and to consider 
issue of Permanent Resident Certificate (PRC) to th ese people.  The State Govt. has constituted a 
Cabinet Sub-Committee to consider the matter. The C ommittee in this connection notes the 
submission made by the representative of Government of Jammu & Kashmir during  the Committee's 
sitting held on 11 th  November, 2014 that the Cabinet sub-committee has met five times but so far no 
decision has been taken.  Some Members of the Commi ttee felt that the issue of Permanent Resident 
Certificates has not been settled even after more t han six decades and were of the view that the grant s 
to the State Government may be linked with the settlement of this issue. 
 

 28 
3.1.1.5   With regard to query  as to how long the critical issue of permanent residency and 
citizenship of WPR would continue, the Committee al so notes with all seriousness the submission 
made by  the Home Secrerary during the aforesaid me eting that  legally WPRs do not have a right of 
claiming to be the permanent residents because of t he very simple reason that they were living in the 
then West Pakistan  which  was not a part of the Maharaja’s territory.  And  how and when the State 
Government will grant them the Permanent Resident s tatus is a political question which the Ministry, 
at this juncture, cannot give a reply to.  The Cent ral Government has been writing to the State 
Government frequently  the last being on 7 th  November, 2014.   
3.1.1.6   The Committee expresses its serious concern that the West Pakistani Refugees, who are 
very much citizens of India and eligible for voting  in Parliamentary elections do not  possess 
right to vote in the State Legislative Assembly ele ctions on the pretext that they are not 
permanent residents of the State in terms of the J& K Constitution. The Committee feels that 
though they are living there for more than 60 years , they are not leading the life of free citizens 
despite having voting rights for Parliament. This right has not earned them any special benefits. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government must impress upon the 
State Government to consider, as a one time measure , the demand of West Pakistani Refugees 
to grant them the status of permanent residents of the State sympathetically so that they can 
live  as state subject in a dignified way, with all  legal rights including right to vote in State 
Legislative Assembly.   
3.1.2 Provision of State Government Jobs 
 
3.1.2.1 According to the representatives, the Refug ees are not entitled to any Government post under 
Rule 17 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Recr uitment Rules and the J&K Civil Service  
Rules, 1956 should be amended to make entitled the children of refugees for State Government  jobs.   
3.1.2.2 The Committee takes note of the reply of th e Government that in the absence of permanent 
resident status, no person can be provided job with in the State. In the State of J&K, only those 
persons can seek jobs within the State who are perm anent residents.  Since providing of such benefits 
need amendment in the J&K Constitution as such, no further action could be taken.  
3.1.2.3 The Committee feels that once the permanent resident right is granted to West Pakistani 
Refugees, all subsidiary benefits would automatical ly follow enabling them to lead decent life. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that J&K Constitution may be amended for conferring 
the status of State Subject on the WPRs at the earl iest. These people have already suffered for 
more than 60 years and the issue brooks no delay. T he Committee also recommends that 
pending final decision in the matter, a temporary w aiver may be made for admission of the 
children in the professional institutions.   
3.1.3 Reservation in Central Government Jobs/Centra l Professional Colleges 
 
3.1.3.1 It was urged that reservation should be pro vided in Central government jobs/Central 
professional colleges for the wards of WPRs. Implementation of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s suggestion 
in the case titled State Govt Vs. B.L. Kalgotra reg arding admission in State professional/technical 
colleges should also be ensured. As per the Hon’ble  Supreme Court’s suggestion, Executive order 

 29 
should be issued to make WPRs eligible for admissio n in State professional/technical colleges. All 
Deputy Commissioners be asked to issue SC and OBC Certificates to eligible WPR.  
3.1.3.2 The Ministry in its written reply informed that the State Government has stated that this issu e 
will be incorporated in the package proposal for consideration. The observations made by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court can be implemented only after making amendment in the State Constitution. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court had asked the State to consid er the demand and make amendments wherever 
required. State Government has informed that they a re issuing instructions to concerned authority to 
issue SC and OBC Certificates to eligible WPRs.  Th e Ministry further commented that as per the 
report received from the State Govt., they have bee n issuing Caste Certificates to the West Pakistani 
Refugees settled in the State.  They have issued 13 Caste Certificates in 2008, 55 in 2009, 34 in 2010, 
72 in 2011 and 38 in 2012. 
3.1.3.3 The Committee is of the view that since the  State Government has agreed, in- principle, 
to incorporate the provision of reservation for the  wards of WPRs in jobs, the State 
Government should not delay in processing the matte r. State Government should honour  the  
suggestion of the Supreme Court for issuing appropriate executive order to make WPRs eligible 
for admission in State professional/technical colle ges as it is not linked to the permanent 
resident status of these persons. The Committee als o desires that the matter of issuance of SC 
and OBC Certificates to eligible WPRs should be expedited .  
3.1.3.4 The Committee also takes note of the assura nce given by the Home Secretary for 
admission to the wards of WPRs in engineering and m edical colleges in J&K. The Committee 
has already made a separate recommendation to addre ss the issue of permanent resident 
certificate so that the children may get admission in engineering and medical colleges in J&K. 
Besides that, as assured by the Home Secretary, a m echanism may be explored to provide 
reservation to the wards of WPRs in engineering, me dical and other related institutions of 
higher education across the country. The Committee also recommends that, if necessary, the 
minimum benchmark required for admission in such in stitutions may be relaxed for those 
wards because of their lower educational standard. 
3.1.4 Opening of KVs/NVs for WPRs 
  
3.1.4.1 During the course of the meeting of the Com mittee, a suggestion was floated to explore 
possibility of opening a Kendriya Vidhyalaya or Nav odaya Vidyalaya for WPRs. The Home 
Secretary took a cue and promised to look into the suggestion in all seriousness.  
3.1.4.2 The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary to work out the 
best possible mechanism to have an educational syst em set up for them, either Kendriya 
Vidyalaya or Navodaya Vidyalaya. The Committee stro ngly recommends that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs may, in consultation with the Ministry  of Human Resource Development, work 
out some mechanism for opening schools by the Centr al Government for the wards of WPRs. 
This may be done at the earliest so that the next academic session may start in those schools.   
3.1.5 One Time Package, Monthly Monetary Assistance  and Accommodation  

 30 
3.1.5.1 The representatives of WPRs demanded for on e time financial package for settlement of 
WPRs. Monthly monetary assistance of Rs.10,000/- pe r family should  be given to WPRs till their 
permanent settlement.  Monthly free ration should b e given to the WPR families and three room 
tenements be made by Govt. of India for the WPRs in  the cities of Jammu, Kathua and Samba at par 
with the Kashmiri Pandit Migrants.  
3.1.5.2 The Committee takes note of the reply of th e Ministry of Home Affairs that the demand will 
be incorporated in the one time financial settlemen t package. State Government has been asked to 
send a proposal for relief and rehabilitation to WP Rs for consideration.   However, proposal for relie f 
and rehabilitation to WPRs has not been received fr om the State Government. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs further stated that the Kashmiri Pandits mi grants cannot be equated with the West Pakistani 
Refugees, hence, this demand cannot be accepted.  
3.1.5.3 The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government should impress 
upon the State Government for early finalization of one time financial package for settlement of 
WPRs. The Committee is of the considered view that even if West Pakistani Refugees cannot be 
equated with the Kashmir Pandits migrants, but they  deserve immediate relief and 
rehabilitation for sustenance without delay. One ti me compensation of Rs. 30 Lakhs may be 
provided within one year and there should not be any delay in the matter. 
3.1.6 Creation of separate battalion in State Polic e, Army and Para Military Forces 
 
3.1.6.1 The representatives of WPRs sought for  cre ation of separate battalions in State Police, Army 
and Para Military Forces from among the youths of the WPRs as per the announcement made in 2008 
by the then Chief Minister of J&K.   
3.1.6.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has submitted that no proposal has been initiated from State 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir. 
3.1.6.3 The Committee taking a serious note of the casual reply by the Government 
recommends that Union Government should persuade th e State Government to initiate action 
to implement the announcement made for the creation  of separate battalion in State Police, 
Army and Para Military Forces from among the youths of the WPRs.  
3.1.7 Reservation of Seats in Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council 
 
3.1.7.1 It was demanded that two seats in the Legis lative Assembly and one seat in Legislative 
Council of the State be reserved for WPRs.   
3.1.7.2 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, State Government has informed that the issue of 
reservation of two seats in the Legislative Assembl y and one seat in Legislative Council of the State 
for WPR  needs amendment in J&K Constitution. 
3.1.7.3 The Committee is of the considered view tha t citizens of India must have the right to 
elect and get elected in all representative bodies to enhance the strength of democracy. WPRs 
should get permanent resident status sooner for fos tering complete faith in democracy. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affa irs may pursue with the State 

 31 
Government to examine the issue of reservation of s eats in the Legislative Assembly and 
Legislative Council of the State for WPRs, and if n ecessary, may move for necessary 
amendment to J&K Constitution. 
3.2 DISPLACED PERSONS FROM POJK IN 1947 
 
3.2.1 Official registration of DPs of 1947  
3.2.1.1 It was demanded that official registration of DPs from POJK by GOI / State Govt. of J&K 
should be undertaken. Left over families of DPs may be given an opportunity for registration. As first  
priority, Govt. of India must issue an advertisemen t inviting applications for general enumeration of 
all POJK DP families without any conditions that we re kept in 1960 stipulating details of their 
properties, buildings and land left back in POJK.   Recount of POJK DP families staying in J&K and 
other Indian States be made afresh and register to examine their entitlement of claim for interim 
package/compensation. 
3.2.1.2 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that as per the available 
records, 31,619 families were registered with the R ehabilitation Organisation, out of which 26,319 
families opted to settle down within the State itse lf and 5,300 families settled outside the State of 
J&K (Delhi 1,901 families, Maharashtra 123 families , Rajasthan 495 families and other States 2,781 
families).  Out of 26,319 families, around 22,719 families opted to settle in rural areas, whereas 3,600 
families settled in urban areas.   
3.2.1.3 The Ministry of Home affairs further submit ted that formal registration has already been done   
during 1960 to 1962 and after a lapse of over 50 ye ars, demand for fresh enumeration of the DPs will 
have practical problems. 
3.2.1.4 The Committee takes into account the fact t hat non-registered families are not given 
proper relief and compensation amount. The Committe e is of the view that for that purpose, 
their fresh enumeration is necessary. The Committee  also feels that in order to understand the 
problems being faced by PoJK DPs and to have update d policy guidelines for them, it is 
appropriate that their enumeration is done at the e arliest. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should take adequate  steps immediately to ensure official 
registration of Displaced Persons from PoJK in orde r to ensure that benefits of schemes meant 
for refugees and Displaced Persons reach the targetted group.        
3.2.2 Defreezing of Seats in Legislative Assembly 
 
3.2.2.1 The representatives of the affected persons  were of the view that 8 seats out of 24 Legislativ e 
Assembly seats which are designated for the territo rial constituencies of the State that lie in Pakist an 
Occupied Kashmir in favour of POJK DPs may be defreezed.   
3.2.2.2 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, State Government of J&K has informed that this 
needs amendment in the State Constitution.  
3.2.2.3 The Committee considers that the Government of Indi a should take up the matter of 
defreezing of 8 seats for POJK DPs with the State G overnment of J&K keeping in view the 

 32 
problems being faced by DPs. The Ministry may impre ss upon the State Government to make 
amendments in the State Constitution, if necessary, at the earliest.  
3.2.3 Sanctioning of Interim package  
3.2.3.1 It was demanded that an interim package be sanctioned for POJK DPs with compensation for 
loss of life, property, movable and immovable, and the suffering caused to them during last 65 years.   
3.2.3.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs viewed that re habilitation assistance has already been 
sanctioned/ paid from time to time to the urban as well as rural settlers.  
3.2.3.3 The Committee notes the above comments of t he Government but finds non seriousness 
in keeping its words. The Committee notes that unde r the assistance sanctioned in 1947-48 for 
rural settlers, 46 Basties constructed by rural set tlers on their own were regularized under the 
Slum Improvement Scheme of J&K.   However Rs.25 lak h for improvement of civic amenities 
in 46 regularized colonies were sanctioned under re habilitation package in the year 2000. One 
can imagine the number and level of facilities to be provided in a basti at  an average amount of 
Rs 54,000 in the year 2000. The Committee further n otes that for improvement of civic 
amenities in 46 recognized colonies, the State Gove rnment has constituted a Committee to 
prepare a survey report for improving the civic ame nities in the recognized colonies.  However, 
the survey report has not yet been finalized by the  State Govt.  Likewise, 123 urban settlers 
were given plots under assistance in 1947-48. There after, after 52 years, in the year 2000, an 
amount of Rs.2 crore was sanctioned for the allotme nt of plots to  the displaced persons who 
settled in urban areas of  J&K and were not allotted plots in the past . The Committee also takes 
note of the latest situation wherein the Ministry o f Home Affairs has informed that for making 
a payment of Rs.2 lakh per family in lieu of plot, in the year 2008, as per the report received 
from the State Govt., the work is still continuing and out of 198 applications received by them, 
48 applications were found complete. Out of these, 18 applications were placed before the 
verification committee, of which 6 applications have been approved, 2 have been rejected and in 
10 cases re-verification is required. Remaining 30 applications will be placed before the 
verification committee.   The Committee feels that this is taking unduly a long time and should 
be completed at the earliest.  
3.2.3.4 The Committee, without saying furthermore, feels that rehabilitation assistance has been 
awfully insufficient with very poor track record of  implementation. The Committee is of the 
strong opinion that the assistance being provided t o POJK DPs of 1947 must be sufficient for 
sustenance and therefore the sufficient interim relief be given immediately till the finalisation of 
one time compensation, which, according to the Gove rnment, is being incorporated in the 
package. The Committee also takes a serious note of the fact that the survey report has not been 
finalized and urges upon the Ministry of Home Affai rs to purse the state government to 
complete it at the earliest.    
3.2.4 One Time Compensation 
 
3.2.4.1 It was demanded by the representatives   th at one time compensation of Rs.30 lakh per family 
unit for POJK DPs should be given.  

 33 
3.2.4.2 According to the Union Government the State  Government has informed that the demand is 
being incorporated in the package. 
3.2.4.3 The Committee desires that one time compensation of  Rs. 30 Lakh may be included in 
the package and Ministry may ensure that the package is finalized. 
3.2.5 Slow Disbursal of Compensation 
 
 3.2.5.1 It was suggested that payment of compensat ion should be expedited in respect of the 
fund/package sanctioned to the State Govt. in 2008 which is going on very slowly.  Further Steps 
should be taken by the Govt. of India and State Gov t. of J&K to give compensation to the DP 
families. 
3.2.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that  already Rs.30.84 crores has been disbursed and 
the process is going on. The Govt. of India has alr eady asked the State Govt. to expedite the payment 
of compensation to the DPs and close the Scheme in the current year.   
3.2.5.3 The Ministry further informed that for miti gating the hardships of families who had migrated 
from Pak Occupied Kashmir (PoK) in the wake of Paki stani aggression in J&K in 1947, 
rehabilitation assistance had been sanctioned from time to time. Besides that, the GOI has advised the 
State Govt. to consider further demands which are as under;- 
(i) Consideration of additional 1950 land deficienc y claims received during the year 2004.   
(ii) Consideration of additional 640 applications f rom urban DPs after the cut-off date for 
allotment of plots.   
 
3.2.5.4 The Committee expresses its deep concern th at the payment of compensation in respect 
of fund/package sanctioned in 2008 is being impleme nted at snail’s pace affecting the lives of 
POJK DPs. The process should have been completed mu ch earlier. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Union Government must pursue th e matter with the State Government to 
expedite the implementation of the package without further delay.  
 
3.2.5.5 The Committee further recommends that the d emands of such DPs for consideration of 
additional 1950 land deficiency claims received dur ing the year 2004 and additional 640 
applications from urban DPs after the cut-off date for allotment of plots may be examined.  
Ministry of Home Affairs may take initiative to get  the issue resolved within one year and 
pursue the State Government in this regard. 
3.2.6 Inclusion of PoJK DPs in Dialogue on J&K 
 
3.2.6.1 It was demanded that the POJK DPs must be i ncluded in any dialogue on J&K at any level 
being the first victim and natural party to any settlement.   
3.2.6.2 In response to the demand, the Ministry  of  Home Affairs  opined that only those groups can 
be allowed to participate who are or will specifically be authorised to participate.  
3.2.6.3 The Committee is of the view that this demand needs  to be examined cautiously. The 
Committee feels that concerns of the displaced pers ons of PoJK should be taken into 

 34 
consideration before addressing their grievances for redressal. The channel for discussions with 
the representatives should be kept open so that they may have no feeling of being neglected. 
3.2.7 Constitution of Welfare and Relief Commission /Development Board  
3.2.7.1 The representatives of the affected persons  suggested that Welfare and Relief 
Commission/Development Board should be constituted for DPs of POJK, 1947 to look after the 
statistical/data base needs, economic support, soci al needs, employment needs and for working out 
the compensation etc.   
3.2.7.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs responded by s aying that already a separate office has been 
created for addressing their problems, and at this stage, there is no proposal for constitution of a 
Commission or Board for such DPs.  The Ministry in its written submission also mentioned that the 
Provincial Rehabilitation Organisation was constitu ted by the Government in the year 1950, which 
was disbanded in the month of October, 1982.  Thereafter, Govt. of J&K created a Rehabilitation Cell 
in 1984 to find out a solution for the matters related to the settlement of these DPs of 1947 from PoK , 
which is under the charge of Custodian, EP, Jammu E x-Officio PRO, Jammu who looks after the 
redressal problems of DPs of 1947. 
3.2.7.3 The Committee understands that the demands of the representatives of POJK DP of 
1947  for constitution of a Welfare and Relief Commission/Board for DPs of POJK, 1947 can be 
attributed to the reason that the existing office m eant for addressing their problems is not 
functioning effectively. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Welfare and Relief 
Commission/ Development Board with adequate infrast ructure may be constituted in view of 
the large number of people involved and number of issues to be addressed.  
3.2.8 Constitution of  a Committee 
 
3.2.8.1 The representatives argued that a Committee  should be constituted to look into the problems 
of POJK DPs.   
3.2.8.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs mentioned that  the Govt. had constituted Wadhwa Committee 
for addressing the issues of DPs.  The Committee ha s submitted its report and is presently pending 
with the Cabinet Sub-Committee for its consideration. 
3.2.8.3 The Committee feels that though Wadhwa Comm ittee submitted its report in the year 
2007, no action has been taken on its recommendatio ns. It is still with Cabinet sub-Committee. 
The report can not be kept pending indefinitely. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Union Government should take up the matter with  the State Government to expeditiously 
consider and implement the recommendations of Wadhwa Committee within six months . 
3.2.9 Publicity of Nodal Agency/Officer 
 
3.2.9.1 It was suggested to the Committee that the name(s) of nodal agency/officer for giving benefits 
to DPs of 1947 of POJK and its jurisdiction and power be publicised.   

 35 
3.2.9.2 The State Govt. of J&K has created a separa te organization, headed by Provincial   
Rehabilitation Officer, Jammu, for extending the be nefits for rehabilitation of POJK DPs, which is 
under the charge of Custodian, EP.  
3.2.9.3 The Committee is of the view that the Government should post on the internet the details 
of the name and telephone numbers of Provincial   R ehabilitation Officer, Jammu, and other 
associated agencies/officers for extending benefits  to DPs of 1947 of POJK along with its 
jurisdiction and powers as well as the procedure, i n simplified way, to be followed for making 
claims or redressal of grievances. This may also be  given wide publicity particularly in the 
areas where POJK DPs are living and other places. 
3.2.10 Reservation in technical and other professio nal colleges, special package for 
employment and interest free loans for  business  
3.2.10.1 It was vehemently demanded that reservatio n should be provided in technical and 
other professional colleges for children of POJK DP s, and special package should be given for 
employment of educated youth and interest free loans to establish their own business etc.   
3.2.10.2 The Government assured that the demand is being incorporated in the package. 
3.2.10.3 The Committee feels that since the concern  of POJK DPs for reservation in 
technical and professional colleges has already bee n accepted by the Government, its 
implementation on ground level should not be delaye d.   The Committee also desires that the 
Government may facilitate interest free/subsidized loans to POJK DPs to establish their 
business so that they can lead a settled life banki ng on their permanent source of livelihood. 
Employment drive for 5-10 years for the youths belo nging to POJK DPs should also be 
conducted. 
3.2.11  Monthly cash, ration money, exemption from income tax 
 
3.2.11.1 It was submitted that Displaced Persons of  1947 from POJK should be provided 
monthly cash doles, ration money, exemption from in come tax.  According to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs the Government of India has already approve d substantial package of relief and has also 
revised the package from time to time.   Therefore, this demand is not accepted. 
3.2.11.2 As mentioned earlier, The Committee is of the view that the rehabilitation 
assistances have been awfully insufficient with ver y poor track record of implementation. In 
view of the pathetic conditions of the displaced pe rsons, the Committee feels that Government 
may consider these demands in the package meant for  POJK DPs, keeping in view rising 
inflation and consequent impact on cost of living.    
3.2.12 Granting  State Subject to POJK refugees liv ing outside the State  
3.2.12.1 The representatives demanded that POJK ref ugees living outside the State may be 
given grant of State Subject including ration card, entry in voter list and municipal records etc.   

 36 
3.2.12.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has stated th at Permanent Residents of J&K Certificates 
are being issued as per the J&K Permanent Resident Certificates Act. Any person who has been or 
who is a resident of the State and fulfils the crit eria prescribed in the Act can obtain the PRC. The 
PRCs are required either for purchasing of property  within the State or seeking employment within 
the State and there is no other use for such PRCs outside J&K. 
3.2.12.3 The Committee desires that the matter may be discussed with the representatives 
of POJK DPs for solution. The Committee also desire s that one nodal officer may be appointed 
in Delhi for granting Permanent Resident certificat es to POJK DPs living outside the State of 
J&K as being done for Kashmiri migrants. A campaign  may be initiated to attract more and 
more POJK DPs living in other parts of the country by issuing advertisements in national 
dailies and the rules for applying the Permanent Resident Certificate may be simplified. 
3.2.13  Refugee status to POJK DPs  
3.2.13.1 It was also demanded that refugee status b e given to POJK DPs for availing benefits 
under National and International Laws.   
3.2.13.2 The Government put forth its opinion that the POJK DPs are the citizens of India and 
also the permanent residents of the State of J&K.  Hence, they cannot be treated as refugees. 
3.2.13.3 The Committee agrees that since POJK DPs a re the citizens of India and also 
permanent residents of the State, their mere displa cement cannot make them refugees as such.  
Government may, however, consider the benefits and other packages as admissible under the 
law. 
3.2.14  Allotment of land and inadequate land defic iency compensation 
 
3.2.14.1 It was brought to the notice of the Commit tee that the cabinet decision of 1954 
regarding allotment of evacuee /State land was not implemented in the right earnest. Roshni Scheme 
of J&K benefited illegal occupants of land and not refugees having land deficiencies.  
3.2.14.2 It was also informed that 1,62,000 kanals of evacuee land lies in the possession of 
Custodian Department for clearing pending cases of land deficiency. Custodian Department is leasing 
land to local persons and for commercial purposes t hereby depriving the refugees of the legitimate 
rights. It was suggested that the State /Custodian Department should take steps for allotment of land 
to refugees in the State of J&K having land deficiencies at the earliest.   
3.2.14.3 The representatives argued that the existi ng land deficiency compensation @ Rs.1.50 
lakh or land upto 5 kanal by the State Govt. is not sufficient.   
3.2.14.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that  the State Govt. had decided to allot land 
to POJK DPs as per cabinet order No. 578-C of 1954 dated 05/04/1954 and accordingly, 6,80,850 
kanals of EP land and 2,43,000 kanals of State land  were allotted to such families who opted to settle  
in rural areas. The Roshini scheme was implemented in pursuance of State Legislation. All residents 
of the State including POJK DPs  were entitled under the scheme.  

 37 
3.2.14.5 The  Government further informed that the families who were deficient of land have 
already been compensated. Compensation has already been paid @ Rs.30,000/- per kanal subject to 
ceiling of Rs.1.50 lacs per family against land def iciency. More than 2,500 families have already 
received this compensation and some more cases are in pipeline. The demand  for allotment of land to 
refugees in the State of J&K having land deficienci es has been met by providing cash compensation 
against the land deficiency.  
3.2.14.6 It was also stated that in 2008, the Gover nment of India had enhanced the 
compensation and there is no case to raise it again.  
3.2.14.7 The Committee, recommends that the amount of compensation for land 
deficiency may appropriately be reviewed. All those  families that have not received 
compensation may be given compensation immediately without any delay. 
3.2.15 Opening of  Jammu-Sialkot road  
3.2.15.1 It was suggested to the Committee that Jam mu-Sialkot road may be opened for trade 
and other activities.   
3.2.15.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs submitted tha t this  needs to be considered through the 
diplomatic channels and considering the state of Indo Pak relationship. 
3.2.15.3 The Committee is in agreement with the vie w of the Union Ministry of Home 
Affairs.    Efforts may be made to open Jammu-Sialk ot road for trade and other activities 
through the diplomatic channels .    
3.2.16 Actual Line of Control Certificates 
 
3.2.16.1 The representatives demanded that Actual L ine of Control (ALC) Certificates may be 
given to DP families of 1947 staying in the vicinit y of border areas in Jammu for getting jobs.  
Special package for the people living on Internatio nal border should be provided. People living in 
ALC should  be provided 5 marlas of land in any saf e area to construct houses and provide proper 
housing colonies for the DPs living in refugee camps under inhuman conditions.   
3.2.16.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that  the benefit of reservation is being 
provided to such persons who have settled along the  ALC. The areas falling under ALC have already 
been notified.  The State Govt. has reported that the matter of providing 5 marlas of land to the people 
living on International border/ALC in any safe area will be looked into.  
3.2.16.3 The Committee feels that the need of issua nce of ALC Certificate to DP families 
of 1947 staying in the vicinity of border areas in Jammu may be due to the fact that such 
certificate would enable the DPs to avail the benef its of reservation by proving that they are the 
residents of areas falling under ALC. Mere notifica tion might not be sufficient for proof. 
Government should arrange for issuance of ALC Certificates to DP families of 1947 . 

 38 
3.2.16.4 The Committee also recommends that the iss ue of providing five marlas of land 
to the people living on International border/ALC, i n any safe area may be considered 
sympathetically and an early decision may be taken.  
3.2.17  Compensation against land used for mining/f encing  
3.2.17.1 The representatives asked for alternate pl ace/cash compensation to the families whose 
land is falling under border fencing ditches/mines.   
3.2.17.2 The Union Ministry of Home Affairs submitt ed that the State Government has 
informed that the issue will be looked into. Howeve r, rent is being paid to the persons whose land is 
occupied by the forces for mining/fencing purposes.    
3.2.17.3 In view of the Committee rent is different  and it cannot be compared with 
compensation. Since the State Government has agreed  to consider it, the Committee 
recommends that early decision may be taken sympathetically. 
3.2.18  Exemption from paying rent  
3.2.18.1 It was submitted that the DPs staying in C ustodian Houses may be exempted from rent 
and these houses be allotted to them permanently.   
3.2.18.2 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs meagre rent is being charged from DP’s 
for the quarters allotted in their favour. The Ministry also informed that the State Govt. has stated that 
occupancy tenancy rights were given under the Agrar ian Reforms Act and These rights are more or 
less absolute in the sense that the allottees can t ransfer the right of occupancy tenancy by sale, gif t or 
exchange without permission of Government. 
3.2.18.3 When once occupancy tenancy rights were gi ven to DPs under the Agrarian 
Reforms Act and these rights are more or less absol ute in the sense that the allottees can 
transfer the right of occupancy tenancy by sale, gi ft or exchange without permission of 
Government, then the Committee feels to understand as to how the rent is being charged from 
the DPs for the houses. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs in tandem with the State Government should clarify the stand on the issue at the earliest 
to clear the apprehension of the allottees. 
3.2.19  Equal treatment to  all Displaced persons 
 
3.2.19.1 It was mentioned that all the DP families of 1947 should be treated equally in terms of 
allotment of land, cash compensation in lieu of lan d deficiency and payment of other benefits.  DPs 
from PoJK, irrespective of the year they reached here should be treated as one lot.  
3.2.19.2 Accordingly to the Ministry of Home Affair s each category of DPs is being treated as 
per the package/facilities announced from time to t ime. Only those who had come within the crucial 
period between September, 1947 to December, 1950  h ave been treated as one lot. Those who came 
after the crucial period cannot be given the status of DPs of POJK. The left over families did not fulfil 

 39 
the prescribed criteria for registration. Therefore, their cases for registration were rejected. There fore, 
this demand for registration after a lapse of 50 years   is not accepted. 
3.2.19.3 The Committee feels that though all may no t be treated at par, but, their 
problems need to be addressed properly and suitable solution should be found. 
 
3.3 CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS (DPs) OF 1965 AND 1971  (CAMP) & (NON-
CAMP)  
3.3.1 One time compensation  
3.3.1.1 It was demanded by the representatives of t he affected persons that one time compensation, 
not less than Rs.25 lakh for each family for the pr operty left by the Displaced Persons of 1965 and 
Displaced persons of 1971 (camp) & (non-camp), shou ld be given. Besides, one time ex-gratia 
payment @ Rs.25 lakh each family should also be mad e to all DPs of Chhamb 1965 and 1971 for the 
losses suffered due to successive wars Pakistan. Mo nthly stipend may be given to landless and 
homeless families of DPs of 1965 and 1971 as being paid to Kashmiri Migrants or they should be 
allotted 10 Marla plots.  
3.3.1.2 Commenting on the above demands, the Minist ry of Home Affairs submitted that  State 
Government has informed that a  separate proposal i s being submitted in regard to one time 
compensation. Proposal has not been received from t he State Government on the issue of one time 
ex-gratia payment to all DPs of Chhamb Sector 1965 @ Rs.25 lakh each family for the losses 
suffered due to three successive wars of Pakistan. Already the families settled in rural areas have been 
provided land and there is no question of Monthly s tipend. The Ministry further stated that out of 
total number of 4600 families in Chhamb 1971 (camp)  category, 3900 families were allotted land.  
Rest of the families were excluded because some (30 0) families were not agriculturists. Some (182) 
families were serving soldier families and some (21 8) families were widows and destitutes.  Special 
assistance for widows and destitutes was given whic h inter alia included pension of Rs.60/- per 
month, ad-hoc maintenance grant of Rs.300/-, specia l resettlement grant of Rs.100/-, housing grant 
upto Rs.5000/- and small housing plots.   
3.3.1.3 The Committee is of the considered view tha t there should not be any more delay in 
formulating substantive proposal for one time compe nsation for DPs of 1965 and 1971 (camp) 
& (non-camp). The Committee desires that the provis ions of the proposal must be 
comprehensive, addressing all issues and demands of  DPs of 1965 and 1971 (camp) & (non-
camp), keeping in view the suffering of the displac ed persons, for ensuring them decent and 
dignified lives. The Committee also desires that th eir request for monthly stipend to land less 
and house less persons/families as being paid to Ka shmiri Migrants may be considered till 
finalisation of the substantive proposal. Issue of allotting plots of suitable size to homeless and 
landless DPs may also be looked into. 
 
 

 40 
3.3.2 Occupancy/tenancy rights  
3.3.2.1 According to the representatives of DPs, th e Occupancy/tenancy rights of evacuee land u/s 
3/A of Agrarian Reform Act 1976 to the Chhamb DPs o f 1965 and 1971should be given to remove 
the disparity with DPs of PoK 1947. Five marlas of land in any safe area should be provided for the 
people living on International border/ALC under special package.   
3.3.2.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs in its earlier  communication informed that the issue of 
Occupancy/tenancy rights of evacuee land needs amen dment in the Agrarian Reforms Act, 1976. 
Already the matter has been taken up with the Law D eptt. for making amendments in the Act.   It is 
expected that in the coming Session, this issue may  be resolved.  The Ministry in its latest 
communication  informed that the ownership right in  respect of State land allotted to the Chhamb 
Displace Persons of 1971 (camp) has been given duri ng the year 2000, however their demand for 
occupancy right in respect of EP land is still an i ssue. All the Chhamb Displaced persons of 1971 
(camp) except 27 families, were allotted plots in r ural areas in various 129 bastis.  Those families 
who could not be allotted full quota of prescribed scale of land, a scheme for making cash 
compensation in lieu of deficient allotable units of land was worked out.  699 families were identified 
for cash compensation.  However, 677 families have been paid cash compensation ranging from Rs. 
1000 to Rs. 5000 in the year 1992.  There were 463 left out families who are demanding cash 
compensation in lieu of land deficiency.   
3.3.2.3 The Committee takes note of the fact as nar rated by the Ministry of Home Affairs that 
the issue of conferring  occupancy/tenancy rights o f evacuee land has not yet been addressed.   
This right is necessary  to eliminate the disparity  with DPs of PoK 1947. The Committee also 
takes note of the hope expressed by the Government that in the coming Session, this issue may 
be resolved.  The Committee is disappointed with th e latest situation at hand and feels that 
nothing has moved at the ground level. The Committe e would like to impress upon the 
Government that necessary amendment in the Agrarian  Reforms Act of 1976 may be brought 
at the earliest to settle the long pending issue. 
3.3.3 Land deficiency compensation and equal treatm ent 
 
3.3.3.1 The representatives demanded that cash comp ensation in lieu of land deficiency to DPs of 
1965 and 1971 should be given as has been given to DPs of 1947. Adequate compensation not less 
than Rs.30 lakh per family, as per present existing  cost for the property left by the DPs of 1965 and 
DPs of 1971, should be provided. It was also reques ted that all the DP families of 1965 and 1971 
should be treated equally in terms of allotment of land, cash compensation in lieu of land deficiency 
and payment of other benefits like cash compensation /relief/rental payments for the land occupied by 
the BSF/Army for border fencing etc.  
 3.3.3.2 The Committee has noted form the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs that the 
proposal for cash compensation in lieu of land defi ciency and compensation not less than Rs. 30 lakh 
for each family will be considered appropriately af ter the same is received from the State 
Government. Each category of DPs is being treated as per the package/facilities announced from time 
to time. The Ministry of Home Affairs also apprised  the Committee that  the RD Kapoor Committee 
had not agreed to treat the non-camp DPs of 1971 at  par with the camp DPs of 1971 on the ground 
that the non-camp DPs were not actually residing in  Chhamb Area at the time of Indo-Pak conflict of 

 41 
1971, but were continuing to live elsewhere in J&K.  They had some source of livelihood outside 
Chhamb to fall back upon, whereas the camp DPs had lost everything and had to make a fresh start in 
life. On the issue of cash compensation /relief/ren tal payments, the State Govt. has informed that the  
matter shall be resolved once the amendment is made to the Agrarian Reforms Act.   
3.3.3.3 The Committee is of the view that since cas h compensation in lieu of land deficiency is 
being given to DPs of 1947, on the similar line, ca sh compensation must also be given to  DPs of 
1965 and 1971 in lieu of land deficiency. The Commi ttee fails to understand as to why State 
Government is delaying formulation of the proposal and forwarding the same to Central 
Government for consideration. The Committee, theref ore, strongly, recommends that Ministry 
of Home Affairs may impress upon the State Governme nt to formulate the proposal without 
any further loss of time and send the same for approval.    
3.3.4 Reservation in  educational Institution and e mployment  
 
3.3.4.1 It was demanded that reservation quota for education to the wards of DPs of 1965  and 1971 
should be provided as has been provided to the ward s of Kashmiri Migrants. Backward status should 
also be given to all poor DPs to seek employment in  Govt. jobs. State Cabinet decision regarding 
inclusion of areas within 8 km of International bor der area in the list of socially and educationally 
backward classes should be implemented and special  recruitment drive be taken up in the armed and 
paramilitary forces with relaxation to displaced youths of DPs.  
3.3.4.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that  the DPs of 1965 (Chhamb) and 1971 cannot be 
equated with the Kashmiri migrants. The backward ar eas in the State have already been notified and 
any DP residing within such jurisdiction can avail benefits of reservation either for employment or 
education.   State Government has informed that the    matter will be considered on merits. The State 
Govt. has informed that the matter of implementatio n of State Cabinet decision No.133/12 will be 
looked into.   Recruitment of Constable in CAPFs is being conducted as per scheme, in which 60% of 
vacancies are being allotted amongst all States on the basis of population ratio, 20% vacancies are 
allotted to border districts falling within the are a of responsibility of Border Guarding Forces and 
20% vacancies in Border Guarding Forces are allotte d to the militancy affected areas including J&K, 
as notified from time to time. 
3.3.4.3 The Committee recommends that wards of displaced pe rsons of 1965 and 1971 may be 
given preference for getting admission in education al institutions as a level-playing mechanism. 
The Government may consider the request of DPs of 1 965 and 1971 for reservation for 
employment in Govt. jobs to ensure guaranteed means  of livelihood. Employment drive for the 
youths belonging to POJK DPs should also be conduct ed.  Since the State Government has 
agreed to consider request for reservation to DPs l iving within notified backward areas, the 
Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken in the matter. 
3.3.5 Issuance of  ALC Certificates 
 
3.3.5.1 It was suggested that the ALC Certificates may be given to DP families of 1965 and 1971 in 
accordance with the notification No.174-GD dated 08 .07.1971 staying in the vicinity of border areas 
in Jammu for getting jobs.  

 42 
3.3.5.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs stated that th e benefit of reservation is being provided to such 
persons who have settled along the ALC. The areas f alling under ALC have already been notified. 
Already there is reservation in favour of such pers ons who reside near ALC/ LoC. Any DP living 
within the notified area is entitled for such benefit.     
3.3.5.3 The Committee feels that due to  lack of aw areness and low level of education, the DPs 
may be finding difficult to follow procedure in get ting ALC certificates. The Procedure for 
getting ALC certificates could be cumbersome, and i f it is so, the procedure may be simplified 
and a drive may be undertaken to encourage eligible DPs for procuring ALC certificates.  
3.3.6 Constitution of  Development Board  
 
3.3.6.1 The representatives of displaced persons we re of the view that a Development Board for DPs 
may be formed by the State Govt. on the pattern of Gujjar Development Board. Establishment of 
APEX Committee and creation of separate cell in all  Deputy Commissioners Headquarters for 
dealing with the DPs of 1965 and 1971 matters may be considered.   
3.3.6.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that there is no such proposal at present in the State 
Government for constitution of a Development Board.  State Government has informed that if 
required, action shall be taken for creation of separate cell. 
3.3.6.3 The Committee feels  that plethora of insti tutional arrangement is not going to 
ameliorate the conditions of DPs as the same would complicate the system causing dalay in 
seeking  justice. Therefore, an institutional struc ture should be created to address all the issues 
of DPs at a single window. 
3.3.7 Exemption from paying rent 
 
 
3.3.7.1 It was submitted before the Committee that DPs staying in Custodian Houses may be excused 
from rent and these houses should be allotted to th em permanently. DPs should be permitted to repair 
and make addition and alteration in their original accommodation.  
3.3.7.2 According to the Ministry of Home Affairs m eagre rent is being charged from the DPs for the 
quarters allotted in their favour. Therefore, this demand cannot be accepted.  Repair and modification  
work already being done after getting permission from Custodian.  
3.3.7.3 The Committee feels that payment of even the meagre rent may be difficult for DPs. The 
Committee recommends that this issue may be reconsi dered. Repair work and minor 
modification may be allowed without permission from  any authority but major change may be 
done only after seeking permission from appropriate authority.    
3.3.8 Registration of left out DPs  
3.3.8.1 It was demanded that all left out DP families of 1965 and 1971 be registered.   
3.3.8.2 Responding to this demand, the Ministry of Home Affairs opined that State Government 
should examine the issue of registration of left out DP families of 1965 and 1971. 

 43 
3.3.8.3 The Committee recommends that Ministry of H ome Affairs may impress upon the State 
Government to take early decision on the issue of r egistration of left out Displaced Persons’ 
families of 1965 and 1971. 
3.3.9 Implementation of Wadhwa committee and interl ocutors’ reports 
 
3.3.9.1 The representatives demanded that recommend ations of Wadhwa Committee constituted by 
the State Government, and recommendations of Interl ocutors' Report headed by Shri Dilip 
Padgaonkar may be implemented.   
3.3.9.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the C ommittee that the matter is before Cabinet Sub-
Committee for further deliberations. The matter has  already been taken up with the State 
Government. 
3.3.9.3 The Committee desires that early decision m ay be taken for implementing the 
recommendations of Wadhwa Committee and Interlocuto rs’ Report. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government.  
****** 

 44 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
WEST PAKISTANI REFUGEES (WPRs) 
 
Permanent Resident Certificate and Voting Right  
 The Committee expresses its serious concern that t he West Pakistani Refugees, who are 
very much citizens of India and eligible for voting  in Parliamentary elections do not  possess 
right to vote in the State Legislative Assembly ele ctions on the pretext that they are not 
permanent residents of the State in terms of the J& K Constitution. The Committee feels that 
though they are living there for more than 60 years , they are not leading the life of free citizens 
despite having voting rights for Parliament. This right has not earned them any special benefits. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Central Government must impress upon the 
State Government to consider, as a one time measure , the demand of West Pakistani Refugees 
to grant them the status of permanent residents of the State sympathetically so that they can 
live  as state subject in a dignified way, with all  legal rights including right to vote in State 
Legislative Assembly.   
(Para 3.1.1.7) 
Provision of State Government Jobs  
 The Committee feels that once the permanent reside nt right is granted to West Pakistani 
Refugees, all subsidiary benefits would automatical ly follow enabling them to lead decent life. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that J&K Constitution may be amended for conferring 
the status of State Subject on the WPRs at the earl iest. These people have already suffered for 
more than 60 years and the issue brooks no delay. T he Committee also recommends that 
pending final decision in the matter, a temporary w aiver may be made for admission of the 
children in the professional institutions.   
(Para 3.1.2.3) 
Reservation in Central Government Jobs/Central Professional Colleges  
 The Committee is of the view that since the State Government has agreed, in- principle, 
to incorporate the provision of reservation for the  wards of WPRs in jobs, the State 
Government should not delay in processing the matte r. State Government should honour  the  
suggestion of the Supreme Court for issuing appropriate executive order to make WPRs eligible 
for admission in State professional/technical colle ges as it is not linked to the permanent 
resident status of these persons. The Committee als o desires that the matter of issuance of SC 
and OBC Certificates to eligible WPRs should be expedited .  
(Para 3.1.3.3) 
 The Committee also takes note of the assurance giv en by the Home Secretary for 
admission to the wards of WPRs in engineering and m edical colleges in J&K. The Committee 

 45 
has already made a separate recommendation to addre ss the issue of permanent resident 
certificate so that the children may get admission in engineering and medical colleges in J&K. 
Besides that, as assured by the Home Secretary, a m echanism may be explored to provide 
reservation to the wards of WPRs in engineering, me dical and other related institutions of 
higher education across the country. The Committee also recommends that, if necessary, the 
minimum benchmark required for admission in such in stitutions may be relaxed for those 
wards because of their lower educational standard. 
(Para 3.1.3.4) 
Opening of KVs/NVs for WPRs  
 The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Home Secretary to work out the 
best possible mechanism to have an educational syst em set up for them, either Kendriya 
Vidyalaya or Navodaya Vidyalaya. The Committee stro ngly recommends that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs may, in consultation with the Ministry  of Human Resource Development, work 
out some mechanism for opening schools by the Centr al Government for the wards of WPRs. 
This may be done at the earliest so that the next academic session may start in those schools.   
(Para 3.1.4.2) 
One Time Package, Monthly Monetary Assistance and Accommodation  
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Central  Government should impress 
upon the State Government for early finalization of one time financial package for settlement of 
WPRs. The Committee is of the considered view that even if West Pakistani Refugees cannot be 
equated with the Kashmir Pandits migrants, but they  deserve immediate relief and 
rehabilitation for sustenance without delay. One ti me compensation of Rs. 30 Lakhs may be 
provided within one year and there should not be any delay in the matter. 
(Para 3.1.5.3) 
Creation of separate battalion in State Police, Army and Para Military Forces  
 The Committee taking a serious note of the casual reply by the Government 
recommends that Union Government should persuade th e State Government to initiate action 
to implement the announcement made for the creation  of separate battalion in State Police, 
Army and Para Military Forces from among the youths of the WPRs.  
(Para 3.1.6.3) 
Reservation of Seats in Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council  
 The Committee is of the considered view that citiz ens of India must have the right to 
elect and get elected in all representative bodies to enhance the strength of democracy. WPRs 
should get permanent resident status sooner for fos tering complete faith in democracy. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Home Affa irs may pursue with the State 

 46 
Government to examine the issue of reservation of s eats in the Legislative Assembly and 
Legislative Council of the State for WPRs, and if n ecessary, may move for necessary 
amendment to J&K Constitution. 
(Para 3.1.7.3) 
DISPLACED PERSONS FROM POJK IN 1947  
Official registration of DPs of 1947  
 The Committee takes into account the fact that non -registered families are not given 
proper relief and compensation amount. The Committe e is of the view that for that purpose, 
their fresh enumeration is necessary. The Committee  also feels that in order to understand the 
problems being faced by PoJK DPs and to have update d policy guidelines for them, it is 
appropriate that their enumeration is done at the e arliest. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should take adequate  steps immediately to ensure official 
registration of Displaced Persons from PoJK in orde r to ensure that benefits of schemes meant 
for refugees and Displaced Persons reach the targetted group.        
(Para 3.2.1.4) 
Defreezing of Seats in Legislative Assembly  
 The Committee considers that the Government of Indi a should take up the matter of 
defreezing of 8 seats for POJK DPs with the State G overnment of J&K keeping in view the 
problems being faced by DPs. The Ministry may impre ss upon the State Government to make 
amendments in the State Constitution, if necessary, at the earliest.  
(Para 3.2.2.3) 
Sanctioning of Interim package  
 The Committee notes the above comments of the Gove rnment but finds non seriousness 
in keeping its words. The Committee notes that unde r the assistance sanctioned in 1947-48 for 
rural settlers, 46 Basties constructed by rural set tlers on their own were regularized under the 
Slum Improvement Scheme of J&K.   However Rs.25 lak h for improvement of civic amenities 
in 46 regularized colonies were sanctioned under re habilitation package in the year 2000. One 
can imagine the number and level of facilities to be provided in a basti at  an average amount of 
Rs 54,000 in the year 2000. The Committee further n otes that for improvement of civic 
amenities in 46 recognized colonies, the State Gove rnment has constituted a Committee to 
prepare a survey report for improving the civic ame nities in the recognized colonies.  However, 
the survey report has not yet been finalized by the  State Govt.  Likewise, 123 urban settlers 
were given plots under assistance in 1947-48. There after, after 52 years, in the year 2000, an 
amount of Rs.2 crore was sanctioned for the allotme nt of plots to  the displaced persons who 
settled in urban areas of  J&K and were not allotted plots in the past . The Committee also takes 
note of the latest situation wherein the Ministry o f Home Affairs has informed that for making 
a payment of Rs.2 lakh per family in lieu of plot, in the year 2008, as per the report received 

 47 
from the State Govt., the work is still continuing and out of 198 applications received by them, 
48 applications were found complete. Out of these, 18 applications were placed before the 
verification committee, of which 6 applications have been approved, 2 have been rejected and in 
10 cases re-verification is required. Remaining 30 applications will be placed before the 
verification committee.   The Committee feels that this is taking unduly a long time and should 
be completed at the earliest.  
(Para 3.2.3.3) 
 The Committee, without saying furthermore, feels that rehabilitation assistance has been 
awfully insufficient with very poor track record of  implementation. The Committee is of the 
strong opinion that the assistance being provided t o POJK DPs of 1947 must be sufficient for 
sustenance and therefore the sufficient interim relief be given immediately till the finalisation of 
one time compensation, which, according to the Gove rnment, is being incorporated in the 
package. The Committee also takes a serious note of the fact that the survey report has not been 
finalized and urges upon the Ministry of Home Affai rs to purse the state government to 
complete it at the earliest.    
(Para 3.2.3.4) 
One Time Compensation  
 The Committee desires that one time compensation of  Rs. 30 Lakh may be included in 
the package and Ministry may ensure that the package is finalized. 
(Para 3.2.4.3) 
Slow Disbursal of Compensation  
 The Committee expresses its deep concern that the payment of compensation in respect 
of fund/package sanctioned in 2008 is being impleme nted at snail’s pace affecting the lives of 
POJK DPs. The process should have been completed mu ch earlier. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Union Government must pursue th e matter with the State Government to 
expedite the implementation of the package without further delay.  
 
(Para 3.2.5.4) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the demands of such DPs for consideration of 
additional 1950 land deficiency claims received dur ing the year 2004 and additional 640 
applications from urban DPs after the cut-off date for allotment of plots may be examined.  
Ministry of Home Affairs may take initiative to get  the issue resolved within one year and 
pursue the State Government in this regard. 
(Para 3.2.5.5) 
 

 48 
Inclusion of PoJK DPs in Dialogue on J&K  
 The Committee is of the view that this demand needs  to be examined cautiously. The 
Committee feels that concerns of the displaced pers ons of PoJK should be taken into 
consideration before addressing their grievances for redressal. The channel for discussions with 
the representatives should be kept open so that they may have no feeling of being neglected. 
(Para 3.2.6.3) 
Constitution of Welfare and Relief Commission/Development Board  
 The Committee understands that the demands of the representatives of POJK DP of 
1947  for constitution of a Welfare and Relief Commission/Board for DPs of POJK, 1947 can be 
attributed to the reason that the existing office m eant for addressing their problems is not 
functioning effectively. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Welfare and Relief 
Commission/ Development Board with adequate infrast ructure may be constituted in view of 
the large number of people involved and number of issues to be addressed.  
(Para 3.2.7.3) 
Constitution of  a Committee  
 The Committee feels that though Wadhwa Committee s ubmitted its report in the year 
2007, no action has been taken on its recommendatio ns. It is still with Cabinet sub-Committee. 
The report can not be kept pending indefinitely. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Union Government should take up the matter with  the State Government to expeditiously 
consider and implement the recommendations of Wadhwa Committee within six months . 
(Para 3.2.8.3) 
Publicity of Nodal Agency/Officer  
 The Committee is of the view that the Government s hould post on the internet the details 
of the name and telephone numbers of Provincial   R ehabilitation Officer, Jammu, and other 
associated agencies/officers for extending benefits  to DPs of 1947 of POJK along with its 
jurisdiction and powers as well as the procedure, i n simplified way, to be followed for making 
claims or redressal of grievances. This may also be  given wide publicity particularly in the 
areas where POJK DPs are living and other places. 
(Para 3.2.9.3) 
Reservation in technical and other professional col leges, special package for employment and 
interest free loans for  business  
 The Committee feels that since the concern of POJK  DPs for reservation in technical 
and professional colleges has already been accepted  by the Government, its implementation on 
ground level should not be delayed.   The Committee  also desires that the Government may 

 49 
facilitate interest free/subsidized loans to POJK D Ps to establish their business so that they can 
lead a settled life banking on their permanent sour ce of livelihood. Employment drive for 5-10 
years for the youths belonging to POJK DPs should also be conducted. 
(Para 3.2.10.3) 
 
Monthly cash, ration money, exemption from income tax 
 
 As mentioned earlier, The Committee is of the view  that the rehabilitation assistances 
have been awfully insufficient with very poor track  record of implementation. In view of the 
pathetic conditions of the displaced persons, the C ommittee feels that Government may 
consider these demands in the package meant for POJ K DPs, keeping in view rising inflation 
and consequent impact on cost of living.    
(Para 3.2.11.2) 
Granting  State Subject to POJK refugees living outside the State  
 The Committee desires that the matter may be discu ssed with the representatives of 
POJK DPs for solution. The Committee also desires t hat one nodal officer may be appointed in 
Delhi for granting Permanent Resident certificates to POJK DPs living outside the State of 
J&K as being done for Kashmiri migrants. A campaign  may be initiated to attract more and 
more POJK DPs living in other parts of the country by issuing advertisements in national 
dailies and the rules for applying the Permanent Resident Certificate may be simplified. 
(Para 3.2.12.3) 
Refugee status to POJK DPs  
 The Committee agrees that since POJK DPs are the c itizens of India and also permanent 
residents of the State, their mere displacement can not make them refugees as such.  
Government may, however, consider the benefits and other packages as admissible under the 
law. 
(Para 3.2.13.3) 
Allotment of land and inadequate land deficiency compensation  
 The Committee, recommends that the amount of compe nsation for land deficiency may 
appropriately be reviewed. All those families that have not received compensation may be given 
compensation immediately without any delay. 
(Para 3.2.14.7) 
 

 50 
Opening of  Jammu-Sialkot road  
 The Committee is in agreement with the view of the  Union Ministry of Home Affairs.    
Efforts may be made to open Jammu-Sialkot road for trade and other activities through the 
diplomatic channels .    
(Para 3.2.15.3) 
Actual Line of Control Certificates  
 The Committee feels that the need of issuance of A LC Certificate to DP families of 1947 
staying in the vicinity of border areas in Jammu ma y be due to the fact that such certificate 
would enable the DPs to avail the benefits of reser vation by proving that they are the residents 
of areas falling under ALC. Mere notification might  not be sufficient for proof. Government 
should arrange for issuance of ALC Certificates to DP families of 1947 . 
(Para 3.2.16.3) 
 The Committee also recommends that the issue of pr oviding five marlas of land to the 
people living on International border/ALC, in any s afe area may be considered sympathetically 
and an early decision may be taken.  
(Para 3.2.16.4) 
Compensation against land used for mining/fencing  
 In view of the Committee rent is different and it cannot be compared with compensation. 
Since the State Government has agreed to consider i t, the Committee recommends that early 
decision may be taken sympathetically. 
(Para 3.2.17.3) 
Exemption from paying rent  
 When once occupancy tenancy rights were given to D Ps under the Agrarian Reforms 
Act and these rights are more or less absolute in t he sense that the allottees can transfer the 
right of occupancy tenancy by sale, gift or exchang e without permission of Government, then 
the Committee feels to understand as to how the ren t is being charged from the DPs for the 
houses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that t he Ministry of Home Affairs in tandem 
with the State Government should clarify the stand on the issue at the earliest to clear the 
apprehension of the allottees. 
(Para 3.2.18.3) 
 
 

 51 
Equal treatment to  all Displaced persons  
 The Committee feels that though all may not be tre ated at par, but, their problems need 
to be addressed properly and suitable solution should be found. 
(Para 3.2.19.3) 
CHHAMB DISPLACED PERSONS (DPs) OF 1965 AND 1971 (CAMP) & (NON-CAMP)  
One time compensation  
 The Committee is of the considered view that there  should not be any more delay in 
formulating substantive proposal for one time compe nsation for DPs of 1965 and 1971 (camp) 
& (non-camp). The Committee desires that the provis ions of the proposal must be 
comprehensive, addressing all issues and demands of  DPs of 1965 and 1971 (camp) & (non-
camp), keeping in view the suffering of the displac ed persons, for ensuring them decent and 
dignified lives. The Committee also desires that th eir request for monthly stipend to land less 
and house less persons/families as being paid to Ka shmiri Migrants may be considered till 
finalisation of the substantive proposal. Issue of allotting plots of suitable size to homeless and 
landless DPs may also be looked into. 
(Para 3.3.1.3) 
Occupancy/tenancy rights  
 The Committee takes note of the fact as narrated b y the Ministry of Home Affairs that 
the issue of conferring  occupancy/tenancy rights o f evacuee land has not yet been addressed.   
This right is necessary  to eliminate the disparity  with DPs of PoK 1947. The Committee also 
takes note of the hope expressed by the Government that in the coming Session, this issue may 
be resolved.  The Committee is disappointed with th e latest situation at hand and feels that 
nothing has moved at the ground level. The Committe e would like to impress upon the 
Government that necessary amendment in the Agrarian  Reforms Act of 1976 may be brought 
at the earliest to settle the long pending issue. 
(Para 3.3.2.3) 
Land deficiency compensation and equal treatment  
 The Committee is of the view that since cash compe nsation in lieu of land deficiency is 
being given to DPs of 1947, on the similar line, ca sh compensation must also be given to  DPs of 
1965 and 1971 in lieu of land deficiency. The Commi ttee fails to understand as to why State 
Government is delaying formulation of the proposal and forwarding the same to Central 
Government for consideration. The Committee, theref ore, strongly, recommends that Ministry 
of Home Affairs may impress upon the State Governme nt to formulate the proposal without 
any further loss of time and send the same for approval.    
(Para 3.3.3.3) 

 52 
Reservation in  educational Institution and employment  
 
 The Committee recommends that wards of displaced pe rsons of 1965 and 1971 may be 
given preference for getting admission in education al institutions as a level-playing mechanism. 
The Government may consider the request of DPs of 1 965 and 1971 for reservation for 
employment in Govt. jobs to ensure guaranteed means  of livelihood. Employment drive for the 
youths belonging to POJK DPs should also be conduct ed.  Since the State Government has 
agreed to consider request for reservation to DPs l iving within notified backward areas, the 
Committee recommends that an early decision may be taken in the matter. 
(Para 3.3.4.3) 
Issuance of  ALC Certificates  
 The Committee feels that due to  lack of awareness  and low level of education, the DPs 
may be finding difficult to follow procedure in get ting ALC certificates. The Procedure for 
getting ALC certificates could be cumbersome, and i f it is so, the procedure may be simplified 
and a drive may be undertaken to encourage eligible DPs for procuring ALC certificates.  
(Para 3.3.5.3) 
 
Constitution of  Development Board 
 
 
 The Committee feels  that plethora of institutiona l arrangement is not going to 
ameliorate the conditions of DPs as the same would complicate the system causing dalay in 
seeking  justice. Therefore, an institutional struc ture should be created to address all the issues 
of DPs at a single window. 
(Para 3.3.6.3) 
Exemption from paying rent  
 
 The Committee feels that payment of even the meagr e rent may be difficult for DPs. The 
Committee recommends that this issue may be reconsi dered. Repair work and minor 
modification may be allowed without permission from  any authority but major change may be 
done only after seeking permission from appropriate authority.    
(Para 3.3.7.3) 
Registration of left out DPs  
 The Committee recommends that Ministry of Home Aff airs may impress upon the State 
Government to take early decision on the issue of r egistration of left out Displaced Persons’ 
families of 1965 and 1971. 
(Para 3.3.8.3) 
 

 53 
Implementation of Wadhwa committee and interlocutors’ reports  
 The Committee desires that early decision may be t aken for implementing the 
recommendations of Wadhwa Committee and Interlocuto rs’ Report. The Ministry of Home 
Affairs may pursue the matter with the State Government.  
(Para 3.3.9.3) 

 54 
ANNEXURE 
Composition of the Sub-Committee on Action Taken on 137 th  Report on Rehabilitation 
of J & K Migrants of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs (2013) 
 
Rajya Sabha 
(1)  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy   -  Convenor  
(2)  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(3)  Shri Santiuse Kujur 
(4)  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
 
Lok Sabha 
(5)  Shri Naveen Jindal  - Co-convenor   
(6)  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
(7)  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
(8)  Shri Ramen Deka 
(9)  Shri Datta Meghe 
(10)  Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
(11)  Shri Rathod Ramesh  
(12)  Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
(13)  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
****** 