C. S. (H.A.)- 55 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1996-97) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on the 30th August, 1996) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 30, 1996/Bhadra 8, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. !NTRODUCfiON (iii) 
3. REPORT 1-14 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 15-23 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Som Pal -Chairman 
RAJYA SADHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
11. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata ·Banerjee 
27. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O.H . Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri ldris Ali 
31. Shri Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
33. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
(i) 

34. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
39. Shri N.S.V. Chithan 
· 40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj. Singh 
42. Shri . Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint ~ecretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit its Thirty-third Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Report on 
the Demands for Grants (1996-97) relating to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions. 
2. Tite Committee while making its recommendations/observations has mainly relied upon 
the following:-
(i) Detailed Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministry; 
(ii) Explanatory Note on the Demands received from the Ministry; 
(iii) Annual Report (1996-97) of the Ministry; 
(iv) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires sent to it by the 
Secretariat; 
(v) Presentations made by the Secretary of the Ministry on 14th and 20th August, 1996; 
(vi) Written clarifications on the points/issues raised by the Members in the meeting of 
the Committee. 
3. The Committee considered the Report in its meetings held o'n 27th and 29th August, 
1996 and adopted the same at its meeting held on 29th August , 1996. 
New DELHI; 
August 29, 1996 
(iii) 
SOMPAL 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

REPORT 
The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was created as a separate 
Ministry from 1970 onwards in pursuance of the recommendations of the Administrative 
Reforms Commission (ARC). The ARC felt that the size of the Civil Services in the country 
warranted that a separate Ministry be created to deal with manifold problems which had 
emerged. However, the ARC recommended that this Ministry should always be under the 
charge of the Prime Minister. It was earlier created as a Department and in March, 1985 was 
constituted as a full-fledged Ministry. It is under the overall charge of the Prime Minister 
assisted by a Minister of State. The Ministry comprises the following three departments:-
(i) Department of Personnel and Training; 
(ii) Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances; 
(iii) Department of Pensions and Pensioners' Welfare. 
The three Departments function under Secretary (Personnel), assisted at present by 
three Additional Secretaries, four Joint Secretaries and other supporting officers and staff. 
2. The Department of Personnel and Training .also functions as the Administrative 
Ministry for the following agencies:-
(i) Central Bureau of Investigation· (CBI). (It is a premier investigative agency of the 
Government with Police powers, especially created to deal with corruptions related 
matters). 
(ii) Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). (Central agency to advise on all vigilance 
matters). 
(iii) Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). (A statutory body al}d recruitment 
Agency for Group 'A' and 'B' services/posts). 
(iv) Staff Selection Commission (SSC). (A recruitment agency for Group 'C' posts and 
also a few selected Group 'B' posts in the Central Secretariat). 
(v) Central Administrative Tribunals (CAl'). (A judicial body to provide justice to the 
Central Government employees in their service matters). 
(vi) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM). (A training Institute for 
Secretariat Officers and Staff). 
3. Functionally, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions is divided 
into following seven divisions:­
- Establishment Officers. 
- All India Services and Administrative Vigilance. 
- Establishment. 
-Administrative Tribunal, Administration and Staff Welfare. 
-Training. 
- Central Services and Pension and Pensioners' Welfare. 
- Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. 
4. Role and tasks 
The important areas where the Ministry has allotted tasks I nodal role are as follows:­
(i) General questions relating to recruitment, promotion and morale of the Central 
Civil Services. 
(ii) Deputation of officers I experts to other countries and United Nations and its 
allied agencies. 
(iii) Redeployment of staff rendered surplus in Central Government Offices. 
(iv) Formulation and coordination of training policies for All India Services and 
Central Services. 
1 

2 
(v) The Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration and Institute of 
Secretariat Training and Management. 
(vi) All policy matters relating to vigilance and discipline among public servants. 
(vii) The Central Bureau of Investigation. 
(viii) The Central Vigilance Commission. 
(ix) Administration of all service rules including Fundamental Rules (FRs), Sup­
plementary Rules (SRs) and Civil Service Regulations (CSRs). 
(x) Grants to the Indian Institute of Public Administration. 
(xi) All aspects of Senior Management and career development for Middle Manage-
ment. 
(xii) Government-employees relations, including staff grievances and welfare. 
(xiii) The Union Public Service Commission. 
(xiv) The Staff Selection Commission. 
(xv) The Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB). 
(xvi) Administrative Reforms. 
(xvii) Organisation and Methods. 
(xviii) Policy and Coordination of issues relating to redressal of Public Grievances. 
(xix) Formulation of policy and coordination of matters relating to retirement benefits 
to Central Government employees. 
(xx) Pension Structure of Government and relief to Government pensioners. 
(xxi) Reservation of public posts for members of the Scheduled Castes; Scheduled 
Tribes and other disadvantaged groups in the Society. 
5. Demand No. 65, relating to the Ministry of Personnel, Public 'Grievances and 
Pensions includes requirements of funds for the Department of Personnel and Training, 
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Department of Pensions and 
Pensioners' Welfare, Central Administrative Tribunals, Staff Selection Commission, Central 
Bureau of Investigation, Institute of Secretariat Training and Management, Lal Bahadur 
Shastri National Academy of Administration, Training Schemes, Central Vigilance Commis­
sion, Public Enterprises Selection Board and Loans to State Government for payment of 
House Building Advance to All India Services Officers. 
6. A statement indicating the AE 1994-95, BE and RE 1995-96 and BE 1996-97 in 
respect of Demand No. 65 is given below:-
REVENUE 
CAPITAL 
TOTAL: 
Secretariat-Central 
Services 
(Three Departments 
of the Ministry) 
.:::entral AdminiJtrative 
Tribunals 
Staff Selection 
pmmission 
Major 
Head 
2052 
2051 
1994-95 (ACtual) 
Plan Non-Plan Total 
5.56 70.78 76.34 
2.45 6.00 8.45 
8.01 76.78 84.79 
0.81 •7.55 8.36 
8.49 8.49 
8.27 8.27 
1995·96 (Budget) 
Plan Non-Plan Total 
6.10 74.60 80.79 
2.00 6.00 8.00 
8.10 80.60 88.79 
1.00 7.56 8.56 
9.75 9.75 
9.81 9.81 
(in Crorts of Rupees) 
1995-96 (Revised) 1996-97 (Budget) 
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total 
6.10 86.58 92.6& 6.60 108.79 113.39 
2.00 7.74 9.74 1.50 7.40 8.90 
8.10 94.32 102.42 8.10 114.19 122.29 
1.00 8.17 9.17 0.80 8.37 9.17 
11.22 11.22 14.92 14.92 
11.01 11.01 10.35 10.35 

3 
Major 1994-95 (Actual) 1995-96 (Budget) 1995·96 (Revised) 1996-97 (Budget) 
Head Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total 
Central Bureau of 2055 1.21 38.48 39.69 1.00 39.38 40.38 1.<42 <47.01 48.43 1.70 64.21 65.91 
Investigations (Rev.) 4055 1.7<4 1.7<4 1.40 1.40 
including lnt~rpol 
{Capital) 
Training (Revenue) 2070 3.54 6.25 9.79 <4.10 6.40 10.50 3.68 7.20 10.88 4.10 6.87 10.97 
(including ISTM & 4059 2.<45 2.45 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.50 1.50 
LBSNAA) (Capital) 
TOTAL: 8.01 69.04 n.os 8.10 72.90 81.00 8.10 86.35 94.45 8.10 106.12 114.22 
Loans to States for 7601 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00 - 6.00 6.00 
House Building 
Advances to All 
India Ser vice 
Officers 
Other Items {PESB & 2070 1.74 1.74 1.79 1.79 1.97 1.97 2.07 2.07 
CVC) 
GRAND TOTAL: 8.01 76.78 84.79 8.10 80.69 88.79 8.10 94.32 102.42 8.10 114.10 122.29 
7. It will be seen from the above statement that the provision of Rs. 8.10 crores in the 
Plan Budget for 1996-97 is at the same level as for the -year 1995-96. The Non-Plan budget for 
1996-97 shows an increase of Rs. 33.50 crores, as compared to BE 1995-96. The Ministry has 
advanced following reasons f:>r this increase:-
(i) Payment of Additional Instalment of DA, Interim Relief, Bonus etc. to employees; 
(ii) Provision made for payment of enhanced rent of buildings of CAT in New Delhi 
and Bombay including arrears of enhanced rent; 
(iii) Provision made for filling up of vacant and newly created posts in the CBI and 
payment of cash compensation equivalent to 30 days annually to the Executive Staff 
upto the rank of inspector; 
(iv) Computerization of CBI, office expenses of new offices of CBI as well as CBI 
Academy; 
(v) Expenditure of Special Courts for CBI cases. 
8. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, as contained in its (Para 15) 
Sixteenth Report, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance had agreed to include the Demand relating to Union Public 
Service Commission (UPSC) (Demand No. 95) alongwith the Demands of the Ministry of 
Personnel from the financial year (1996-97). The UPSC is a constitutional body, created under 
Article 315 of the Constitution. The Commission's charter of duties are given in Article 320 
and 321 of the Constitution. In brief it is the duty of the Commission to conduct examinations 
for appointment to the services of the union and advise Government on all matters relating to 
framing of recuitment rules, method of recruitment, principles to be followed in making 
promotions and transfers from one service to another. The Commission is also required to be 
consulted in respect of disciplinary matters affecting a civil servant including appeals and 
memorials filed by individual Government servants. The Commission 's advice is also sought 
regarding any claim for reimbursement of legal expenses incurred by a Government Servant in 
defending legal proceedings instituted against him for acts done in the execution of his duties 
and on the question of award of pension for injury sustained by a Government servant in a 
civil capacity. By virtue of the provision made in the relevant Acts, the Commission is 
required to be consulted in respect of appointments to certain categories of posts under the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Employee 's State Insurance Corporation and the 
Employees' Prov ident Fund Organisation. 

4 
9. According to Article 322 of the Constitution, the expenses of the UPSC including 
salaries, allowances and pension payable to members and staff of the Commission are 
'charged' on the Consolidated Fund of India. A statement indicating the AE 1994-95, BE 
and RE 1995-96 and BE 1996-97 in respect of Demand No. 95 is given below:-
Major Head 
"2051" 
U.P.S.C. 
REVENUE 
CAPITAL 
TOTAL: 
Break up of the 
Administrative 
Expenses 
Canteens 
Examination 
& Selection 
AE 
1994-95 
Plan Non-Plan 
18.79 
18.79 
Provisions 
11.06 
0.01 
7.72 
18.79 
BE 
1995-96 
Plan Non-Plan 
19.38 
19.38 
11.20 
0.11 
8.07 
19.38 
RE 
1995-96 
Plan Non-Plan 
22.55 
22.55 
12.74 
0.12 
9.69 
22.55 
(Rs. in Crores) 
BE 
1996-97 
Plan Non-Plan 
25.17 
25.17 
14.86 
0.13. 
10.18 
25.17 
10. It will be seen from the above statement that the administrative expenditure of the 
Commissfon has gone up from Rs. 11.31 crores in B.E. 1995-96 to,R~. 15.00 crores in B.E. 
1996-97 and the expenses on examination from Rs. 8.07 crores to Rs. 10.18 crores. The 
explanation offered for the increase of Rs. 3.69 crores in administrative expenses and 
Rs. 2.10 crores in Examinations and selection is that it is mainly due to large number of 
candidates taking various examinations, increase in the cost of material required for 
examinations and consequent increase in office expenses and increase in the rate of 
evaluation fees of script and invigilation charges, payment of additional instalment of DA, 
Interim Relief etc. to the Staff. 
11. The Committee having considered all aspects makes recommendations/observations 
in respect of the following:-
Public Grievances 
12. Cognizance· and redressal of Public Grievances are an integral part of a responsible 
administrative set up. According to the Annual Report (1995-96) of the Ministry, Internal 
Grievance Redressal Machinery (IGRM) is functioning in Ministries/Departments of the 
Central Government. Grievance redressal units are also functioning in subordinate offices/ 
public sector undertakings which. have public dealings. Instructions have been issued to the 
Ministries/Departments to take note of and attend to grievances appearing in .the 
newspaper columns. The Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances 
(DAR & PG) receives statistical report about receipts and disposal of grievances. According 

5 
to the information furnished by the Ministry, there are about 45000 such grievances pending 
disposal and; the disposal of such grievances is the responsibility of concerned Ministry I 
Department and that DAR & PG receives regular feedback from them on the receipt and 
disposal of public grievances. 
13. The DAR & PG takes up about 3-5% of the grievances it receives directly and 
pursues their final disposal by the concerned Ministry /Department. All other cases are 
transferred or referred to the Ministries I Departments for final disposal under intimation to 
the DAR & PG. In response to a query regarding the action taken by Ministries/ 
Departments on Grievances appearing in newspaper columns, the Ministry stated that there 
role is limited to issuing policy guidelines and monitoring of implementation of these 
guidelines is not done. The Committee was also informed that the Directorate of Public 
Grievances (DPG) under Cabinet Secretariat is an independent grievance redressal agency 
for notified Departments I Agencies and that it has the authority to call for and examine 
officials and files of the Ministries/ Departments concerned. Further the recommendations 
of the DPG are almost invariably to be acted upon by the concerned Ministry or 
Department. 
14. The Committee feels that the whole approach towards ~edressal of public Grievances 
lacks coherence and that clear guidelines, explicitly fixing the responsibility for time bound 
redressal of grievances is a must. Provisions for punitive action in case of non-redressal of 
grievances within the stipulated time, without any valid reason be made. The Committee feels 
that the working procedure as obtaining in the DPG should be adopted and improved upon by 
DAR & PG to make the grievance redressal machinery more effective. The Committee would 
also impress upon the Ministry, the need for widely advertising the existence of Public 
Grievances cells in .Ministries/Departments, specifying the mechanism for seeking redress 
and mentioning the time frame for such redressal. The DAR & PG would do well to institute 
an effective mechanism for monitoring of implementation I non-implementation or the policy 
guidelines issued by it and take requisite corrective steps on a regular basis. The Committee 
desires that the Department should come out with specific suggestions and stipulations to 
improve Public Grievance redressal. 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS 
15. Administrative Reforms are important inasmuch as they help the Administration to 
re-orient and reinvent itself to be in step with ground-realities. The DAR & PG conducts 
research on general issues of Administrative Reforms, sponsors management studies to 
identify Grievance prone-areas and studies them for remedial action. As the nodal agency, it 
offers help and advice to the Ministries/Departments in performance of 0 & M activities. 
16. On being queried about the follow up done by it on the management studies done 
by the Department , the Ministry replied that the recommendations are only advisory in 
nature and that the organizations concerned are expected to implement the suggestions. In 
response to a query whether there existed any mechanism to ensure quick follow up action 
to such studies , the Department has replied that it undertakes impact analysis in respect of a 
few selected studies which assess the extent of implementation made in the study reports. 
The depar tme nt had also undertaken a study on the working of the Emergency Departme nt 
of Dr. Ram Manoh ar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi. The Committee would be interested in 
knowing as to when the study was undertaken, the findings thereof and what follow up 
action has been taken. 
17. The Committee would like to express its dissatisfaction with the state or things. In the 
wake or liberalization there is an urgent need for change in administrative ethos as also in the 

6 
organization and functioning of the administrative set up. The expense and effort involved in 
conducting studies for identifying problem areas and initiating changes in the administration 
is not justified, if the same is not complemented by a rigorous implementation mechanism. 
Bureaucratic inertia is legendary and has given birth to organized interests. These are proving 
to be a big drain on national resources. It is the considered view of the Committee that the 
emphasis on reduction of staff through retrenchment and various voluntary retirement 
schemes is not a solution to the problem of overstaffing referred to by the Secretary. The 
Government should instead focus on streamlining and reducing the multiplicity of unnecessary 
procedures and rules etc. There is an urgent need for reduction of a number of functions the 
Government is called upon to perform. 
18. The Committee would also like to impress upon the Ministry the need for developing 
a rich corpus of case studies on real life working of administration, through the management 
studies sponsored by it. lhis can be used as a very important training tool for new recruits. 
MODERNIZATION OF OFFICES 
19. Modernization of Offices is imperative for improving their administrative efficiency 
and productivity as well as for facilitating access of the public to organisations I units of 
Government. A plan scheme for the purpose was introduced in 1987-88. The Committee had 
queried the Ministry about efficacy and impact of the said scheme. In its reply the Ministry 
had detailed the functional changes resulting from the drive to modernize the offices. 
Specifically, the reply states that functional layout of offices has improved, facilitating better 
supervision and coordination; efficient management and processing of information and 
records has been achieved. The Secretary of the Ministry in the deposition before the 
Committee mentioned that modernization of offices has increased the scope for reducing the 
office staff, especially in Group 'C' & 'D' posts. 
20. The point about improvement in administrative efficiency and better public service as 
a result of modernization of offices is well taken. But the Committee would like to know, 
whether Government has taken any long term view of the changes being introduced in form of 
mechanization of work. Apart from having a bearing on employment generation in future, 
this shift wiU also considerably restrict the pool from which people are selected against future 
vacancies. The Committee would ~ke to know whether Government have devised any long 
term plan to create an adequate training base to cater to skill imparting and upgradation 
needs in view of increasing mechanization of Government work. The Committee emphasizes 
the need for evolving a transparent and time-hound procedure for facilitating improvement in 
the interface between the Government and public at large. 
21. In light of the new Economic- Policies, the Government sought to suitably modify, 
C.C.S. (Conduct) Rules; Fundamental Rules (FRs); Supplementary Rules (SRs); and All 
India Service (Conduct) Rules,' 1968. A Special Review Group was set up for the purpose. 
According to the Ministry, necessary action to amend the relevant rules in most cases has 
been taken. The Committee has taken note of the action in initiating the move to effect 
suitable relevant changes in Rules and expects that such a proactive approach will continue in 
future also. · 
PROGRESSIVE USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK 
22. Hindi is the official language of India. Due to a variety of reasons it has not been 
able to gain country wide acceptance as the official language. As a corollary the efforts to 
develop it as the national link language have also not borne fruit. On being queried about 
the steps being taken to facilitate wider acceptance of Hindi, the Ministry replied that 

7 
the subject matter concerns the Department of Official Language under the Ministry of 
IHome Affairs. 
23. The Committee takes strong exception to this reply. In its view this reply aptly sums 
up the official attitude wherein promotion of Hindi is treated as a ml:ltter of official routine. 
Technically the onus of initiating the policy may be the responsibility of Ministry of Home 
AtTairs, but that in no way prevents the Ministry of Personnel from taking a proactive 
approach in the matter. In view of the Committee an efforts could be made to simplify the 
language as it ls used for official purposes, thereby making it intelligi~le to a larger number of 
people and helping it gain wider acceptance. 
ADMINISTRATIVE VIGILANCE 
24. Administrative Vigilance is important for the maintenance of integrity in the public 
services. The Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T) determines policy on the 
subject and coordinates the work of ·various Ministries/Departments for maintenance of 
discipline and eradication of corruption. The DoP&T also handles all policy and administra­
tive matters pertaining to the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance 
Commission. It also deals with the complaints of corruption against the Chief Ministers of 
States and the Union Ministers. The DoP&T is also responsible for appointment of Chief 
Vigilance Officers in the Central Public Sector Undertakings, autonomous bodies and other 
Government offices. 
25. The Committee had asked the Ministry of furnish details about the vacancy position 
of Chief Vigilance Officers in Central Public Undertakings, aut~nomous bodies and other 
Government offices, indicating the period since they have been vacant and the reasons why 
they have been vacant so. In its reply the Ministry stated that out of 145 such full-time posts 
of Chief Vigilance Officers 76 posts are already filled up and that efforts were underway to 
fill up remaining 69 posts. The Ministry also submitted that such a large number of posts of 
CVOs, were vacant because of the unwillingness of the selected candidates to accept the 
offer of joining. This, in view of the Ministry was due to the lack of comparable facilities 
and administrative and financial powers, which the selected officers enjoy in their parent 
cadre. In order to make the posts of CVOs more attractive, Government has notified 
recently some measures, so as to enthuse more officers to join willingly as CVOs. Among 
them are enhancing the administrative/financial powers of the CVOs and making the post of 
CVOs a tenure post, with a tenure of five years. The Ministry did not have any information 
about the period for which the posts of CVOs have been vacant. 
26. The Committee express its displeasure at the reply furnished by the Ministry, and 
desires that the information about period-wise pendency of the posts of C~ntral Vigilance 
Offi('ers in Central PSUs be furnished at the earliest. The Committee recommends that time 
bound action should be taken to fill up the posts of CVOs and in any case they should be 
filled up within a year of their falling vacant. The Committee feels that hitherto the 
appointment of CVOs in different central PSUs is by and large restricted to the officers of 
lAS and IPS. The Committee understands that there are some instructions/guidelines of the 
Central Vigilance Commission regarding extension of zone of consideration for appointment as 
CVOs to the Officers belonging to other Group 'A' Services. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that such instructions/guidelines of the eve in this regard should be 
implemented. 
27. The Committee feels that it is evident from the reply furnished by the Ministry · that 
over the years the profile of the post of CVOs has developed into that of a 'punishment 
posting'. This is an unfortunate development especially when we see that Rs. 1,60,000 crores 

8 
of public money is invested in the Central Public Undertakings. It stands to reason here that 
the less than adequate efficiency and return these Public Sector Enterprises provide is partly 
due to the weak vigilance structure. This Committee would like to impress upon Government 
the need for instituting and maintaining a strong and impartial Vigilance structure. The 
Committee recommends that Government should consider giving additional career points to 
the officers who are posted as CVOs thereby making the incentive package for them more 
attractive. Further, the Government should come out with a concrete proposal to implement 
the above rtcommendations within a period not exceeding a year. 
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
28. The CHI is a premier investigating agency of the Government, with police powers, 
especially created to deal with corruption related matters. Presently CBI is functioning as 
per provisions of Delhi Police Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946 and enjoys full functional 
autonomy · in investigations. Under the DSPE Act CBI requires the consent of State 
Governments before investigating crimes in the State. This is so because "Police" is a state 
subject in List - II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and the CBI needs to the 
invested with such powers by the State Government . 
29. The workload of the CBI is increasing tremendously. What is more the nature of 
cases, it is being asked to investigate are getting increasingly complex. A fair number of 
these cases pertain to white collar crimes. It is absolutely necessary that reorganization/ 
IT'Odemization of the CBI is· done on a regular basis to enable it to keep in step (if not 
ahead), with the challenges, it is called upon to tackle. The ministry in reply to the queries 
to this effect has detailed the steps being taken to reorganize/modernize the Bureau. The 
reply also mentions that a housing proposal including proposal for owned office space for 
various branches of CBI throughout the country is being mooted. On the question of 
granting absolute autonomy to the CBI, the Ministry replied that the CBI has full functional 
autonomy in investigations. Further in view of the Ministry the question of making CBI an 
absolutely autonomous organization requires an in-depth study. 
30. The Committee has taken note of the reorganization/modernization drive being 
effected in the CBI. The measures being taken and the results thereof to fill up the vacant 
posts in CBI have also been noted and Committee is satisfied on this account. In this regard, 
the Committee would like to know whether there are any provisions for pre-entry and/or 
post-entry training of the CBI personnel to enable them to deal with increasing number and 
complexity of white collar crimes. In view of the Committee, it would be better if the 
investigative teams of CBI coordinate with other such teams of different Ministeries/ 
Departments, while working on cases of similar nature. This will make the investigation more 
effective. It will also prevent the working of different investigative team at cross purposes, 
thereby help in optimizing time, effort and resources. The Committee is not aware, whether 
the CBI has a countrywide dedicated communication network at its disposal. Such a network 
will facilitate speedy disposal of information among various centres of CBI , as well as help 
maintain confidentiality of the same. In raising the question of autonomy for CBI the 
Committee in no way wishes to take it outside the purview of Parliament. Such investigative 
organizations need to be accountable. The idea behind, raising the question of autonomy is to 
ensure that executive arbitrariness does not impinge upon impartial functioning of the CBI. 
The contention of Government that the matter requires careful and in-depth study does not 
appear to be convincing. The Committee understands that several reports to this effect have 
been prepared and that no action has been taken on them. The L. P. Singh Committee 
appointed to review the functioning of CBI bad inter-alia recommended reconstitution of 
CBI; derming its power and charter of work; defining the method of selection of 

9 
Director, CBI, the terms and conditions of appointment and the manner of his removal. 
Similarly the Estimates Committee (1991·92) under the Chairmanship of Jaswant Singh, had 
made some major recommendations in its 13th Report, which included giving status and well 
defined legal powers to CBI. The Committee would like to know how many such reports exist 
and what are their recommendations~ and impresses upon Government, the nee~ for taking 
steps to study them and implement those which are found desirable and feasible. 
CADRE MANAGEMENT 
31. The Department of Personnel & Training (DoP&T). deals with the senior 
appointment and personnel policies in the Government of India. This is done primarily 
through the Establishment Officer and the Additional Secretary in the DoP&T who is also 
the Secretary to the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC). The Establishment 
Officer is also the ex-officio Member-Secretary of the Civil Services Board (CSB), which is 
chaired by the Cabinet Secretary. The Board makes recommendations for appointment and 
extension of tenure to the posts of Deputy Secretary, Director and Joint Secretary under the 
Central Staffing Scheme. The CSB makes recommendations to the ACC for inclusion of 
officers in Joint Secretary suitability list and also recommends cases for premature retirement 
of senior officers. The Central Establishment Board, chaired by Secretary (Personnel) inter­
alia also recommends cases of premature retirement for officers below the rank of Joint 
Secretary. 
32. In this connection the Committee had asked the Ministry to furnish details of senior 
officers who have been retired prematurely during last three years alongwith criteria and 
guidelines for the same. The same were furnished by the Ministry. The Committee also 
desired to know the objectives of monitoring the career pattern of officers which come under 
the purview of the Department of Personnel. In its reply the Ministry has stated that this 
exercise is regularly carried out to enable the DoP&T to make recommendations for all 
senior appointments under the Government of India. The same is done under the provisions 
of the Central Staffing Scheme. A total of 460 such postings (350 at the level of Deputy 
Secretary/Director/equivalent and 110 at the level of Joint Secretary/equivalent) were 
effected in the year 1995-96. The Committee had also enquired about the number of All 
India Services (AIS) officers who have never come on Central deputation under provisions 
of the Central Deputation Reserve (CDR), or who had stayed on deputation.over and above 
the prescribed tenure. The Committee had sought to know, whether such a practice was 
violative of rules and regulations governing the AIS officers. In its reply the Ministry had 
merely stated the provisions regarding deputation as they exist and mentioned that there are 
2900 lAS officers who have never come on Central deputation. The Ministry offered no 
comment, whether such a practice was violative of rules and regulations governing AIS 
officials. 
33. The Committee would like to impress upon Government the need to dispose off the 
requirement of taking permission from cadre controlling authorities for proceeding against 
senior officers in cases involving gross impropriety on their part. It is understood that many 
such cases are not proceeded with, because such a permission is not fortbcof!.1ing. The 
Committee recommends that such a permission be made a part of the mandate given to the 
investigative bodies. The report(s) thus received should be an important criteria for making 
recommendations about pre-mature retirement and shortlisting of officers for senior level 
appointments. 
34. The Committee understands that, over the years the Civil administration has become 

10 
top heavy. The Committee in this regard would like to know, as to what is the span-of-control 
obtaining in the Ministries/Departments/Subordinate offices of the Government of India. The 
Committee notes with concern the tendency to create new departments and accommodate 
senior officers against vacancies thus created. This in view of the Committee is creating a 
considerable drag on resources without giving commensurate results. In this regard the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of new departments/posts created since 
1980 with rationale thereof and to what extent the objectives for which these were created 
have been achieved. 
35. As is evident from the reply furnished by the Ministry there are 2900 lAS officers 
who have never come on Central deputation. This is a staggering 57.23% of the authorised 
cadre strength of the lAS. Viewed against this backdrop the rationale of lAS as a national 
integrating service, by virtue of which the service lays claim to and appropriates a significant 
proportion of functionally and administratively important posts, is seriously undermined. The 
whole objective of cross-fertilisation of experience in matters of planning and policy 
formulation comes to nought. Moreover these lAS officers block the promotional avenues for 
Provincial Civil Services {PCS) officers. The Committee bas strong reservations on this 
account and recommends that Ministry look into this and formulate a long term policy 
encompassing all the issues regarding cadre management of Group 'A' officers, keeping in 
view the changing dynamics of Centre-State rel~tions. 
36. The Committee had desired that Ministry provide infonnation about consultants and 
advisors engaged by the Government of India, indicating the number of retired government 
servants beyond the age of 62 years, so engaged. The Ministry in its reply stated that there 
were a total of 30 consultants engaged by the Government of India of which 21 were retir~d 
government servants, four of them being over the age of 62 years. The Ministry explaining 
the rationale of engagement of consultants had put forth the view that consultancy is being 
used to restrict the size of regular Civil Service by hiring experts to undertake assignments of 
a short term nature. 
37. The point is well taken, but the Committee finds that 21 out of a total of 30 
consultants engaged are retired government servants. It stands to reason that they have 
obtained the requisite expertise by serving in their official capacity and as such their 
replacements in the regular bureaucracy should logically be competent enough to handle 
whatever is being attended to, by the consultants. The Committee recommends that 
government look afresh into the policy, especially as hiring of retired government servants 
opens up avenues for playing favourities. Further, the engagement of consultants should be 
resorted to only in very exceptional circumstances. The assignment of consultants thus 
engaged should be time-bound and no extensions should be granted in any case whatsoever. 
The assignments should be wound up if they are not completed within the prescribed time. 
38. The Committee had asked the Ministry to set up a time frame for finalization of 
panels of Group-1 of CSS Officers on the basis of common seniority list as per the Central 
Administrative Tribunal's Order of March 22, 1995. The Ministry in its reply has given 
elaborate explanation detailing various steps that are involved in finalising the panels. It is 
stated that the number of officers to be considered are very large. Moreover, the procedure 
involved for making such recommendations is lengthy. The Committee appreciates the 
quantum of work involved in finalizing the panels. Be that as it may, it also has a human 
angle. CSS Grade-l panel has not been brought out for the last 9 years due to no fault of the 
Ministry. Nevertheless, in the absence of panel not only promotions have been delayed, a 
large number of officers would have retired without getting their promotions. Therefore, any 

11 
further delay would cause avoidable hardships. The Committee is therefore of the view .that 
this is a subject-matter which requires special action. This matter should not be dealt with in 
the routine bureaucratic manner. It should be possible for the Ministry to set up a special 
task force to complete the various steps that are being required le\lding upto the constitution 
of DPC and finalization of panel. The Ministry sbo~Jd assess bow much time it would require 
and a tim'-! frame should be drawn up to complete this exercise. The Committee feels that it 
should be possible, given the necessary will to complete the job within 6 to 9 months. 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES SELECTION BOARD (PESB) 
39. The PESB is entrusted with the responsibility of making recommendations for 
appointment to the full-time board level posts of Chief Executives and functional Directors 
and P.art-time Chairman in the Central Public Sector Undertakings. According to the Annual 
Report {1995-96) of the Ministry. PESB makes such recommendations well in advance 
except in cases where the vacancies are not foreseeable due to death/resignation of the 
existing incumbents. Yet, when asked about the vacancy position, the Ministry replied that 
as on May 31, 1996 there were 105 vacancies of Chief Executives/full-time Directors lying 
vacant in different Central Public Sector Undertakings. This is quite contrary to the assertion 
made by the Ministry that prompt action is taken to fill the vacancies in the Central PSUs. 
The Committee is, therefore, not convinced about the use of the data bank of the PESB 
Secretariat which stores the Bio-data received from various sources-Public, Government 
and the Private Sectors and that the data base has been computerised to facilitate easy 
storage and retrieval. 
40. The Committee had also inquired about the vacancy position within the Board and 
sought the information regarding requisite qualifications, experience and tenure for the posts 
of Chairman and Members of PESB. The Committee had specifically inquired about the 
appointment of Sh. A.C. Wadhawan as Member, PESB w.e.f 23.07.1996 despite his 
indictment by an enquiry Committee of the Union Ministry of Mines. 
41. Additionally the Committee had inquired about the procedure adopted by PESB, 
while recommending the candidates for appointment to Central PSUs, and wanted to know 
from the Ministry whether PESB ensures that the incumbent recommended is clear from 
vigilance angle? It is apparent from the reply furnished by the Ministry, that the PESB does 
not insist on vigilance clearance of the candidates before making its recommendations. 
42. The Committee is not too pleased with the reply furnished by the Ministry. Excepting 
questions of factuai nature the replies furnished are very vague and do not address the issues 
raised by the Committee. Regarding the delay in filling up the vacant posts in Central PSUs 
nothing by way of explanation has been offered. The PESB now has full complement of its 
members, according to the Ministry. But the specific question regarding reasons for 
appointment of Shri A.C. Wadhawan as member PESB, despite his indictment, bas not been 
answered. Merely stating that the appointment has been effected following the prescribed 
procedure is in fact no answer, because no appointments are possible without following the 
procedure as prescribed by law. The Committee regrets that Government bas given an evasive 
reply in an important issue like this. It would, therefore, like to have full details of this case. 
According to the Committee the PESB must streamline further the mechanism to monitor the 
implementation of its recommendations. The PESB should look into the feasibility of making 
it statutorily binding on the Ministries/Departments to provide information alongwitb reasons 
for implementation/non-implementation of its recommendations within a stipulated time­
frame. The Committee does not concur with the opinion forwarded by the Ministry that 
insistence on vigilance clearance by the PESB will lead to delays in finalization of the 

12 
recommendations, especially in view of the fact that vacancies are anticipated well in advance 
and there exists a Data Bank on the prospective candidates. It is the considered view of the 
Committee that vigilance clearance be made mandatory for the candidates recommended for 
appointment by PESB. 
BACKLOG OF RESERVATIONS FOR SCsiSTs 
43. Regarding the filling up of backlog vacancies for SCs/STs, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the Fifth Special Recruitment Drive (SRD) was completed on 31.03.1996 
and after its completion 12,815 vacancies for SCsiSTs are yet to be filled up. The reasons 
advanced by the Ministry for non-filling of such vacancies is that these have been classified 
as 'hard-core' vacancies and includes posts such as nurses, technicians, pathologists, scientists 
etc. These require candidates with specialized skilVtechnical qualifications, and that non­
availability of such candidates has resulted in persistence of vacancies. The Ministry further 
states in its note that every effort is being made to fill up the vacancies meant for SCs/STs. 
In this regard the Sixth SRD has been started from 9.07.1996 and it would continue till 
31.03.1997. 
44. The Committee feels that the reply furnished by the Ministry is inadequate. Merely 
stating that 'suitable candidates' are not available does not adequately addres:; the issues 
raised by the Committee. The Ministry in this regard may provide the details of the steps 
taken to recruit the SCIST candidates through the SRDs indicating whether the information 
about such vacancies was suitably disseminated to prospective candidates. The Ministry may 
also provide the total number of posts which have been dereserved if any, since the launch of 
Special Recruitment Drives (SRDs). The Ministry should seriously look into the possibility of 
recruiting such candidates who are marginally below the prescribed criterion for recruitment 
and then providing them adequate training to help them acquire the necessary proficiency. 
The Committee understands that the details of the vacancy position, Ministry/Department­
wise, are available before the SRDs are launched. In light of this fact, the Committee would 
urge the Ministry to seek report from the concerned Ministries/Departments regarding their 
experience from SRDs. The information so gathered should be used to make subsequent SRDs 
more effective. 
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRmUNAL 
45. The Central Administrative Tribunal was set up on 01.11.1985 under the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. As on 01.01.1996 it has 17 regular benches operating at 
the principal seats of High Courts in different parts of the country. The sanctioned strength 
of Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Members of CAT as on 01.01.1996 is as follows:-
Chairman 
Vice-Chairmen 
Members 
1 
16 
49 
The jurisdiction of CAT extends to all the civilian employees of Central Government . 
Organizations like Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, National Labour Institute , 
the Central Social Welfare Board, the Council for Agriculture Research, the Employee s 
State Insurance Corporation and Sports Authority of India have also been brought within 
the jurisdiction of the CAT. 
46. The Ministry in its note has submitted that there were 8 vacancies of Vice-Chairmen 
and 11 Members as on 31st July, 1996, and that selections have been made for all the 
vacancies, except one vacancy of an Administrative member which arose on 22.06.1996 due 

13 
to demise of the incumbent. Regarding the proposal to set up additional courts in the 
Principal Bench and in the Allahabad Bench, the Ministry, states that the matter is under 
consideration in consultation with the Chairman CAT. Further the Committee has been 
informed by the Ministry that there are a total of 42,878 cases pending in CAT. 
47. The Committee is concerned at the pendency of large number of cases in the CAT 
and its benches. According to the information furnished by the Ministry to the Committee, 
as on March 31, 1996, a total number of 42,878 cases were pending .d,isposal before the CAT 
and its different benches, the details of which are as under:-
(i) Less than 1 year 14735 
(ii) Between 1-2 years 11710 
(iii) Between 2-3 years 7407 
(iv) Between 3-5 years 6511 
(v) Over 5 years 2515 
TOTAL: 42878 
It is somewhat surprising that such a large number of cases are pending disposal 
despite the fact that the Administrative Tribunals are not bound by the technicalities 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The objective of Tribunal is to provide speedy 
and inexpensive justice and, in the opinion of the Committee this is being undermined 
due to the pendency of such a large number of cases. As the saying goes "Justice 
delayed is justice denied." The Committee feels that the full complement of Vice­
Chairmen and Members of CAT should be in place to ensure expeditious disposal of 
cases. In this connection, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation as 
contained in its 16th Report wherein it bad recommended that in view of the large 
number of cases pending before the Principal Bench and AUababad Bench, the number 
of courts in those Benches needs to be increased for speeding up the disposal of 
pending cases. Further, the Committee recommends that a time frame instituted to 
expedite the clearance of each stage of a case. Concerned Government offices should 
be asked to provide required information at the earliest and strlngent provisions 
should be made to cbargesbeet the departments/officials not doing so within the 
stipulated time. 
KENDRIYA BHANDAR 
48. The Kendriya Bhandar (Central Government Employees Consumer 
Cooperative Society) , a Welfare Cooperative Society was set up in 1963 to provide 
essential commodities to the consumers at reasonable prices. This it endeavours to 
do by operating at a marginal rate of gross profit . It receives no subsidy from the 
Central Government except Government accommodation allotted to it at a 
nominal rent of Rs. 11-per month, per premises. Kendriya Bhandar seeks to 
constantly improve upon the services and range of goods provided by it to the 
customers. 
49. The Committee appreciates the operation of Kendriya Bhandar, and is 
pleased about the fact that it receives no subsidy from the government , save on 
accommodation, and yet it has been running on profit since 1982-83. In this regard 
the Committee recommends that a study be carried out, wherein the impact of 

14 
operations of the Kendriya Bhandar on the price and quality of goods in the open market be 
studied. The insights gained from such a study will help the Kendriya Bhandar to make 
suitable changes in its operational strategy to improve upon its achievements. 
50. The Kendriya Bhandar has its branches located in various parts of Delhi which 
include areas where Officers belonging to higher income group also reside . With the 
liberalization of the economy and other fast changing developments, possession of credit cards 
is a fairly common phenomenon. Therefore, the Committee would suggest that to enhance its 
sales turnover the management of Kendriya Bhandar may consider accepting payment s 
through credit cards. This facility may be introduced on trial basis in few selected bran ches to 
begin with. 
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
51. The Committee was informed that UPSC conducts 17 examinations in all and that the 
candidates have the option to write the answers in all the papers, including optional subjects, 
in any of the languages included in the VIIIth Schedule to the Constitution apart from English 
in the Civil Services Examination only. The Committee wanted to know as to why regional 
languages are not being used in all the examinations conducted by the UPSC. In reply the 
Ministry submitted that on an average about 88% candidates giving the Civil Services 
Examination opted to take it in the English medium. Whereas the corresponding figure for 
Hindi and regional languages was 9% and 3% respectively. The Secretary informed the 
C...ommittee that most probable explanation for these figures was that good quality literatur e 
was not available in Hindi/regional languages and thus the case for use of Hindi/region al 
languages was not very strong. Continuing further, the Secretary submitted that the propo sal 
for introduction of such option in all the examinations being conducted by the UPSC was 
under active consideration. 
52. In this regard the Committee is of the view that low percentage of candidate s o pting 
for regional languages and non-availbility of good quality literatu re in the same is a historical 
build up and that this can not be a excuse for not allowing use of regional languages. It must be 
recognized that support systems only come up in response to felt needs. The question papers of 
the examinations can continue to be in English and Hindi but the candidates should be given the 
option of replying in any of the languages specified in the Vlllth Schedule of the Constituti on, 
in all the examinations being conducted by the UPSC. The Ministry bas argued that sufficient 
number of candidates do not offer regional languages as the medium of writing the 
examinations and that the pass percentage of such candidates who do opt for regional languages 
as the medium of examination is very poor. This argument is not tenable. The Committee would 
like to point out that the right of use of regional languages is enshrined in the Constitution and 
that this Constitutional obligation should be honoured. Also, there are two unanimous 
resolutions of Parliamen t and directions of the Hon'ble President of India that the use of 
regional languages as recognised by our Constitution be permitted by UPSC in all the 
examinations conducted by it, just as use of regional languages is permitted for the All India 
Civil Services Examinations. The importance of local languages is evident from the fact that the 
AIS officials have to Pcquire functional proficiency in the language of the States to which they 
are assigned. 
53. The fact that sufficient number of books and other relevant material are not available , 
also is not relevant . If sufficient number of books/other literat ure is not available the reason is 
that there is not adequate demand for t he same. If examinees are a llowed the use of regional 
languages, the Committee is of the view that other things will follow. The Committee, ther efore, 
recommends that use of regional languages as listed in the Vllltb Schedule to the Constitut ion, 
be permitted in all the examinations conducted by UPSC and SSC without any further delay. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF TIIE MEETINGS OF TilE COMMITI'EE 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th August, 1996, in Committee 
Roon 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
6. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
7. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
8. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
12. Shri Vijay Goel 
13. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
14. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
15. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
16. Prof. M. Kamson 
17. Shri ldris Ali 
18. Shri Gopal Tandel 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Shri N. Dennis 
21. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
22. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
23. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the members felicitated the Chairman on his appointment as the 
Chairman of the Committee and wished him a successful tenure. The Chairman reciprocated 
the sentiments expressed by the members and thanked them for their gesture. He s·tated that 
with the co-operation of members, most of whom had distinguished themselves in various 
fields, the Committee would be able to fulftl its mandate. 
3. Thereafter he outlined in brief the functions of the Committee for the benefit of the 
new members and informed the members about the detailed schedule of 
15 

16 
meetings of the Committee which had been worked out to take up consideration of the 
detailed Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries coming within its purview. 
4. Some members then raised points and gave suggestions regarding the proposed 
consideration of the Demands for Grants of the related Ministries and the subjects which 
could be taken up by the Committee later. The Chairman of the Committee clarified the 
points raised by the members . 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 

v 
*FIFrB MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 14th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
7. _Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
10. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
11. Shri Vijay Goel 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Shri M.O.H . Farooq 
14. Shri Khelsai Singh 
15. Shri Tara Chand Baghora 
16. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason , Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS 
1. Shri P.C. Hota, Secretary (Personnel) 
2. Shri Dinesh Chandra, Addl. Secretary (Pensions) 
3. Shri J .A. Chowdhury, Addl. Secretary & Estab. Officer 
4. Shri P.S.A . Sundaram, Addl. Secretary (AR&PG) 
5. Shri V. Lakshmi Ratan, Joint Secretary (AT&A) 
6. Shri R. K. Tandon, Joint Secretary (AT&A) 
7. Shri A .K. Arora, Joint Secretary (Trg.) 
8. Shri Harinder Singh, Joint Secretary (Estt .) 
9. Shri A.K. Bhattarai, Deputy Secretary (Admn.) 
10. Shri Pranab Ray , FA 
•Minutes of second, third and fourth meetings of the Committee relate to some other matters 
discussed by the C ommittee . 17 

18 
11. Shri Naval Kishore, Deputy Secretary (Fin.) 
12. Shri S.S. Sharma, Under Secretary (Fin.) 
13. Shri S.K. Chakravarti, Director, DOPT 
• • • 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Detailed Demands for Grants (1996-
97) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. The Secretary of the 
Ministry made a presentation detailing the activities within the mandate of the Ministry and 
the allocations proposed therefor during the year 1996-97. In this context, he particularly 
dwelt on CBI which is consuming about 55% of the expenditure of the Ministry, recruitment 
and training of Personnel appointed to the Services under the Union, machinery for 
Administrative Reforms and Pensions to the retired Government Servants, functioning of 
Central Administrative Tribunals, Central Vigilance Commission, Public Enterprises 
Selection Board, UPSC and SSC, mode of redressaVdisposal of Public Grievances and over 
staffing in services under the Government. 
3. The members sought clarifications from him on various points arising out of his 
presentation and made some additional points about the autonomy of CBI, rampant 
corruption, need to provide a more viable system of dealing with public grievances, delay in 
filling up vacancies in CAT, mounting backlog of vacancies reserved for SCs and STs and 
extending the facility of taking papers in regional languages currently available for Civil 
Services Examinations to other UPSC examinations as well. The Secretary replied to some 
of the points raised by the members and as regards others the Committee directed him to 
submit written replies. 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept . 
5 . • • • 
6 . • • • 
7. • • • 
8 . • • • 
9. • • * 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 7.40 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, 
the 19th August, 1996. 
•••Relate to other matters. 

VII 
*SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
6. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABRA 
7. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
8. Shri Jagatvir Singh Drona 
9. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
10. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
11. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
12. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
13. Prof. M. Kamson 
14. Shri Khelsai Singh 
b . Shri N. Dennis 
16. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
17. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason , Committee Officer 
• • 
•Minutes of sixth meeting of the Committee relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
•••Relates to other matter. 
19 

20 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS 
1. Shri P.C. Hota, Secretary 
2. Shri Dinesh Chandra, Add I. Secretary 
3. Shri J.A. Chowdhury, Addl. Secretary & Estt. Officer 
4. Shri P.S.A. Sundaram, Addl. Secretary (AR&Trg.) 
5. Shri V. Lakshmi Ratan, Joint Secretary (S&V) 
6. Shri R.K. Tandon, Joint Secretary (AT&Admn.) 
7. Shri A.K. Arora, Joint Secretary (Trg.) 
8. Shri Harinder Singh, Joint Secretary (E) 
9. Shri Pranab Ray, Financial Advisor 
10. Shri Naval Kishore, Director (Finance) 
11. Shri A.K. Bhattarai, Deputy Secretary (Admn.) 
12. Shri S.S. Sharma, Under Secretary· (Finance) 
2 .• • • 
3 .• • • 
4 . • • • 
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions. Some points raised by the members in the context of the written 
replies furnished by the Ministry pursuant to the discussions held earlier on 14th August, 
1996 were explained. The Committee in particular raised pointed queries on the functioning 
of the Department in handling matters related to the public grievances and UPSC. 
6 .• • • 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 23rd 
August, 1996. 
•••Relate to other matters. 

IX 
*NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 27th August, 1996 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
4. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
6. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
9. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Shanna 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
13. Shri ldris Ali 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
15. Dr. Jayanta Rongpi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft 32nd, 33rd and 34th Reports on the 
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home Affairs; Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs and after some discussion 
decided to amend para 12 of the 32nd Report and make some additions in the 34th Report 
as per the discussions on the subject. The Committee then decided to take up the three 
Reports again for its consideration and adoption at its next meeting on August 29, 1996. 
*Minutes of eighth meeting of the Committee relates to some other matter discussed by the 
Committee. 
21 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 1.30 P.M. on Thursday , the 29th August , 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma 
7. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
8. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
9. Shri Vijay Goel 
10. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
11. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
13. Shri ldris Ali 
14. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur , Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason , Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of its draft Thirty-second, Thirty-third 
and Thirty-fourth Reports on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Ministries of Home 
Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
3 .• • • 
4 .• • • 
5 .• • • 
Thirty-third Report 
6. The Committee adopted its Thirty-third Report on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions unanimously . 
•••Relate to other matters. 
22 

23 
7 .• • • 
8. The Committee decided to present/lay all these three Reports in the ,Rajya Sabhal 
Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 1996 and authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri 
Pramib Mukherjee to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri M.O.H . Farooq · and 
in his absence Shri Satya Pal Jain to lay them on the Table of . ~ok Sabha. 
9. The Committee also decided that three copies of the evid~nce tendered before it in 
connection with the consideration of Demands for Grants of the aforesaid Ministries be kept 
in the Library for reference purposes. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 2.42 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 23rd 
September, 1996. 
•••Relates to other matter. 