.~ . . ::, 
._. :~.!~·/ THIRTIETH REPORT 
~ ~!~r. ~~:~:~ir:,::t .. ON ~ 
THE ,ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECO~MEN DATIONS/ 
... · OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINE D IN ITS 
\ ... · .. · .. ·. ·· SIXT£ENTH REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
· · (1995-96) Of THE MlNISTRY OF PltRSONNEL, 
~ '; :·:~ I. • • :::. ' PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
•;, ~ , • ...._, I· 
. . . '!- ",.. t ,. .. 0 " 
(-~"''c ,.,,, •• . •. : • . ' 
~~ 1 ' '.:.\';"to': ·~. ~~.: .. » ., •• • '·. ~ ,.;,.·.·~~~.~~ .t·~\f~·~~ 4 • .-; .... _ ... • 
.. u. fl, ' .. ~~~ p l ~~ • .. .-.u::'Ol;l:in7, )' J:J,.'e-l -~-'-~· •. : ;c: .. ·~ . :' 
~·· ... , ·•=-· ~· I .~~ .... "•'<' t·~·,· "' ~} ··~ ~.:•••r' 1 •· .,,.~;·J, .. ,.: 
I.... f ·, o " o ._ 
• • , .. ~ •• "',~'-J ) • • l 
t . :s . ; ... , , ~:-... · =~ 
.... ·-
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 1996/Chaitra, 1918 (Saka) 

C.S. (H.A.)-49 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON HOM-E AFFAIRS 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS SIXTEENTH 
REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS 
(Laid in the Rajya Sabha on the 27th August, 1996) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on the 27th August, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 1996/Chaitra, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION oF THE CoMMITrt:.t: ...................................................•......... 
2. lNTRODUCnON ............................ . ....................................................•.... 
3. RErORT ...............................................................•... . ....•••.......•.•......... 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITI"EE .•........•...•..•....•.•.•. 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-8 
9-12 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chmrman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2 Shn Madhavsmh Solanki 
3. Shn Anantray Devshanker Dave 
#4. Vacant 
5. Shn Makhan Lal Fotedar 
6. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
•7. Shn N. RaJendran 
8. Shn Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Mufti Mohd Sayecd 
10. Shri Knshan Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Gaya Singh 
12. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
13. Shri Raaj Bahhar 
14. Shri Jayant Kumar M<tlhnutru 
••1s. Slui Jitcndra Prasada 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sudlur Sawant 
17. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
18. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galih 
@19. Vacant 
20. Shri A. Vcnkatcsh Natk 
21. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
22. Shri M.O.ll Farook 
23. Shn Naratn Stngh Chautlhari 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shrimati Btbhu Kumari Dcvi 
26. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan 
27 Dr. GiriJa Vyas 
28. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 
29. Maj. Gen. (Rctd.) Bhuwan Chantlra Khanduri 
30. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
31. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
32. Shri Ram Singh 
33. Shri Shyam Lal Kamal 
34. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
35. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
36. Mahant Ahcdya Nath 
37. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
38. Shri Rabi Ray 
39. Shri llari Kcwul Prasatl 
* Vacancy caused w.e.f. the 13th Septcmhcr, 1995 due to induction of Shn R K Dhawan in the Umon Council 
of Mmistcrl> 
• Nominated on l71h Augusl, 1995 111 the vaccmcy caused by the retirement of Shn MurJsoli Maran from chc 
Mcmbcrl>hip of RaJya Sabha. 
•• Nom1natcd on 201h September, 1995 in the vacancy caused by induction of Dr. Jagannath Mishra in the 
Union Council of Ministers. 
@ Vacancy caused w.t .f the 13th September, 1995 due to induction of Prof. M. Kamson in the Union Council 
of Ministers. 
(i) 

40. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
41. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
42. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
43. Shri Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
44. Shri B. Raja Ra_vi Verma 
45. Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R. C. Soperna, Director 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C. B. Rai, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I. the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs having .been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirtieth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations / observations of the Committee , 
contained in its Sixteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, presented to Rajya Sabha on the 8th May, 1996. 
2. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was requested to furnish 
a note on the Action Taken by them in respect of The Committee's recommendations 
contained in paras 9, 11. 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 32 and 36 of its Sixteenth 
Report : 
3. An Action Taken Note was received from the Ministry in respect of all the 15 
recommendations contained in the Report, on the 30th November, 1995. 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on the 16th January, 1996, had decided to 
consider the said Action Taken Note and to seek clarifications thereon from the Secretary of 
the Ministry. In pursuance of this decision a meeting of the Committee was held on the 
6th March, 1996. 
5. The recommendations/observations contained in this Report are based on the Action 
Taken Note furnished by the Ministry and the presentation made by the Secretary of the 
Ministry before the Committee. 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 29th March, 1996. 
Ntw DtLHI; 
March, 1996 
RAJNI RANJAN SAHU 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

REPORT 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
Public EnterpriseS Selection Board 
Vacancies of Chairman and Members In PESB 
1. Recommendation : The Committee, in para 9 of the Sixteenth Report had expressed 
concern that the post of the Chairman PESB has been lying vacant since 1.11.1993. Out of 
the three members , there was only one member and the second member ha~ been appointed 
only recently. This , in the view of the COmmittee, meant, that only one member held :(61 
meetings and made recommendations for 49 Chief Executives and 93 full time Functiomd 
Directors and part time Chairman. This in view of the Committee, assumed significance in 
view of the fact that a total of Rs. 164332 crores (1993-94 figures) of the public money is 
invested in as many as 246 Central Public Enterprises. The Committee had been informed 
that efforts were being made to locute silitable persons to fill up vacancies of the Chairman 
and the member of PESB . The Committee felt that necessary action to fill 'up the vacancies 
had not been taken with due seriousness and recommended that such important posts l{e 
filled up without further delay. 
2. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, had reported that out of the 3 posts of 
members, two members were in position now; the second member having joined on 2.2.95. 
The Observations of the Committee regarding the filling up of posts have been brought to 
the notice of the Cabinet Secretary und thqt the matter has also been taken up by him at the 
appropriate level. The Action Taken Note also mentioned that the Members PESB generally 
does not act alone in making recommendation for appointments in Public Enterprises . 
Besides, the Members in the PESB, the Secretary of the Administrative Ministry concerned 
with the public enterprise is also associated. The Secretary of the Ministry, in his deposition 
before the Committee informed that Mr. N. Vittal has been appointed the Chairman, PESB 
with effect from 4th January, 1996. As on 6.3.96 there were two vacant posts of members in 
the PESB and that those might be filled up in about two months' time . He also submitted 
that non-availability of suitable persons was the reason for delay in filling up of vacant posts 
in PESB. 
3. The Committee in its 16th Report had noted with concern that the post of Chairman 
of the PESB had been lying vacant since November 1, 1993. Similarly, full complement of 
members were not in position. The Committee . had, therefore, recommended that such 
important posts should be filled up without further delay. 
4. The Department of Personnd in its Action Taken Note, submitted in November , 
1995, had stated that Committee's observations regarding filling-up of the posts had been 
brought to the notice of the Cabiuct Secretary and the matter had also been taken up by 
him at the appropriate level. 
5. The Secretary , Department of Personnel who deposed before the Committee on 
March 6, 1996, stated that it was difficult to get qualified ·persons for the appointment us 
Chairman and members of the PESD. He udded that the Chairrhan and members , as per the 
resolution for appointments to these posts, should be a distinguished former chief executive 
of a public sector enterprise. There were 246 central public sector enterprises in the country 
and normally chief executives of Schedule 'A' PSUs only were considered for appointment 
to these posts . Therefore , Government had to wait till a suitable person was available from 
amongst the Chairmen of the Central PSUs of Schedule 'A' category. He informed the 
Committee that the post of Chairman had, however, been filled-up on January 4, 1996. The 
incumbent was the Secretary, Department of Electronics , who was due to retire towards the 
end of the month . 
6. During the discussions that followed it emerged that the entire action to .fill-up the 
1 

2 
top level of posts in the PESB, namely, Chairman and the members rests with the Cabinet 
Secretary and the Department of Personnel had practically no role to play. The Secretary, 
Personnel, in his deposition had stated that they only intimate to the Cabinet Secretary. 
7. In order to examine the matter in· the correct perspective, the Committee had 
requested the department of Personnel to furnish certain data such as details of qualifica­
tions for appointment to these posts and list of Chairmen and members of PESB during the 
past few years. Unfortunately, till the finalization of the Report, the Committee had not 
received the requisite information from Government. 
8. The Committee notes with deep concern the manner in which the Chairman and 
members of the PESB are appointed by Government. The PESB is charged with the 
responsibility of recommending Board level appointments for the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings, which number 246. Some of the PSUs are in the Core sector of the economy 
and thus occupy a very strategic and cruclal place in the country's economy. Therefore, the 
Committee emphasises the importance and the need of selecting qualified and suitable persons 
to man the top level posts in the PSUs. This would be possible only if PESB itself bas full 
complement of its· members. However, the Committee notes with deep regret that Government 
has handled the matter of manning the PESB with rather cavalier fashion. Over the years 
only lAS officers have been selected as Chairma&inembers of the Board and these too who 
are either retired or were due to J."ftire In the near future. Therefore, it is no w~nder thqt 
performance of the majority of PSUs h~d not been satisfactory. The Committee would, 
therefore, reiterate that timely action should be taken to fdl-up the posts in the PESB, which 
should not necessarily be from the lAS alone. 
Monitoring mechanism in PESB 
9. Recommendation: The Committee, in. para11 of the Sixteenth Report had observed 
that there was no mechanism of monitoring in the PESB regarding implementation of its 
recommendations by the Administrative Ministries. In the absence of such a mechanism, it is 
not understood as to how the PESD can monitor whether or not its recommendations are 
being implemented by the concerned Ministries expeditiously. The Committee was of the 
view that the recommendations of the PESB need to be closely monitored at the level of 
PESB. 
10. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry had stated that, the PESB has since set up a 
mechanism for monitoring the implementation of its recommendations by the Administrative 
Ministries-Departments concerned. lt has formulated a proforma to be filled in and 
furnished by the Administrative Ministries/Departments concerned by the 7th of every 
mo~th, giving details of the action taken by them on its recommendations. This would 
enable the PESB to regularly monitor the progress made by the various Administrative 
Ministries/Departments in implementing the recommendation made by it. 
11. ·The Committee is pleased to note that a monitoring mechanism at the level of PESB 
has been instituted as per its recommendation. The Committee hopes that the PESB will be 
able to monitor effectively whether-. or not. its recommendations are being implemented by the 
concerned Ministries/Departments expedi.tiously. 
Public Grievances 
12. Recommendation (Para 12): Acw-rding to the Ministry's Annual Report (1994-95), 
the Department of Public Grievancc.~s had received a total of 8152 complaints from January­
December 1994, a bulk of which were referred to the concerned Ministries/Departments/ 
State Governments, leaving merely 61 grievances for intensive monitoring and follow-up by 
the Department. The Committee is not uware whether any monitoring was done in respect 
of the referred grievances/complaints. As the nodal Department for public grievances, th~ 
Committee · expects a little more exercise by the Department in this regard. 

3 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note had mentioned that efforts were being made 
for improving the monitoring of the taken up cases from amongst the referred cases. It also 
mentioned that considerable progrct~s hus already· been made in this regard and it will be 
ensured that by the end of the yenr (1995) further substantial number of grievances are 
taken up for active monitoring, with a view to positive redressal of public grievances. The 
Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee on 6th March , 1996 that as per the 
directions of the Committee, the Department of Public Grievances had taken up 208 
grievances, plus the backlog for intensive monitoring and follow up. 
14. The Committee is of the opinion that the reply of the Ministry is too general. It does 
not indicate specifically the efforts beln& made to improve monitoring of the cases, as well as 
the progress made in cases which have been taken up by the Department of Public 
Grievances. The Committee feels that its direction for taking up a larger number ot 
grievances for intensive monitoring bas not been taken in the right earnest. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may look into the matter and report back to the 
Committee on the Action Taken in implementing the recommendation. 
Surrender of Posts 
15. Recommendations (Paras 13 & 14): The Ministry had stated that as per instructions 
issued by the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
was required to surrender 10% of posts. Of the 105 posts which were to be surrendered 
under this direction, 67 had already been surrendered and the remaining 38 posts were 
identified to be surrendered , as and when they fall vacant. The Committee felt that it is nol 
clear precisely when the remaining posts ure likely to be surrendered and inquired from the 
Ministry whether any time limit had been fixed to implement the instructions of Ministry of 
Finance. 
16. The Ministry in its Action Tuken Note informed the Committee that out of 
remaining 38 posts identified for surrender, another 14 posts have since been surrendered. 
The remaining 24 posts are proposed to be surrendered by September, 1996. 
17. The Committee is satisfied wlth the Action Taken by the Ministry and hopes that the 
time limit fixed by the Ministry for surrender of the remaining p~sts will be adhered to. 
ExpmdiJure of UPSC 
18. Recomm endation (Para 15): The Committee found that the Demands of the UPSC, 
a 'charged' expenditure, is not included in the detailed Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the 
Ministry. The Committee felt that as the UPSC is under the administrative control of the 
Ministry, the Demands of the UPSC be included, alorigwith the detailed Demands of the 
Ministry, even though the expenditure of the UPSC is 'charged'. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommended that the Demands of the UPSC may be included alongwith the 
detailed Demands of the Ministry- from the next financial year. 
19. The Ministry in its Action Tuken Note submitted that the matter has been 
considered in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and it has been decided to include 
the Demands relating to UPSC, alongwith the Demands of the Ministry of Personnel, from 
the next financial year. 
20. The Committee is pleased to note that its recommendation has been accepted In 
principle and hopes that it will be implemented from the financial year 1996-97. 
Kendriya Bhandar 
Functio11i11g of KeiUiriya Bhandar 
21. Recommendation (Para 18): Notwithstanding the performance and achievements of 
the Kendriya Bhandar, the Committee felt that there is a lot of scope for improvement in its 

4 
functioning. The Committee felt that the J(endriya Bhandar is not being run on professional 
lines and suggested some specific steps to improve their functioning. In the Committee's 
view, issues like proper maintenance of notice boards, upkeep of stores, especially display of 
goods, cleanliness, maintenance of stores, availability of goods, quality of goods, behaviour 
of sales staff and the issue of having uniform timings and weekly off in all the stores need to 
be seriously looked into, to make such stores consumer friendly and run on professional 
lines. 
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note outlined the following steps, taken to 
implement the items of improvement suggested by the Committee:-
(a) Special training courses are belf1g arranged for the staff to inculcate professional 
attitudes and impart professional skills to them; 
(b) Face lifting of stores is being done and 24 stores were earmarked for this purpose 
in 1995; 
(c) A food testing laboratory has been opened in Kendriya Bhandar HQs to provide 
for large scale pre-testing of samples. Samples lifted from stores are also tested in 
the laboratory. 788 such ~ samples were tested from 1.4.95 to 31.7.95 and only 12 
did not come up to the prescribed specifications; 
{d) Digital weighing and packing machine has been installed to ensure quality by 
packing goods hygienically; 
(e) As regards limited choice of goods in most of the stores, the Ministry submitted 
that Kendriya Bhandar wus selling more than 2000 consumer, and grocery items 
through its stores. As fair price shops are attached to these stores and as most of 
the stores are situated in Type I and Type Ii staff quarters, the accommodation 
available does not permit the range of goods made available, being expanded; 
{f) The Ministry felt that having uniform timings and weekly off for all the stores was 
not feasible and it will not suit the customers as timings and weekly off are decided 
by stores' location and sales activities. 
23. The Committee has taken note of the steps initiated by the Ministry to implement Us 
recommendations. It feels that constant efforts should be made to improve functioning of the 
Kendriya Bhandar and that they should be run along professional lines. 
Installation of Alpha Numeric Machines in Kendriya Bhandars 
24. Recommendation (Para 19): The Committee had recommended that Alpha Numeric 
Machines, which also print the name of the items purchased and their prices on the cash 
memos, should be installed in all the 84 stores of Kendriya Bhandar within the financial year 
(1995-96). In view of the Committee, it should not be difficult to achieve as the financial 
position of Kendriya Bhandar was sound. 
25. The Ministry in its Action Taken No~e reported that it has been decided in principle 
to provide Alpha Numeric machines in ull the 84 ~tores in a phased manner in the financial 
year 1995-96. The Ministry also reported that this would involve a capital expenditure of 
Rs. 27 lakhs, apart from maintenance expenditure of Rs. 4 lakhs per annum. 
26. The Committee would like to know the progress made so far in regard to installation 
of Alpha Numeric machines in all ·the 84 stores. 
Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) 
Pendency of cases in CAT 
27. Recommendation (Paras 20 & 21): Th·e Committee expressed its satisfaction that 
CAT has been able to dispose of us many as 163115 cases since its inception. The 

5 
Committee, however, expressed concern that despite speedy disposal • of cases by the CAT, 
39849 cases were still pending before it for varying periods, out of which 6483 cases were 
over three years old. The Committee also noted that the number of cases pending before the 
Principal Bench (6387) and Allahabad Bench (6913) were much more as compared to its 
other Benches. 
28. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, stated that the Chairman, CAT has been 
requested to consider suitable measures to expedite disposal of the cases pending in various 
Benches, particularly the cases which are more than three years old, and those cases which 
are pending in the Allahabad Bench and the Principal Bench at Delhi. 
29. The Committee desires to know whether any steps have been taken by the Chairman, 
CAT to expedite disposal of the pending cases. 
Setting up of Additional Courts in CAT 
30. Recommendation (Para 22): The Committee felt that in view of large number of 
cases pending before the Principal Bench and the Allahabad Bench, the number of courts in 
those Benches need to be increased. The Committee had noted that it would be better if the 
cases instituted before the CAT are disposed off within a period of 1-2 years from the date 
of their institution. The Committee had also recommended that all the then vacant posts of 
Vice Chairman and members of Tribunal are filled up expeditiously and that action be 
intimated for filling up future vacancies well in advance. 
31. The Ministry had stated in its Action Taken Note that the question regarding setting 
up of additional courts is being examined in consultation with Chairman, CAT. Regarding 
filling up of the then vacant posts, the Ministry had submitted that the recommendations for 
appointment to the posts of Vice-Chairman and members of the Tribunal are made by a 
Committee, whose C~airman is a Judge nominated by the Chief Justice of India. The 
Ministry had requested for a date from the Chairman of the Selection Committee for holding 
the next meeting. In his deposition before the Committee on 6th March, 1996 the Secretary 
of the Ministry informed the Committee, that the meeting of Selection Committee has since 
been held. Two Vice-Chairmen, seven Members on the Judicial side and one Member on 
the Administrative side have been selected and that the papers are now with Honourable 
Chief Justice of India for his final clearance. 
32. The Committee would like to know from the Ministry, whether the Vice-Chairmen 
and Members who have been selected, have joined. The Committee expresses its concern over 
the delay in setting up additional courts in the Principal Bench and in the AUahabad Bench of 
the CAT, and impresses upon the Ministry to expedite the process of setting up of the 
additional courts and report back to the Committee on the steps taken in this regard. 
Resident's Welfare Association 
33. Recommendation (Para 23 & 24): As part of the welfare schemes, Residents' 
Welfare Associations were set up by the Government. These Welfare Associations had been 
receiving grants from the Government to enable them to carry out their day-to-day welfare 
activities for Central Government Employees. The Ministry had decided to discontinue this 
scheme of giving grants-in-aid to the Associations from 1996-97 onwards. The Committee 
had recommended that the Ministry should reconsider its decision and continue to release 
the gran~-in-aid to these Associations, and that this will be in conformity with staff welfare 
policy of the Ministry. 
34. The Ministry in its-Action Taken Note had stated that a review of the arrangements 
of providing grants-in-aid to the Residents' Welfare Associations was conducted as a part of 
action plan 1993-94. Subsequently, it was felt that these Associations are more of voluntary 
nature and should be encouraged to function as such instead of providing them with 

6 
continuous subsidy. The Ministry had felt that there is no apparent reason to change thi!> 
decision. The Secretary of the Mini~try informed the Committee on 6.3.1996 that some of 
the Association did not give utilisation certificates of the funds disbursed through grants-in­
aid in time and, that a number of romplaints had also been received. So, the Ministry fell 
that since they hav~ been nurtured with grants-in-aid for sufficiently long period, they should 
now try to stand on their own legs. 
35. The Committee endorses the view of the Ministry and decides not to pursue the 
matter further. 
Audit Objections 
36. Recommendation (Para 26): Audit objections do not speak well of an organisation. 
Moreover, their pendencey over a long period of time is not at all desirable. The Committee 
was surprised to know that large number of audit objections are pending settlement, 
specially in SSC, CAT, ISTM and Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administra­
tion. 
37. The Ministry in its Action taken Note had stated that the number of outstanding 
audit objections have been reduced from 195 as on 31.12.94 to 123 as on 1.11.95 and that 
steps are being taken for selllemcnt ol remaining audit objections as well. 
38. The Committee is dismayed to note that despite the assurance given by the Ministry 
to the Committee thad steps are being taken to expedite settlement of audit objections, a larJle 
number of audit objections are still pending. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to 
streamline its monitoring of settlement of audit objections and issue necessary instructions to 
the attached offices to take suitable action in this regard. 
Backlog of Reservation for SC/ST 
39. Recommendation (Para 27): The Committee had been informed that after 
completion of the 4th Special Recruitment Drive in March, 1994 out of a backlog of 30,259 
SCIST vacancies, recruitment of 15,398 candidates had been completed. The Ministry had 
also stated in its note that the 5th Special Recruitment Drive {1995-96) was likely to be 
launched in June 1995 to clear the remaining backlog of SCIST vacancies. The Committee 
had expressed the hope that sincere efforts would be made in this regard during the 
proposed drive. 
40. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry had stated that all the Departments have 
been requested to identify the ppsts reserved for SCISTs so as to fill them up during the 
Special Recruitment Drive, which had ~tarted on 1.6.95 and was to end on 30.11.95. The 
Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee on 6.3.96 that the drive has since been 
extended till 31.3. 96. 
41. The Committee desires thnt the Ministry may send a detailed list of Ministries and 
Departlnents where the vacancies ha"e nnt been filled up, indicating the vacant posts, as also 
the backlog in each Ministry and Department as on 31.3.96. The Committee would also like to 
know the efforts made by each Mlni!oilry and Department in implementing the Special 
Recruitment Drive. 
Vacancies in CBI 
42. Recommendation (Para 28): The Committee had been informed that the total 
numbe.r of vancant posts in the CBI as on -.1.9.1994 was 1,015 which was inclusive of the 
additional posts sanctioned for strengthening of CBI. The number of vacant posts as on 
1.3.95 came down to 885. Out of these 885 vacant posts, 156 posts belonged to group 'D' 
and 656 posts belonged to group 'C'. The Committee had desired that all the vacancies 
shcruld be filled up expeclitiously for smooth functioning of the CBI. Even for posts. with 

7 
which UPSC and SSC arc assodatcd, the Committee had expressed its hope that early 
recruitments would be made. 
43. The Ministry in its Action Takt~n Note had submitted that the total number of 
vacancies in the CBI as on 1.7.95 has been reduced from 1015 to 790. Number of vacancies 
in Group 'C' have been reduced from 656 to 580 and in Grade 'D' from 156 to 148 and that 
instructions have been issued to the CBI to speed up the process of filling up of remaining 
vacancies. The Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee on 6.3.96 that the total 
number of vancancies has now come down to 647. He also reported that about 269 
appointments are in the pipeline pending verification. He expressed the hope that by the end 
of June 1996. there will not be more than 3 to 5 percent vancancies in the CBI. 
44. The Committee has taken note of the progress made by the CBI in filling up the 
vacant posts. The Committee desires thut rev.iew of the vacancy position be done in order to 
till up the vacancies without delay. 
Cadre .1\.fmwJ.:emt•IJt 
45. Recommendation (Paras 31 & 32): The Committee had been informed that the 
Appointment Committee of the Cabinet had approved the poJicy that CSS officers who 
could not be appointed as Joint Secretary during circulation of their names will be 
considered for mandatory posting, if they have been empanelled for three years or more or 
have got only two years' service for superannuation. The Committee was of the view that 
the period of three years is rather long and felt that it should not take more than two years 
for placement of these officers from the ycur of empaneldment. The Committee also felt that 
a delay of more than two years for placement as Joint Secretary under the Central Staffing 
Scheme, would mar the prospects of thdr further avenues of promotion. 
46. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry informed the Committee that the 
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet had taken a decision on 6.4.95 that CSS officers 
who could not be appointed as Joint Secretary during circulation of their names may be 
considered for mandatory postings if they have been empanelled for three years or more or 
have got only two years' service for superannuation. This, in view of the Ministry, would 
provide a degree of relief in regard to the placement of CSS officers. 
47. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Mmistry. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may reply to the following points:-
(a) What is the numher of officns who have been appointed as Joint Secretary in 
pursuance of the ACC declslun of April 6, 1995. 
(b) Whether It is a fact that the delay in implementing the decision of the ACC dated 
April 6, 1995 is bound to mar the prospects of further promotion of CSS officers os 
Additional Secretaries? If ~. what action is being taken/is proposed to be taken for 
resorting to mandatory postings. 
Training for tl1e CSS Officers 
48. Recommendation (Paras 33, 34, .15 & 36): The Committee had noted that in case of 
the lAS officers there is a fairly comprehensive and well laid out scheme of training, both at 
the time of entering the service and while in service. The Commit~ee, ·after a perusal of 
training programmes for CSS officers, had felf that adequate training facilities have not been 
provided for the off~cers of the CSS. The Committee wanted to know why there cannot be 
uniform policies for training for both the services, namely lAS and the CSS, particularly in 
view of the fact that Department of Personnel is the cadre controlling authority for both of 
them. 

8 
49. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry had mentioned that the training division of 
the Department of Personnel and Training has been organising two programmes namely; the 
Management Development Programme (CSS) which is compulsory for selection grade 
officers of CSS and Special Programme for Directors and Deputy Secretaries of Central 
Staffing Scheme at UPA. In addition to these programmes, the Management in Government 
Programmes (MIG) and the Management Orientation Programmes (MOP) are also open to 
the officers of the CSS. They are also nominated to different general category plan 
programmes. Further, CSS officers of the rank of Under Secretary and above are abo 
considered alongwith the officers of All India Services and Group 'A' services for acquiring 
higher skills in the specialized fields abroad. These training facilities, in view of the Ministry. 
were adequate for the present. 
50. The Committee has taken note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committt.•e 
would like to know from the Ministry, whether it is a fact that the lAS officers have fixed 
schedules of training; if so, what action has been/is being taken to ensure uniformity in the 
training schedules of lAS ond CSS ofllccrs. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE 
XXXI 
THIRTY ·FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th January, 1996 in Committee 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Slui Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri · Makhan Lal Fotedar 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
6. Mufti Mohd. Sayccd 
7. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
9. · Shrf Raaj Bahhar 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Kirip Chaliha 
11. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
12. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
13. Shrimati Bihhu Kumari Devi 
14. Maj. Gen. (Rettl.) Bhuwan Chctndra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Singh 
16. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
17. Shri Vinaya Katiyar 
18. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
19. Shri Rabi Ray 
20. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
21. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
22. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
23. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
24. Slui Bhubaneswar Prasad Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Sopcrna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
2. • • • 
:3. The Committee then expressed serious concern over the law and order situation in 
the country in the wake of recent nrms drop at Purulia and decided to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Director, CBI on the 29th January 1996 to have an 
overview of the situation. It also decided to seek clarifications, if any, from the Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and th~ Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions on the Action Taken Notes furnished by these Ministries on the recommendations 
contained in its Fifteenth and Sixteenth Reports respectively, on the same day. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, 
the 29th January, 1996. 
•••Relate$ to other matter. 
9 

XXXVIII . 
THIItTY ·EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.30 t'.M. on Wednesday, the 6th March, 1996, in Committee 
Room '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Slui N. Rajendran 
6. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
7. Dr. Sanjaya Sinh 
8. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutru 
9. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
LOK SAUHA 
10. Shri A. Yenkalesh Naik 
11. Slui M.O.H. Farook 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Dcvi 
13. Shri Ram Singh 
14. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
15. Shri Rabi Ray 
16. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
17. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Slui R.C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTH.Y OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS 
Shri P.C. Hota. Secretary 
Shri Dincsh Chandra, Addl. Secretary 
Smt. Sarita Prasad, ~oint Sccaclary 
Shri K. Ramani, Joint Sccretmy 
Shri James K. Joseph, Joint Secretary 
••• *** *** 
2. The Chairman apprised mcmhl·rs that as per the agend<s of the meeting, the 
Committee would take up conside{ation of (I) the Action Taken Note furnished by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations of 
the Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report relating to Demands for 
Gr3nts {1995-96) and (ll) the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
•••Relates to other matter. 
10 

11 
on the rccommcnJutions of the Committee contained in its Fifteenth Report relating to 
Demands for Grunts (1995-96) and seek clarifications thereo11 from the Secretaries of the 
concerned Ministries who had been invited for the purpose . 
3. The Chairman, thereafter . welcomed the Secretary of the ~i.nistry of Personnel. 
Public Grievances and Pensions and other Officers accompanying him and requested him to 
explain the position regarding action taken/being taken by· Government on the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in its Sixteenth Report. The Secretary gave 
details of various measures/steps taken hy Government thereon. The Secretary also replied 
to various queries raised by the Chairman and Members. The Committee observed that the 
Action Taken Note of the Ministry on certain points/issues was vague and needed 
elaboration. The Committee accordingly desired that the Ministry may furnish detailed 
information on those point!Vissues. 
4. • • • 
5. The Committee then adjoumcJ al 6.30 P.M. to meet again at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, 
the 7th Mardt, 19%. 
•••Rellltes to other matter. 

xxxx 
FORTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 29th March, 1996, in Committee Room 
'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Rajni Ranjan Sahu - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
3. Makhan Lal Fotedar 
4. Shri Krishan Lal Sharma 
5. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Gurucharan Singh Galib 
7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
8. Shri Shantaram Potdukhe 
9. Shri M.O.H. Farook 
10. Shri Narain Singh Chaudhari 
11. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
12. Shrimati Bibhu Kumari Devi 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri 
15. Shri Ram Singh 
16. Shri Rabi Ray 
17. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav 
18. Shri Saifuddin Choudhury 
19. Shri Prem Chand Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Director 
Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri Surinder Kumar , Under Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Committee .Officer 
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft Twenty-ninth, Thirtieth and 
Thirty-first Reports on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee contained in its Fifteenth, Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
Reports relating to Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministries of Home Affairs, 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Law, Justice and Company Affairs, 
respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports with some changes 
in the Twenty-ninth Report. 
3. The Committee discussed the matter regarding presenting/laying the said Reports in 
the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha. As the term of the present Committee was to expire on the 
7th April, 1996 and also in view of the ensuing Lok Sabha elections, it authori~ed its 
Chairman, to present the Reports to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha as per the Direction 
issued by him in this regard. 
4. • • • 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 6.00 P.M. on 4th April, 1996. 
•• • Relates to other matter. 
12 