C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
C.S.(H.A.)-241
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF
NORTH-EASTERN REGION
MINISOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 20TH MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 20TH MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
2. INTRODUCTION  
3. REPORT  
 CHAPTER-I Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
 
 CHAPTER-II Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
 
 CHAPTER-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final Replies of the Government are still awaited
 
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE  
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE  

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
( CONSTITUTED ON 5 AUGUST, 2006 )
     1.   Shrimati Sushma Swaraj   — Chairperson
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Shri V. Narayanasamy
     3.   Shri Rishang Keishing
     4.   Shri R. K. Dhawan
     5.   Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
     6.   Shri Janeshwar Mishra
     7.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     8.   Shri N. Jothi
     9.   Shri Satish Chandra Misra
    10.   Shri Sanjay Raut
           LOK SABHA       
    11.   Shri L.K Advani    
    12.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
    13.   Shri Ilyas Azmi     
    14.   Km. Mamata Banerjee   
    15.   Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo       
    16.   Shri Biren Singh Engti  
    17.   Shri Tapir Gao      
    18.   Shri T.K. Hamza   
    19.   Shri Raghunath Jha
    20.   Shri Naveen Jindal
    21.   Shri Ajit Jogi        
    22.   Prof K M. Kader Mohideen         
    23.   Shri Ram Chandra Paswan           
    24.   Shri Sachin Pilot   
    25.   Shri Ashok Kumar Pradhan         
    26.   Shri G. Karunakara Reddy           
  *27.   Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy           
    28.   Shri Baju Ban Riyan     
    29.   Choudhary Bijendra Singh           
    30.   Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh   
    31.   Shri Mohan Singh 
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
           Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Director
           Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
           Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
 
* 
Nominated w.e.f. 10th October, 2006 vice Shri Rahul Gandhi who was nominated to Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development.
 
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorized by the
Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-
07) of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region.
2.      The One Hundred and Twentieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs was
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19 May, 2006.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
3.      The Ministry of DoNER furnished the Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Twentieth Report of the Committee on
17.8.2006. On 14.12.2006 the Minister for Development of North-Eastern Region laid on the Table of the Rajya  Sabha the status of
implementation of the recommendations contained in the said Report of the Committee, pursuant to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha’s
Direction dated 24.09.2004. The Committee is constrained to observe that both these documents are identical word-by-word. If the
statement of the Minister laid after nearly four months of the Action Taken Replies sent by the Ministry to the Secretariat is a mere
reproduction of the ATR, it would defeat the spirit underlying the Chairman’s Direction.
4.      The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 15 March, 2007.
5.      Observations/Recommendations/Conclusions of the Committee are printed in bold letters.
 
NEW DELHI;
15 March, 2007
SUSHMA SWARAJ
         Chairperson,
         Department-related Parliamentary
       Standing Committee on Home Affairs
                                                                                                                                                                       
 
REPORT
        The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the thirteen recommendations/observations
contained in its One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region for
the year 2006-07.
2.     Action Taken Replies were received from the Government in respect of all thirteen recommendations contained in the Report.
Subsequently, the Minister for the Development of the North-Eastern Region laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha a statement on the
status of implementation of recommendations contained in that Report. Those have been categorized as follows:
             (i)    Chapter-I
                    Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government (Para Nos. 7.1, 8.5, 8.6, 9.1, 10.2, 11.2 and
15.1 of the Main Report)                                                                                   (Total-7)
             (ii)   Chapter-II
                    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Para Nos. 7.7, 12.6 and 14.1 of the Main Report)
                                                                                                                                                        (Total-3)
             (iii)  Chapter-III
                    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited (Para Nos. 7.4, 12.3 and
13.2 of the Main Report)                                                                                   (Total-3)
3.     On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations/recommendations on each item of action
taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Twentieth
Report, action taken thereon by the Government and observations/recommendations of the Committee on each item have been given
chapter-wise in the succeeding paragraphs.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recommendation (Para 7.1)
4.0    The Committee observes that NLCPR being a developmental corpus, it should be used for various development projects of the
region but is constrained to note that special packages are also met out of this fund. Any allocation from it for some other purpose is
neither desirable nor permissible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should stop such practice and make separate
allocation for special packages.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
4.1    The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance who have supported the recommendation. Accordingly, the funds for the
Bodoland Territorial Council Area and for meeting the States’ share under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan would be found within the budgets of
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Human Resource Development without any additionality from the Centre and not from
NLCPR.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee:
4.2    The Committee is satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry.
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC)
Recommendation (Para 8.5)
5.0    The Committee notes with concern that the Tenth Plan Outlay for NEC has not been adhered to till 2006-07 even though it is the
terminal year of the plan. The final allocation made in each year put together leaves a gap of Rs. 988.5 crore. Had this amount been
allocated, all the projects could have been completed. The explanation of the Secretary, NEC that a host of projects are languishing from
scarcity of funds can be understood from the fact that the expenditure on the projects has been around hundred percent all the years. The
Committee fails to understand why the Planning Commission makes outlay for the Plan period and does not adhere to it while allocating
it every year. This is not the right approach, particularly in view of requirement of funds for the development of NER. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the amount required for completion of the projects in the current financial year, which is also the
terminal year for Tenth Plan, may be made at RE stage.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
5.1    The recommendations have been noted and NEC would be advised to submit RE proposals in line with the recommendations.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee:
5.2    The Committee notes that this is a critical area and calls upon the Ministry to communicate to it immediately the status of RE
proposals in relation to NEC.
Recommendation (Para 8.6)
6.0    The Committee is also given to understand that there is no proper monitoring mechanism to ensure quality and speedy execution of
the projects of NEC. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the monitoring mechanism may be strengthened to ensure quality and
speedy execution of the projects.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
6.1.0  The methods of Evaluation and Monitoring of NEC funded Schemes/Projects include the following:
               •      Preparation of Monthly Initiative.
               •      Preparation of Quarterly Progress Report (QPR).
               •      Financial Returns and Audit Reports.
               •      Intensive Inspection by NEC Officers.
               •      Quarterly Review by the Secretary.
               •      Periodical review of Schemes/Projects by the Steering Committee.
               •      Monthly performance review with Sectoral Heads.
               •      Monthly review with States on rotation basis.
               •      Obtaining photographs to assess progress.
               •      Concurrent Evaluation of ongoing Schemes/Projects suffering from implementation failure.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
               •      Evaluation-cum-impact study of completed Schemes.
               •      Technical Evaluation of the construction of buildings.
               •      Establishment of Management Information System (MIS).
6.1.1  A Monthly Initiative Report is being prepared highlighting the initiatives proposed and undertaken for making the functioning of
the Council more viable and relevant. A Quarterly Progress Report showing the physical and financial achievements in respect of each of
the NEC Schemes is prepared on a regular basis and circulated to all concerned. The Evaluation Advisory Committee of NEC constituted
in the year 2000 had recommended 26 completed projects for Evaluation-cum-impact study. The Committee has also recommended six
projects for undertaking Concurrent Evaluation and another six projects for Technical Evaluation of the buildings funded by NEC. Six
Concurrent Evaluation and three Technical Evaluation have been completed and the final Reports submitted.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
6.2     The Committee has noted that Evaluation Advisory Committee of NEC has recommended for evaluation-cum-impact study of 26
completed projects. The Committee desires to know the number of projects for which study has been completed and the details thereof.
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY:
Recommendation (Para 9.1)
7.0     The Committee appreciates the positive attitude of the States in coming up with proposals for capacity enhancement and hopes that
this approach would be maintained all through in implementing the schemes successfully. The Committee also notes that under the
Advocacy and Publicity, more than ninety five percent expenditure of the allocation has been made and the Ministry has also indicated
that several activities have been taken up at various places in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be done
under this scheme until the entire region is brought into the mainstream of the economy. More innovative programmes may be
undertaken and the Ministry of DoNER may approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation, if need be.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
Capacity Building:
7.1.0  The Ministry has ongoing arrangements with National/Regional institutes and centres of excellence, which are being continued this
year as well. In addition, as desired by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Ministry is venturing into newer areas of capacity
building. One of such initiatives is in ‘aviation sector’. It is planned to train youth from the North Eastern States as commercial pilots and
aircraft maintenance engineers so as to overcome the shortage of aviation staff willing to serve in the NER and thereby improve
connectivity.
Advocacy and Publicity:
7.1.1  This year the Ministry is proposing to hold exhibitions on regional basis to showcase NE products and strengths in major cities like
New Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad. An exhibition-cum-buyer-seller meet was held in Mumbai in collaboration with CII. An
elaborate programme to showcase the strength of the region through electronic media is underway.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee:
7.2     The Committee notes the action proposed to be taken by the Ministry to train the youth of the NE States as commercial pilot and
aircraft maintenance engineers. This needs to be pursued immediately particularly in view of the scarcity of pilots in the country.
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS (EAPs)
Recommendations (Para 10.2)
8.0     The externally aided projects, if implemented in the right earnest, would go a long way in improving the infrastructure in the North
East. The final report on Phase-I of the NE Urban Development Project may be processed and examined at the earliest and the project
proposals may be prepared soon. The Ministry should make all efforts to ensure that Phase-I goes through this year. As regards the NE
State Road Project, the Committee desires that the submission of draft Report be completed at the earliest and efforts be made to see that
the project takes off this year. The study of NE Trade and Investment Creation Initiative may be got competed at the earliest so that other
processes could be taken up. In regard to the World Bank study on natural resources, water and environment nexus for development and
growth, efforts may be made to complete the study on all aspects positively in this financial year.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
8.1.0  The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is providing Project Preparatory Technical Assistance (PPTA) in two phases. During Phase-
I, five capital cities viz. Agartala, Aizaw, Kohima, Shillong and Gangtok have been taken up. Phase-II will cover four cities viz.,
Guwahati, Dibrugarh, Imphal and Itanagar. The ADB Consultants have submitted draft Report for Phase-I cities Action is being initiated
by Ministry of DoNER/State Governments in the light of ADB’s observations in the Aide-Memoire.
8.1.1  As regards the North-Eastern State Roads Projects (NESRP), the final Report has since been submitted by the ADB Consultants.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
Requisite consultations have taken place with all concerned on  29th June and 14th July, 2006.
8.1.2  The key issue for consideration at this stage is the financing pattern. During 2005-06, the Ministry of Finance had taken a policy
decision to transfer external assistance to States on ‘back-to-back basis’. Most NE States have an extremely narrow resource base and are
not in a position to take the external assistance on ‘back-to-back basis’. The restoration of earlier prevailing financing pattern of 90:10 is
awaiting decision of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
8.1.3  The ADB Consultants on “NE States Trade and Investment Creation Initiative” Project have submitted their draft final Report. It
was discussed with the eight NE State Governments and other stakeholders in a Regional workshop held at Guwahati on 13th July, 2006.
8.1.4  The Strategy Report prepared by the World Bank on “Natural Resources, Water and Environment Nexus for Development and
Growth in North East India” was discussed in a Consultation Workshop held at New Delhi from 26-27 June, 2006. Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region had extended financial assistance to the eight NE States for organizing State Level Workshops
during April-June, 2006. The objective was to discuss the draft Report in a transparent manner and provide an opportunity to all
interested stakeholders to give their considered inputs.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee:
8.2    The Committee having noted the responses of the Ministry of DoNER recommends that the Ministry of Finance may take prompt
decision on restoration of earlier prevailing financing pattern of Externally Aided Projects.
VISION NER: 2020
Recommendations (Para 11.2)
9.0    The Committee is of the view that the Vision Document being a 15 year perspective  plan for integrated and holistic development of
NER through the process of participatory planning, must provide for concerted efforts to tap the potential and strengths of the region,
remove weaknesses and it should be prepared in consultation with all the stakeholders. Sports and textiles are two sectors that have
tremendous potential of growth in the NE region. Prowess of sportspersons of the region has been manifested at various national and
international levels. The need is for providing the ideal environment and infrastructure for allowing this talent to grow. Textiles are one
of the most important thrust areas not only to earn foreign exchange but also to provide employment to a large number of people
particularly to the rural artisans. Thus sports and textiles are two major strengths of the region and need to be given special thrust in the
Document. The Committee also recommends that establishment of a national level sports school and an institute like National Institute of
Fashion Technology in NER should be included in the Vision Document 2020.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
9.1    The recommendations have been noted and are being incorporated in the Vision 2020 Document which is in an advanced stage of
completion.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee:
9.2    The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed immediately of the present status of Vision Document: 2020.
NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION
Recommendations (Para 15.1)
10.0  The Committee agrees that in view of the conducive  climatic condition and heavy rainfall, the Bamboo Mission would boost the
plantation of bamboo in the region, which would certainly help the sagging economy of NE States. The Committee wants early
implementation of National Bamboo Mission in the region so that the Ministry of DoNER and NEC could accelerate projects under the
Mission. The Ministry and NEC may, therefore, take up the matter with the Ministry of Agriculture for early approval of the Mission.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
10.1  Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has informed that the proposed Scheme of Bamboo Mission has been referred to a
Group of Ministers (GoM) by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) Further action in the matter will be taken after the
Report of the GoM.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
10.2  The Committee while noting the reply would like to be informed of the latest position in the matter. The Committee suggests that
the Ministry of DoNER may expedite the follow-up action for implementation of the National Bamboo Mission.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
CHAPTER- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
Recommendation (Para 7.7)
11.0   The Committee does not agree with the Ministry of Finance of its plan to enable the NE States to raise loans from the open market.
The Committee is of the firm view that these States would not be able to raise loans from the market. The prevailing atmosphere in the
NE region too is not conducive for private investment. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that non-budgeting of
loan component of Central assistance to States is not a viable proposition for the special category States of NER and recommends that the
budgeting of loan component may be provided.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
11.1   The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance. They have informed that the decision not to provide budgetary support for
loan component has been taken on the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission and now all Central Assistance to the State
Plan is released by the Centre in the form of grants only and the States have been advised to raise borrowings directly from the market.
Ministry of Finance has pointed out that during 2005-06, no North Eastern State has faced any difficulty in raising the borrowings
directly from the market and during that period an amount of Rs. 1900.13 crore has been raised by them without any difficulty. In view
thereof, Ministry of Finance is of the view that it may not be prudent to provide the budgeting of loan component of Plan Assistance in
the Budget.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
11.2   The Committee is of the view that NE States because of their backwardness need special treatment. The Secretary, DoNER and
Secretary, NEC submitted before the Committee at the time of considering Demands for Grants for 2006-07 that all the NE States have
requested for budgeting of ten percent of loan component. In view of this, the stand taken by the Ministry of Finance is not convincing.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation and recommends that the loan component of Central Assistance to NE States
may also be budgeted as it used to be earlier.
CIVIL AVIATION IN NER
Recommendations (Para 12.6)
12.0   The Committee appreciates the problem involved in regard to the demand for engaging pilots and engineers from the private sector.
However, the problem of air connectivity in the North-Eastern Region cannot be ignored just because of this factor As a short-term
measure, the Government may take up the matter with the Indian Air Force to provide some Air Force pilots and engineers until a
permanent arrangement is made. For solving the problem on a long-term basis, the Ministry may discuss the issue of setting up a Pilot
Training Institute at Lilabari with Ministry of Civil Aviation at the earliest. Necessary allocation may also be made for starting the
Institute at the Revised Estimate stage. The Government may also include this in the ‘Vision Document 2020’
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
12.1.0  Dr. (Mrs.) I.K. Barthakur  had chaired an inter-ministerial meeting on 23.12.2005 to discuss the issue of providing improved air-
connectivity. The Alliance Air had expressed their inability to make Guwahati airport as the hub for operating the four ATR Aircrafts due
to shortage of pilots and technicians. However, it was assured that efforts would be made to recruit expatriate pilots for operating the
ATR aircraft.
12.1.1  Secretary, DoNER held a meeting on 16.03.2006 to review the MoU signed between ihe North Eastern Council and Alliance Air
for improving air connectivity in the NE Region. The Alliance Air was advised to take immediate steps to improve air connectivity in the
region The issue of shortage of pilots was also highlighted. Alliance Air was requested to base at least one ATR at Lokpriya  Gopinath
Bordoloi (LGB) airport, Guwahati and utilize it for effecting improved air connectivity.
12.1.2  Ministry of Defence has been requested to consider the recommendation of the Standing Committee to provide some IAF pilots
and engineers. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has been simultaneously requested to consider setting up of a Pilot Training Centre at
Lilabari.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
12.2   The Committee is not satisfied with the responses of the Ministry of DoNER. It notes that the approach of that Ministry for
improving air connectivity has been confined merely to making couple of requests and no road map has been prepared for achieving the
targets. The Committee would appreciate if Ministry of DoNER could apprise it of the latest position of action taken on each
recommendation. It would like to impress upon the Ministry to vigorously pursue the various issues so that decisions are taken thereon
within a reasonable period of time.
ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
Recommendations (Para 14.1)

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
13.0   The Committee is dismayed at the extraordinary delay in the commencement of work on the project “Ropeway at Tawang in
Arunachal Pradesh” inaugurated by the President of India. Such delays and procrastination breeds resentment amongst the people of the
region against the administration. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to seek early sanction for the project and
complete the same in the shortest possible time frame.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
13.1   The Project “Construction of Ropeway from Tawang Monastery to Ani Gompa” in Arunachal Pradesh was recommended for
sanction at an estimated cost of Rs. 330.89 lakh by the NLCPR Committee in its 40th meeting held on 28.03.2006. The State Government
was requested on 17.05.2006 to submit the work plan and requirement of funds under first installment for release of funds. They have not
submitted as yet the work plan and are being reminded.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
13.2   The Committee expresses its deep concern over the inordinate delay in the commencement of the construction of ropeway from
Tawang Monastery to Ani Gompa due to the nonchalant attitude of the authorities and lack of coordination between Central and State
Governments. The Committee directs the Ministry to expedite the project and submit the work plan so that the funds could be released
and the long pending project may see the light of the day. The Ministry should also help the State Government either by itself or through
NEC in preparing the work plan for the project, if necessary required funds and technical assistance be released to the State Government.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR):
Recommendation (Para 7.4)
14.0   The Committee finds that very important Ministries/Departments from the point of view of NER such as Ministries/Departments of
Science and Technology, Biotechnology and Space are in the list of exempted Ministries/Departments. These Ministries/Departments can
play an important role in the development of NER. Keeping in view the forest cover of the region, the bio-diversity development can be
given a boost through the involvement of Ministry of Science and Technology and Department of Biotechnology. Likewise, the
Department of Space, which has given matching contribution along with NEC for development of North Eastern Space Application
Centre (NESAC), Shillong, can also contribute significantly for the development of NER. These exempted Ministries/Departments
should be reviewed by the Government and considered for the purpose of spending ten per cent of their GBS for the development of
NER. The Committee hopes that the assurance given by the Secretary would be fulfilled at the earliest.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
14.1   The matter is under processing.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
14.2   The Committee urges upon the Ministry to expedite the follow-up action to include the Ministries/ Departments of Science and
Technology, Biotechnology and Space in the list of Ministries/Departments which mandatorily contribute ten per cent of their Grant
Budgetary Support for the development of NE Region, as assured by the Secretary, DoNER. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken thereon.
CIVIL AVIATION IN NER
Recommendation (Para 12.3)
15.0   The Committee is not happy with the way the issue of air connectivity in the North Eastern Region has been handled, particularly
by the Planning Commission. It is surprising that the Planning Commission has taken more than five years to process the proposals for
airports at Passighat and Teju in Arunachal Pradesh and even after five years, no decision has been taken and ‘in-principle’ approval has
not been given. The Committee observes that such delays ate one of the factors for which the North-Eastern Region has remained
backward. The real potential and the strengths available in the region have not been properly tapped and air connectivity is no exception
to this. Such casual approach and bureaucratic delays only create heart burning amongst the people of the region. When the Committee
visited North East early this year, several people who met it sought to know as to how long they have to wait for implementation of these
projects. The Committee takes strong note of this nonchalant approach and recommends that the Planning Commission should clear the
projects without further delay to enable the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the State Government to implement the projects at the earliest.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
15.1   Tezu  and Pasighat airports in Arunachal  Pradesh were included in the 10th Plan of NEC. The Planning Commission has not yet
accorded ‘in principle’ approval to the proposals. Secretary, DoNER addressed a D.O. letter to the Sr. Consultant, Planning Commission
on 30.03.2006 requesting for expediting the ‘in principle’ approval. The recommendation of the Standing Committee has also been
conveyed to the Planning Commission and their comments invited. A reply is awaited.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
15.2   The Committee takes a serious view of the lack of response of the Planning Commission in the matter. Such indifference and
indecisiveness belie the pronouncements of the Government on improving the air connectivity in the NER. The Committee would like the
Ministry of DoNER to again pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and apprise it of the decisions taken on its
observations/recommendations before it takes up scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2007-2008.
HEALTH CARE IN NER
Recommendations (Para 13.2)
16.0   The Committee finds it quite unusual that even after fifty-nine years of independence there are States which do not have even one
medical college and that the demand for the same is quite justified. Setting up of a medical college, besides providing trained medical
graduates, would also bring with it better medical facilities and health infrastructure. The States without medical colleges would all the
more require such facilities besides getting medical graduates. The Committee strongly recommends that at least one medical college in
each of the States of Arunachal  Pradesh, Mizoram  and Nagaland may be set up. This should be considered on priority basis and
allocation may be made at RE stage. This may also be included in the Vision Document 2020.
Action Taken/Proposed to be Taken
16.1   The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The reply is awaited.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
16.2   The Committee takes a strong note of the delay in arriving at a decision on this important matter. The Committee would like the
Ministry of DoNER to apprise it of the decisions taken on its observations/ recommendations before it takes up scrutiny of the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2007-2008.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
        The Committee is satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry.                                                   (Para 4.2)
NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC)
        The Committee notes that this is a critical area and calls upon the Ministry to communicate to it immediately the status of RE
proposals in relation to NEC.                                                                                                             (Para 5.2)
        The Committee has noted that Evaluation Advisory Committee of NEC has recommended for evaluation-cum-impact study of 26
completed projects. The Committee desires to know the number of projects for which study has been completed and the details
thereof.                                                                                                                                            (Para 6.2)
ADVOCACY AND PUBLICITY
        The Committee notes the action proposed to be taken by the Ministry to train the youth of the NE States as commercial pilot and
aircraft maintenance engineers. This needs to be pursued immediately particularly in view of the scarcity of pilots in the
country.                                                                                                                                           (Para 7.2)
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS (EAPs)
        The Committee having noted the responses of the Ministry of DoNER recommends that the Ministry of Finance may take prompt
decision on restoration of earlier prevailing financing pattern of Externally Aided Projects.           (Para 8.2)
VISION NER: 2020
        The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed immediately of the present status of Vision Document: 2020.       
(Para 9.2)
NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION
        The Committee while noting the reply would like to be informed of the latest position in the matter. The Committee suggests that
the Ministry of DoNER may expedite the follow-up action for implementation of the National Bamboo Mission.   (Para 10.2)
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
        The Committee is of the view that NE States because of their backwardness need special treatment. The Secretary, DoNER and
Secretary, NEC submitted before the Committee at the time of considering Demands for Grants for 2006-07 that all the NE States have
requested for budgeting of ten per cent of loan component. In view of this, the stand taken by the Ministry of Finance is not convincing.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation and recommends that the loan component of Central Assistance to NE States
may also be budgeted as it used to be earlier.                                                   (Para 11.2)
CIVILI AVIATION IN NER
        The Committee is not satisfied with the responses of the Ministry of DoNER. It notes that the approach of that Ministry for
improving air connectivity has been confined merely to making couple of requests and no road map has been prepared for achieving the
targets. The Committee would appreciate if Ministry of DoNER could apprise it of the latest position of action taken on each
recommendation. It would like to impress upon the Ministry to vigorously pursue the various issues so that decisions are taken thereon
within a reasonable period of time.                                                                                (Para 12.2)
ROPEWAY AT TAWANG
        The Committee expresses its deep concern over the inordinate delay in the commencement of the construction of ropeway from
Tawang Monastery to Ani Gompa due to the nonchalant attitude of the authorities and lack of coordination between Central and State
Governments. The Committee directs the Ministry to expedite the project and submit the work plan so that the funds could be released
and the long pending project may see the light of the day. The Ministry should also help the State Government either by itself or through
NEC in preparing the work plan for the project, if necessary required funds and technical assistance be released to the State
Government.                                                                                                     (Para 13.2)
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF RESOURCES (NLCPR)
        The Committee urges upon the Ministry to expedite the follow-up action to include the Ministries/ Departments of Science and
Technology, Biotechnology and Space in the list of Ministries/Departments which mandatorily contribute ten per cent of their Grant
Budgetary Support for the development of NE Region, as assured by the Secretary, DoNER. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken thereon.                                                                                                              (Para 14.2)

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
CIVIL AVIATION IN NER
        The Committee takes a serious view of the lack of response of the Planning Commission in the matter. Such indifference and
indecisiveness belie the pronouncements of the Government on improving the air connectivity in the NER. The Committee would like the
Ministry of DoNER to again pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and apprise it of the decisions taken on its
observations/recommendations before it takes up scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 21.07.2008.        (Para
15.2)
HEALTH CARE IN NER
        The Committee takes a strong note of the delay in arriving at a decision on this important matter. The Committee would like the
Ministry of DoNER to apprise it of the decisions taken on its observations/recommendations before it takes up scrutiny of the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2007-2008.                                                                (Para 16.2)
 
 
MINUTES
      *XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 15 March, 2007 in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shrimati Sushma Swaraj — Chairperson
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Shri Rishang Keishing
   3.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
   4.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   5.  Shri N. Jothi
        LOK SABHA
   6.  Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
   7.  Shri Tapir Gao
   8.  Shri T.K. Hamza
   9.  Prof. K.M. Kader Mohideen
10.  Shri G. Karunakara Reddy
11.  Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
12.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
        Shri Rohtas, Under Secretary
        Shri Sanjeev Chandra, Committee Officer
2.      The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration draft ***
and 125th Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations contained in *** and 120th Reports of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministries of *** and DoNER, respectively. After some discussion, *** Draft 125th
Report however was adopted with some minor amendments.
3.      The Committee decided to present/lay these Reports in the two Houses of Parliament on 20 March, 2007 and authorized its
Chairperson and in her absence Shri N. Jothi to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Tapir Gao and in his absence Shri Baju Ban
Riyan to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5.      The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
 
* 
First to ninteenth meetings relate to other matters.
*** Relates to other matters.

C
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Home%20Affairs/ha/125%20Report.htm[01-07-2016 11:38:55]
 
 