Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2014/Pausa, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of
Subordinate Courts
REPORT NO. 
67


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of
Subordinate Courts
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2014/Pausa, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-133

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 12—15
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 17—22
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 23 —34
(I) Details  of  Court  buildings  completed  between  12 th  July,   2010    to
16th  September,  2012 . ........................................................................................... 25—26
(II) Details  of  residential  quarters  completed  between  12 th  July,  2010  to
16th  September,  2012 ............................................................................................... 27—28
(III) Status of Gram Nyayalayas as on 31 st March, 2013 ............................................ 29
(IV) Statement indicating number of Family Courts functional in the States ............ 30
(V) Sanctioned strength and vacancies in subordinate Courts as on 31.03.2012 .... 31—32
(VI) Statement of cases pending in subordinate judiciary as on 31.03.2012 ............. 33—34
8. A PPENDIX ............................................................................................................................. 35 —43
List of previous Reports of the Committee ..................................................................... 37—43

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Sixty-seventh Report on the subject “Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of
Subordinate Courts” as part of Judicial Reforms.
2. The Committee, during its study visits to Mumbai, Bangaluru and Chennai; Kolkata, Shillong,
Guwahati and Imphal; Goa and Kochi; and Bhubaneswar and Port Blair from 12
th to 19 th June, 2010;
3rd to 9 th June, 2012; and 2 nd to 5 th January, 2013 and 15 th to 19 th February, 2013 respectively, held
discussions with State Governments on the subject. The Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry
of Law and Justice made a presentation on the subject before the Committee on 3rd March 2010.
3. While considering the subject, the Committee also took note of the following documents/
information which was placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the subject submitted by Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) Presentation made by the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
on the subject before the Committee on 3
rd March 2010.
(iii) W ritten replies furnished by the State Governments to the questionnaire on the subject;
and
(iv) Other research material/documents related to the subject.
4. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the January 3 rd, 2014.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendation of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 3rd, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Pausa 13, 1935 ( Saka) on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

(iv)
ACRONYMS
ACA Additional Central Assistance
AIJS All India Judicial Service
A2J Access to Justice
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme
FTC Fast Track Court
ICT Information and communications technology
ILI Indian Law Institute
NIC National Informatics Centre
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
US Utilisation Certificates
UT Utilization Certificates

1
REPORT
Constitution of India has provided for a single integrated system of Courts to administer and
interpret both Union and State laws. The Supreme Court being the highest court of appeal is at the
top of hierarchy as per Article 124 of the Constitution followed by High Courts at State levels as
per Article 214 which caters to one or more than one States. Below High Courts exist subordinate
Courts comprising District Courts at district level and other lower Courts at taluk levels.
Chapter IV of Part V and Chapter VI of Part VI of Indian Constitution talk about the Union
Judiciary and Subordinate Courts, respectively. Currently there are 24 High Courts for 28 States and
7 Union Territories and around 16000 District and Subordinate Courts spread over 3066 Court
Complexes in our country.
2. Development of infrastructure of High Courts and Subordinate Courts is the responsibility of
State Governments whereas administration of justice is the common responsibility of both Union and
State Governments in view of Entry No. 11 A of List No. III (Concurrent List) under VI Schedule
to Constitution.
Outlay and Funding Pattern:
3. Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for infrastructure development of subordinate judiciary is
in operation since 1993-94 to provide financial resources in the form of grant to States on the basis
of 50:50 (Centre: State) other than North Eastern States and 75:25 (Centre: State) for North Eastern
States. However, the said Scheme was modified in 2011 whereby Union Government has enhanced
the central share by revising the funding pattern from 50:50 to 75:25 for States other than North
Eastern States. The funding pattern for North Eastern States has been augmented from 75:25 to 90:10.
4. Since its inception in 1993-94 till its modification in 2010-11, R1245 crores were released by
Centre to different States under the CSS. After its revision in 2011 till 2013, R1303 crores have been
released ( R595 crores for 2011-12 and R708 crores for 2012-13). The modified CSS does not cover
High Court buildings for which central assistance to States is provided directly by Planning Commission
as one time Additional Central Assistance (ACA) in the ratio of 30:70 (Centre: State). Planning
Commission has approved one time ACA of R41.50 crores for construction of buildings of High
Courts at Jodhpur during 2010-11 and ACA of R231.31 crores for construction of buildings of
Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court during 2011-12. The projection of requirement of R5510
crores under the said CSS has been approved for the Plan Period 2011-16.
5. Eleventh Plan outlay for the scheme was R701.08 crore. In the first four years of the Eleventh
Plan Five Year Plan i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09, and 2009-10 and 2010-11, R103.80 crore, R132.47,
R175.70 crore, R142.74 crore, respectively, were disbursed to the States/UTs. During 2011-12 a grant
of R595.74 crore has been released to States/UTs.
6. For Twelfth Five Year Plan period, a total plan support of R5802 crore has been approved by
the Planning Commission for various plan schemes of the Department of Justice and out of which,
an amount of R4867 crore has been earmarked for the purpose of augmenting infrastructure
requirement of the States and UTs under this Scheme. During the first year of the Twelfth Five year
Plan (2012-13), an amount of R723.66 crore was provided at RE Stage out of which an amount of
R693.207 crore has been released to the States/UTs as on 28
th February, 2013.
7. The matter of development of infrastructure of the subordinate courts is also being regularly
reviewed in the Supreme Court in the Interlocutory Application No. 279/2010 in Writ Petition (C) No.
1022/1989 in All India Judges’ Association and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors. A strong monitoring

2
mechanism has been set up by formation of Monitoring Committees at Central, State and District level.
The State Governments have been sensitised to the need for the development of judicial infrastructure,
and thus an adequate provision in the budget for the purpose would provide a much needed impetus
to the growth of judicial infrastructure at the subordinate level. As per the information compiled by
the Supreme Court in the above case, an amount of R2109.08 crore has been sanctioned to States
and UTs for construction, repairs and maintenance of court buildings between 12
th July, 2010 till the
16th September, 2012. Similarly an amount of R742.22 crores has been sanctioned by the States/UTs
for construction, repair and maintenance of residential quarters of judicial officers for the above period.
It has, further been indicated that construction of 234 court buildings and 254 residential quarters have
been completed during the above period (Annexture II & III).
Issues raised by State Governments
8. The Committee during its study visit to various States noted that according to States, the
system of fund sharing mechanism of 50:50 and 75:25 ratio was not sufficient and sustainable. Almost
all the States Committee interacted with were of the view that the funds allocated are just not
sufficient and they themselves didn’t have adequate funds to contribute their share to the ongoing
scheme. Despite the fact that Department of Justice revised the fund sharing mechanism during the
financial year 2011-12 from 50:50 to 75:25 and for North Eastern States from 75:25 to 90:10, the
States/UT Govt. continued to be suffered by financial crunch. During its study-visit, the Committee
was apprised of the following issues by the States Governments;
(a) Except the UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, all the States said that the existing
pattern of funding is not sufficient. States like Manipur said that the Central contribution
should be made 100 per cent.
(b) States like Tamil Nadu complained that, the funds by Central Government is generally
released in the last quarter of the financial year. It makes difficult for the State
Government to spend those funds in time. Delayed utilization or non utilization of funds
very often results in delayed/non submission of utilization certificates. It then leads to
delay in further release of funds from Central Govt. Finally the projects get delayed.
(c) In all the States where Committee visited, except Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, the Committee was apprised of the problem of acquisition of suitable
land for the construction of residential quarters and court buildings.
(d) Maharashtra government said that they require 107 more court buildings and 900
residential quarters to meet the existing demands. Similarly all the States have their own
projections, where there is a mismatch between existing infrastructure and demand. In
Karnataka, due to inadequate physical infrastructure, the courts are being run from rented
premises. Similarly, in Odisha, both male and female officials are being forced to share
common toilet facilities due to space crunch.
9. The State Government of Odisha, in its written replies to the questionnaires of the Committee
said that;
“The selection of sites for construction of Court buildings and residential quarters is being
made by a Site Selection Committee consisting of the District judge, Collector, Executive
Engineer of the Works Deptt., and other concerned Officers of the Revenue Deptt. Health and
Fire services of the Concerned District. After selection of the site, the process of alienation
takes place by the Revenue authorities and thereafter the possession of site is handed over. The
selection of the site is usually made keeping in view the convenience of the members of the
Bar as well as the litigant public. The major problem that is being faced most of the times
is that due to non-availability of suitable sites, near or adjacent to the existing court premises,

3
if any other suitable site is selected outside the busy locality or at a little distance, resentment
arises from the side of the members of the Bar against the proposed shifting”.
10. The Committee gathers from the views expressed by the State Governments that the
main problem States are facing on account of non-availability of suitable site for construction
of court buildings and residential quarters for the judicial officers. The Committee believes
that identifying and providing suitable land is the sole responsibility of the State Government.
The Centre has no role to play in this regard. The Committee also appreciates the constraints
explained by the State Governments making the identification of suitable site, a difficult job.
The Committee suggests that the time has now come for the State Government to undertake
the vertical construction instead of the horizontal one at least to lessen the problem of
shortage of land.
11. The Committee observes that the Centre-State share has now been enhanced from
50:50 to 75:25 in respect of all the states except the North-Eastern States, where it has been
raised to 90:10. The Committee also notes that States have to bear the burden of maintaining
the infrastructure so provided. The State Governments have the grievance that the funds are
not just enough and Centre’s contribution need to be further enhanced. The Committee feels
that there is hardly any possibility of increasing the centre’s contribution and, therefore,
advises the State Governments to pool/generate their own resources to meet the requirement.
The Committee believes that the infrastructure of subordinate judiciary has to be strengthened
and efforts have to be made by the concerned agencies in all sincerity. The Committee further
suggests to the Central Government to explore the possibility, if any, to enhance their
contribution.
12. One major issue which came up frequently during Committee’s study visit was the pendency
of Utilisation Certificates (US). The Department of Justice informed the Committee during the
examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14), Ministry of Law and Justice, that since the inception
of the Scheme, the States/UTs have been provided R2534.30 crore as central assistance till
28
th February, 2013. As per the utilisation certificates reported by the States against the releases made
to them upto 2010-11, utilisation of funds to the tune of R31.84 crore is pending with the States.
Utilisation Certificate against the release of R2011-12 and 2012-13 have not become due yet.
13. The Secretary, Department of Justice while deposing before the Committee informed that;
...there are many States which are not coming forward with the Utilisation Certificates. So,
ultimately, they do not get the money even if they demand it because our procedures didn’t
allow them to get it. They have been told that if they want it to be steady flow, they have
to ensure that they also comply with the financial requirements. So, this is where some of the
States have lost out...
14. The Committee is constrained to note that there has been a general complaint of the
State Governments that the funds were not released on time and are very often released in
the last quarter of the financial year. This leads not only to the delay in the project but also
makes it extremely difficult for the State Governments to utilize the money in that financial
year. There have been some experiences where States failed to utilize the money and resultantly
the funds lapsed. The Committee directs the Central Government to be very  particular in
timely release of the funds to the State Governments. It is advisable that the release of funds
may be uniform throughout the year. The Committee wants that the Department of Justice
should specifically address to this issue and inform the Committee in its Action Taken Report
to what extend this issue was resolved.
15. The Committee also notes the explanation given by Department of Justice that release
of funds was mainly delayed due to delayed/non submission of Utilization Certificates of the

4
State Governments. The Committee advises the Department of Justice to take it up with the
concerned State Governments at the highest level to resolve this issue.
16. The Committee takes note of the fact that infrastructure development for subordinate
judiciary is a major component of the plan outlay of the Department of Justice. However, the
Committee during its deliberations with different stakeholders realised that the benefits of the
CSS on infrastructure development of Subordinate Judiciary has not percolated down sufficiently
in different States and there are certain States which were unable to receive funds for one or
more years despite the operation of this Scheme since 1993-94. The Committee reiterates its
view while examining the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
that it is high time for the Department of Justice to go for a review/audit of the said Scheme
so as to ascertain on both these aspects, namely, (i) the uneven and irregular drawl/utilization
of funds by certain States and (ii) the actual development in infrastructure that have taken
place in the States and the extent to which this has helped in speeding up the trial of cases
in courts.
E-Court Mission Mode Project
17. E-Court Mission Mode Project is one of the 27 Mission Mode Projects covered under National
e-Governance Project approved by Government of India in May, 2006. The main objection of the
projection is to assist judicial administration in reducing the pendency of cases to provide transparency
of information to the litigants or to provide legal and judicial data base to the judge, litigant public and
others under the project. Around 15,000 judicial officers would be provided with Laptop, Digital inter
connectivity between all courts from taluk level to the apex court, broad band connectivity to judges,
video conferences in police stations and jails, biometrics for courts, audio video conferencing of court
proceedings, etc. The project intends to make key functions of the judiciary linked to information
communication technology which includes case filing, case work flow, orders and judgement of the
court, cause list, case status. Those would be available on the web and accessible to litigants,
advocates and public at large. The project also implements upgradation of information, technology
infrastructure at Supreme Court and High Courts. It aims to build a national grid of key judicial
information which would be available in reliable way. Department of Justice is a nodal department
which provide support for project monitoring and evolution.
18. NIC is the implementing agency of the project. Out of 14249 subordinate courts, 11810 courts
have been computerised as on 31
st December, 2013. It is proposed to complete computerisation of
remaining courts by 31 st March, 2014. Total estimated cost for the project would be R935 crores. An
e-Committee of Supreme Court chaired by Chief Justice of India is in place to give overall policy
direction for fulfilment of e-court programme.
Issues raised by State Governments
19. During its visit, the Committee was apprised about the status of the e-Court Scheme being
undertaken in different States. Under the Scheme laptop and printers are being provided to officers
and provisions of broadband facility are provided to office and residence of the officials. Technical
manpower is being recruited, trained and deployed in Subordinate Courts.
20. The Committee during its study-visit noted that the e-Courts scheme is being successfully
implemented in Meghalaya, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. In
Karnataka and Maharashtra, the e-Courts scheme is under progress. However, the scheme is yet to
be operational in Manipur and Assam.
21. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry to computerize the
subordinate Courts in the Country and is optimistic that it would help in more efficient

5
management of subordinate courts, reduction in pending cases and increasing the speed of
justice delivery processes. The Committee is also happy and takes note of the new components
added under Phase-II and hopes that the employment of ICT in the various fields associated
with the functioning of the Courts, the advocates as well as the litigants would go a long way
in cutting on wasteful time and energy in the handling of litigation work which is mostly
handled manually at present.
22. The Committee notes that in some States the scheme has been successfully implemented,
whereas in others the scheme has failed to take up or is still in the preliminary stage only.
The Committee also takes note of the shortage of technical and legal manpower at the
subordinate judiciary, which is leading to the piling-up of cases year after year and recommends
the Ministry to look into the matter urgently so that the scheme can be implemented smoothly
within the required time-frame.
23. The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Government both at Centre and States
to adhere to the timeline set out for computerisation of all the Courts. There is a need to
address the constraints in the States those are lagging behind. The Committee calls for a
periodic report from Department of Justice in this regard.
24. The Committee would like to bring into notice that the computerization of Courts and
e-Courts are related but not the same, and computerization of Courts necessarily is a step
towards establishments of e-Courts. The Committee notes that still there are no facilities like
electronic filing, electronic evidence submission system etc. in the computerized courts. The
Committee however, feels that the real objective of e-Courts can only be fulfilled when the
services like e-filing and tracking of cases will be made operational in all the computerized
courts of the country. The Committee suggests that the requisite modifications in the Court
procedures, if necessary, may also be taken up.
25. The Committee strongly feels that the establishment of e-Courts can go a long way in
achieving efficiency, transparency, reducing corruption and particularly backlog of cases and
saving time and cost of the litigants. The Committee also feels that uninterrupted supply of
electricity is a prerequisite for the successful implementation of the e-Court Scheme and
recommends the Ministry to look into the provisions of providing generator sets, especially in
the States which are facing power supply crisis.
Gram Nyayalayas
26. The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 was enacted to provide for establishment of Gram Nyayalayas
at the inter-mediatory panchayat level by the State Governments in consultation with the respective
High Courts to provide speedy and affordable justice to common man at their door steps. Till
December, 2012 a total of 168 Gram Nyayalayas had been notified in seven States (Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Odisha, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Goa) out of which 150 Gram Nyayalayas
have been made operational by the respective State Governments. The operational status of gram
Nyayalayas as on 31
st March, 2013 is given at Annexture III .
27. Under the said Act around 5000 Gram Nyayalayas would be added to the existing structure of
judiciary which would reduce pendency and arrears in subordinate Courts as well as judge population
ratio in our country. In order to provide access to justice, Thirteen Finance Commission has
earmarked R5000 crores for 5 years during 2010-15 for the State Governments. The said act has been
made operational w.e.f. 2
nd October, 2009.The central assistance for setting up of Gram Nyayalayas
for every panchayat or for a group of contiguous Gram Panchayats at intermediate level R18 lakhs
per courts and R3.2 lakhs for Courts per annum for first three years towards recurring expenditure.
The Planning Commission has approved R1398.50 crores for 5000 Gram Nyayalayas in the country.

6
28. The Department of Justice informed the Committee that the slow pace of utilisation of funds
under the Scheme is mainly due to the lack of proposals from the States for setting up of Gram
Nyayalayas. Besides, inadequate infrastructure, non-availability of judicial officers to function as Gram
Nyayadhikaries and problem of concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts are other issues indicated by
the States which are coming in the way of speedy operationalisation of the scheme of Gram
Nyayalayas. Some States have got courts at Taluka level which are co-terminus with the block and
have shown reluctance to establish Gram Nyayalayas.
29. The Central Government carried out a study on effectiveness of functioning of the Gram
Nyayalayas in the States of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh through the Indian Law Institute (ILI),
New Delhi. Besides, inadequacy of infrastructure and manpower, the ILI Report highlighted the issue
of concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts and reluctance on the part of State functionaries to invoke
the jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
30. The Secretary, Department of Justice during his presentation informed the Committee that
some Gram Nyayalayas courts are functioning in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. Around 70 percent
funds are released to States once they show intention of establishing a Gram Nyayalayas; however he
further said that;
“...for the recurring side, I do agree it is not enough because it is only R3.2 lakh per court
and the balance is to be made by the State...”
Issues raised by State Governments
31. The Committee during its deliberations with the State Governments of Maharashtra, Tamil
Nadu, West Bengal and Karnataka was informed that the setting up of Gram Nyayalayas will add more
work load to District and Session Courts. Some of the major problems faced by the States were the
inadequate amount of Central funds allocation and the acquisition of land for the establishment of
Gram Nyayalayas.
32. The varied responses of the State Governments during Committee’s visit, State like Tamil Nadu
said that establishing Gram Nyayalayas will increase workload burden of Session and District courts.
Others like Assam, Manipur, Karnataka, West Bengal and Odisha said that the central contributions are
inadequate.
33. The Committee is dismayed to note that, the Gram Nyayalayas which were supposed to
usher a revolution in the lowest level of the judicial system is being held back because of fund
sharing problem between the Central and the State Governments. Despite more than three
years of the implementation of the scheme, very few States have shown eagerness to establish
the Gram Nyayalayas and not a single Gram Nyayalayas have become operational in North-
Eastern States. The Committee strongly feels that the setting-up of Gram Nyayalayas is the
answer to providing access to justice to citizens at their door steps and the success of these
courts should not only be measured from number of courts established in different states, but
also in terms of reaching out to deprived sections of the society and its role in the overall
reduction in the pendency of cases.
34. The Committee, however, fails to understand the apprehension of State Governments
that setting up of Gram Nyayalayas, would add to the load of session in District Courts. The
Committee believes that it would enhance the speed of disposal of cases which would in turn
discourage the people to resort to the normal courts. The Committee urges the Department
of Justice to take appropriate measure so as to rule out such apprehensions.
35. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations of its Fifty-eighth report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), Ministry of Law and Justice that the issues involved due to

7
which there has been a reluctance on the part of the States to have Gram Nyayalayas should
be considered seriously by the Ministry and all out efforts should be made to resolve them at
the earliest. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to consider the feasibility of
enhancing the Central assistance in order to motivate the States to go in for the Gram
Nyayalayas. As far the issue of acquiring land is concerned, the State Governments may be
encouraged to undertake vertical constructions instead of horizontal to weed out the problem
of shortage of land.
National Mission for Justice Delivery System and Legal Reforms:
36. National Mission for Justice Delivery System and Legal Reforms got approval in principle in
2009 by Union government and got operationalised in 2011 for five years spanning from 2011 to 2016.
The main objective of the said National Mission is to increase access by reducing delays and arrears
in the system and enhancing accountability through structural changes and by setting performance
standards and capabilities. Infrastructural development for the subordinate judiciary is identified as a
major thrust area of the said National Mission. The mission period coincides with Twelfth Plan period.
Five strategic initiatives proposed under the Mission are:–
● Policy and legislative changes
● Re-engineering procedures and Alternative Methods of Dispute Resolution.
● Human Resource Development
● Leveraging ITC for better justice delivery.
● Improved infrastructure for District and Subordinate Courts.
37. Thirteenth Finance Commission award for judiciary to the States is to the tune of R5000
crores for five years spanning from 2010-15 in order to reduce pendency of cases in following ways:–
● Increasing working hours of Courts by holding morning/evening/shift Courts;
● Lok Adalat, Legal aid to marginalised and under trials prisoners
● Construction of Alternative Dispute Resolution Centres;
● Training programme for judicial officers and Public Prosecutors;
● Infrastructural support to judicial academies;
● Restoration of heritage Court and buildings;
● Appointment of manager to assist the judiciary in their administrative function.
Access to Justice (A2J) Project
38. The Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice has been implementing a project on
‘Access to Justice for Marginalized People’ with UNDP support. The interventions under the Project
are focused on strengthening access to justice for the poor, particularly women, Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes , and minorities. The Project seeks, on the one hand, to improve the institutional
capacities of key justice service providers to enable them to effectively serve the poor and disadvantaged.
On the other hand, it directly aims to empower the poor and disadvantaged men and women to
seek and demand justice services. The A2J project is being implemented in two phases, Phase I:
May, 2009– December, 2012 and Phase II: 2013 –2017.
39. The new phase A2J is from January, 2013 with R22.5 crores wherein R1.26 crores by Union
of India. As per United Nations Development Assistance frame-work the project will be implemented

8
in seven States of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan
will be built upon the previous phase experience i.e., Phase I. Based on the success of A2J project,
Department of Justice, Government of India has launched a similar project in the North-Eastern States
and Jammu and Kashmir and the North East of India with a budget allocation R30 crores.
40. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Justice in this regard.
Family Courts
41. The Parliamentary Committee on Empowerment of Women has recommended that Family
Courts may be set up in each district exclusively to deal with family matters so that such a court
may have the necessary expertise to deal with these cases expeditiously. Accordingly, the State
Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to set up Family Courts in each district.
42. The Family Court Act, 1984 empowers the State governments after consultation with High
Courts, to establish Family Courts in areas whose population exceeds one million. The States are being
reminded from time to time to set up more Family Courts. However, the Department of Justice in their
response to the Committee has pointed out that the responses received from States are not very
encouraging. As per the information received from various High Courts/State Governments and made
available to the Committee, 212 Family Courts are functional and 18 more Family Courts have been
notified ( Annexure IV).
43. The Secretary while deposing before the Committee on 3 rd March, 2010 said that;
“...with regard to family courts, we have made a very small allocation because there are no
takers for that...”
44. During its study-visit, the Committee was apprised of the various reasons ailing the establishment
and functioning of the Family Courts in States. Except, Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, all the States have established Family Courts. However, the existing mismatch in the number
of Family Courts within the States and between the States was vividly highlighted by the State
Governments.
45. States have generally been demanding higher financial assistance for Family Courts. Except UT
of Andaman and Nicobar where there is no Family Court at present, the other states complained of
the insufficient financial assistance to the extent of 50% of the cost of construction subject to a ceiling
of 10 lakh per court provided by the Central Government. The Tamil Nadu governments said that
establishment of Family Courts is creating financial burden on the State exchequer. Similarly, States
like Maharashtra, Karnataka and West Bengal wanted the cost-sharing formula between centre and
State to be enhanced.
46. Family Courts Act, 1984 makes it mandatory for the State Governments to set up a
Family Court for every area in the State comprising of a city or a town whose population
exceeds one million. However, the Committee is disappointed to note that even after almost
thirty years very little progress has been made in the establishment of Family Courts in
different parts of the country. The meagre amount of financial allocation, as appraised by the
States is one of the major causes for the slow pace of establishment of Family Courts. Except
Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the States sought higher assistance both for
establishing and meeting the cost for continuing them. The Committee believes that setting-
up of more Family Courts will help in delivery of justice to maximum number of people with
minimum financial burden and will also help in reducing pendency of cases. Thus, the
Committee recommends the Ministry to revisit and revise the financial assistance aspect, so
that the maximum number of Family Courts can be set-up.

9
Fast Track Courts
47. The Eleventh Finance Commission recommended a scheme for creation of 1734 Fast Track
Courts (FTCs) in the country for disposal of long pending cases in Sessions courts and other courts.
The FTCs were established to expeditiously dispose of long pending cases in the Sessions Courts and
long pending cases of under trial prisoners. The term of scheme on the Fast Track Courts which were
recommended by the Eleventh Finance Commission ended on 31
st March, 2005. Based on the
directives of the Supreme Court of India, the Government accorded its approval for the continuation
of 1562 Fast Track Courts that were operational as on 31
st March, 2005 for a further period of
5 years i.e. up to 31 st March, 2010 with a provision of R509 crores. The scheme of central assistance
for Fast Track Courts was further extended for a period of one year i.e. upto 31 st March, 2011 and
it was decided that there will be no central funding for Fast Track Courts beyond 31 st March, 2011.
48. The Central assistance under the above said scheme is limited to an approved norm i.e. R4.80
lakh per court per annum (recurring) and R8.60 lakh (non-recurring). Any expenditure incurred by the
State in excess as recurring and /or non-recurring expenditure was to be borne by the State
Government. According to the Information available on the Website of the Department of Justice, out
of 38.90 lakh cases transferred, these courts have disposed of 32.34 lakh cases.
Issues of State Governments
49. The Central assistance for the Fast Track Courts was discontinued after 31
st March, 2011.
Several States have continued these courts from their own resources. Except Union Territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, all the States where Committee visited are continuing Fast Track
Courts. The State Governments maintained that the continuation of these Courts is necessary to reduce
the pendency of cases; however, the continuation of these Courts by States is leading to financial
burden on the State exchequer. The State Governments wanted the Fast Track Courts to be continued
with 100 per cent Central assistance.
50. The FTCs were established to expeditiously dispose of long pending cases in the Sessions
Courts and long pending cases of under trial prisoners and had become synonymous with the
speedy delivery of justice. The States expressed their willingness to continue and establish more
Fast Track Courts to try cases related to murder, rape and issues related to children and the
elderly, however, the limited financial resources are hindrances. In the wake of gang rape in
Delhi, the Ponzi scheme scam in several States and the languishing of innocent youths accused
of terrorism, the establishment of Fast Track Courts become more important. Accordingly, the
Committee reiterates its recommendations contained in Fifty-seventh Action Taken Note of
Government, that all possible steps to be taken to ensure that the Fast Track Courts are set
up in appropriate situations in the States and the States do not face impediments in this regard.
Pendency of Cases and Shortage of Judicial Personnel
51. The shortage of judicial personnel at Subordinate Courts is a matter of concern. As on
31
st March, 2012, the Department of Justice informed that 3,272 posts of judicial personnel are vacant
in different States (Annexure V). During its study visit, the Committee was apprised of the large
number of vacancies of judicial personnel at Subordinate Courts.
52. The high rate of pending cases in the Subordinate Courts in various parts of the country is
a serious matter. The Department of Justice informed that as on 31 st March, 2012, 26851766 cases
are pending in Subordinate Court (Annexure VI) . Some of the major reasons leading to high
pendency of cases in Subordinate Courts are poor Judge population ratio, prolonged and costly
litigation caused by procedures and lawyers interests, poor infrastructure, shortage of judicial personnel,
weak alternate dispute resolution mechanisms and so on.

10
53. With regard to areas of pendency of cases, the Secretary, Department of Justice in the meeting
on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) made oral submission as under:–
...the pendency of cases which is a very chronic problem in the country like how do we address
those issues of pendency of cases and speed up the delivery of justice...
Issues of State Governments
54. In the States the high pendency of cases in Subordinate Courts is a matter of concern. Except
Manipur and UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the pendency of cases is high in all the States,
except Odisha where the pendency of criminal cases is high and all other States have higher number
of civil cases pending.
55. The State Governments apprised the Committee about the various measures like evening/
morning courts, holiday courts, Lok Adalats and Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanisms being
undertaken to overcome the problem of pendency of cases.
56. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the large number of vacancies
existing in the Subordinate Courts. Similarly, the large number of pending cases is in
Subordinate Courts are major challenges before the Government. The Committee is of the
view, that both these issues are closely related to each other. The Committee feels that
recruitment and training of judicial personnel and supporting staffs at Subordinate Courts may
help in reducing the pendency of cases and the judge-population ratio may be corrected by
appointing more judges in the Subordinate Courts to reduce pendency. The Committee is of
the view that an efficient judicial system which delivers quality justice in minimum time can
reinforce the confidence of people in the rule of law.
57. The Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended a grant of R5000 crore for the period
2010-15 to the States for improving delivery of justice which is to be utilized for setting up of
morning/evening/shift/Special Magistrate Courts for reducing the backlog of cases, holding of Lok
Adalats and Mega Lok Adalats, strengthening legal aid institutions, training of judicial officers and
Public Prosecutors, creating and upgrading the Judicial Academies, providing Court Managers to assist
courts/cases management.
58. The Committee feels that regular conducting of morning/evening, holiday courts, lok
adalats, alternative dispute redressal mechanisms etc. wherever feasible can help in reducing
the problem of pendency of cases in Subordinate Judiciary. Sincere efforts are also required
on the part of State governments to fill the existing vacancies at the Subordinate Courts, so
that the disposal rate of cases may be enhanced. The National Mission for Justice Delivery and
Legal Reforms which is formed to deal with the dual need of addressing the issues of delays
and arrears in the Indian judicial system as well enforcing better accountability, including
setting and monitoring of performance and enhancement of capacity through training at
various levels can go a long way in reducing the problem of high pendency of cases, which is
a major problem faced by the Subordinate judiciary.
59. The Committee considers that existing court procedures which are age old needs a
thorough review. Many of such procedures are avoidable; consume inordinate time; and
unnecessary complications; very often leads to the harassment of litigants; often misused/
abused by the interested parties and; ultimately creates the hassles which result in pendency.
The Committee, therefore, strongly believes that unless procedures are cut short and streamlined,
howsoever best be our judge- population ratio, issue of pendency cannot be resolved. The
Committee understands that it is a huge task but it has to be undertaken if we are really
serious to tackle the issue of pendency. The Committee impress upon both the Central and
State Governments to focus in this direction with a sense of urgency.

11
60. The cost of litigation in the Courts has been exorbitant which is not affordable for the
litigation of the weaker sections of the society. The recommends that the fees paid to advocate/
counsel engaged under various legal aid schemes should be enhanced suitably.
All India Judicial Service
61. Article 312 of the Constitution deals with the All-India Judicial services. However, no such all
India service has been constituted though this matter has been receiving the attention of various
Commissions and Committees which have recommended its institution, but for the past three decades
it has been lying in abeyance. The Law Commission in its reports has recommended the creation of
an AIJS. It opined that such a course is necessary in the interest of efficiency of the subordinate
judiciary.
62. The Attorney General of India while deposing before the Committee on 22
nd October, 2013,
inter alia stated that matter relating to AIJS was referred to him for an opinion. The Attorney General
in his written reply to the Department of Justice stated that that there was no bar under the
Constitution and it could be done.
63. The Committee impress upon the Department of Justice to seriously pursue creation of
AIJS. The Committee feels it is the need of hour and should be created without further delay.
64. The Committee strongly feels that through All India Judicial Service, the subordinate
judiciary would be benefitted by the best talent in the country. It will benefit both the
subordinate as well as higher judiciary as 33 percent of the judicial officers are elevated to the
Bench of High Courts. The creation of AIJS will also help in reducing pendency of cases in
subordinate and higher courts.

12
12
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
OUTLAY AND FUNDING PATTERN
1. The Committee gathers from the views expressed by the State Governments that the
main problem States are facing on account of non-availability of suitable site for construction
of court buildings and residential quarters for the judicial officers. The Committee believes
that identifying and providing suitable land is the sole responsibility of the State Government.
The Centre has no role to play in this regard. The Committee also appreciates the constraints
explained by the State Governments making the identification of suitable site, a difficult job.
The Committee suggests that the time has now come for the State Government to undertake
the vertical construction instead of the horizontal one at least to lessen the problem of
shortage of land. (Para 12)
2. Committee observes that the Centre-State share has now been enhanced from 50:50 to
75:25 in respect of all the states except the North-Eastern States, where it has been raised to
90:10. The Committee also notes that States have to bear the burden of maintaining the
infrastructure so provided. The State Governments have the grievance that the funds are not
just enough and Centre’s contribution need to be further enhanced. The Committee feels that
there is hardly any possibility of increasing the centre’s contribution and, therefore, advises
the State Governments to pool/generate their own resources to meet the requirement. The
Committee believes that the infrastructure of subordinate judiciary has to be strengthened and
efforts have to be made by the concerned agencies in all sincerity. The Committee further
suggests to the Central Government to explore the possibility, if any, to enhance their
contribution. (Para 13)
3. The Committee is constrained to note that there has been a general complaint of the
State Governments that the funds were not released on time and are very often released in
the last quarter of the financial year. This leads not only to the delay in the project but also
makes it extremely difficult for the State Governments to utilize the money in that financial
year. There have been some experiences where States failed to utilize the money and resultantly
the funds lapsed. The Committee directs the Central Government to be very particular in
timely release of the funds to the State Governments. It is advisable that the release of funds
may be uniform throughout the year. The Committee wants that the Department of Justice
should specifically address to this issue and inform the Committee in its Action Taken Report
to what extend this issue was resolved. (Para 12)
E-COURT MISSION MODE PROJECT
4. The Committee also notes the explanation given by Department of Justice that release
of funds was mainly delayed due to delayed/non submission of utilization certificates of the
State Governments. The Committee advises the Department of Justice to take it up with the
concerned State Governments at the highest level to resolve this issue. (Para 17)
5. The Committee takes note of the fact that infrastructure development for subordinate
judiciary is a major component of the plan outlay of the Department of Justice. However, the
Committee during its deliberations with different stakeholders realised that the benefits of the
CSS on infrastructure development of Subordinate Judiciary has not percolated down sufficiently
in different States and there are certain States which were unable to receive funds for one or

13
more years despite the operation of this Scheme since 1993-94, as the Committee. The
Committee reiterates its view while examining the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice that it is high time for the Department of Justice to go for a
review/audit of the said Scheme so as to ascertain on both these aspects, namely, (i) the
uneven and irregular drawl/utilization of funds by certain States and (ii) the actual development
in infrastructure that have taken place in the States and the extent to which this has helped
in speeding up the trial of cases in courts. (Para 18)
6. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry to computerize the
subordinate Courts in the Country and is optimistic that it would help in more efficient
management of subordinate courts, reduction in pending cases and increasing the speed of
justice delivery processes. The Committee is also happy and takes note of the new components
added under Phase-II and hopes that the employment of ICT in the various fields associated
with the functioning of the Courts, the advocates as well as the litigants would go a long way
in cutting on wasteful time and energy in the handling of litigation work which is mostly
handled manually at present. (Para 23)
7. The Committee notes that in some States the scheme has been successfully implemented,
whereas in others the scheme has failed to take up or is still in the preliminary stage only.
The Committee also takes note of the shortage of technical and legal manpower at the
subordinate judiciary, which is leading to the piling-up of cases year after year and recommends
the Ministry to look into the matter urgently so that the scheme can be implemented smoothly
within the required timeframe. (Para 24)
8. The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Government both at Centre and States
to adhere to the timeline set out for computerisation of all the Courts. There is a need to
address the constraints in the States those are lagging behind. The Committee calls for a
periodic report from Department of Justice in this regard. (Para 25)
9. The Committee would like to bring into notice that the computerization of Courts and
e-Courts are related but not the same, and computerization of Courts necessarily is a step
towards establishments of e-Courts. The Committee notes that, in the computerized courts still
there are no facilities like electronic filing, electronic evidence submission system etc. in the
computerized courts. The Committee however, feels that the real objective of e Courts can
only be fulfilled when the services like e-filing and tracking of cases will be made operational
in all the computerized courts of the country. The Committee suggests that the requisite
modifications in the Court procedures, if necessary, may also be taken up. (Para 26)
10. The Committee strongly feels that the establishment of e-Courts can go a long way in
achieving efficiency and transparency, reducing corruption and particularly backlog of cases
and saving time and cost of the litigants. The Committee also feels that uninterrupted supply
of electricity is a prerequisite for the successful implementation of the e-Court Scheme and
recommends the Ministry to look into the provisions of providing generator sets, especially in
the States which are facing power supply crisis. (Para 27)
GRAM NYAYALAYAS
11. The Committee is dismayed to note that, the Gram Nyayalayas which were supposed to
usher a revolution in the lowest level of the judicial system is being held back because of fund
sharing problem between the Central and the State Governments. Despite more than three
years of the implementation of the scheme, very few States have shown eagerness to establish
the Gram Nyayalayas and not a single Gram Nyayalayas have become operational in North-
Eastern States. The Committee strongly feels that the setting-up of Gram Nyayalayas is the

14
answer to providing access to justice to citizens at their door steps and the success of these
courts should not only be measured from number of courts established in different states, but
also in terms of reaching out to deprived sections of the society and its role in the overall
reduction in the pendency of cases. (Para 35)
12. The Committee, however, fails to understand the apprehension of State Govts. that
setting up of Gram Nyayalayas, would add to the load of session in District courts. The
Committee believes that it would enhance the speed of disposal of cases which would in turn
discourage the people to resort to the normal courts. The Committee urges the Department
of Justice to take appropriate measure so as to rule out such apprehensions. (Para 36)
13. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations of its Fifty-eighth report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), Ministry of Law and Justice that the issues involved due to
which there has been a reluctance on the part of the States to have Gram Nyayalayas should
be considered seriously by the Ministry and all out efforts should be made to resolve them at
the earliest. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to consider the feasibility of
enhancing the Central assistance in order to motivate the States to go in for the Gram
Nyayalayas. As far the issue of acquiring land is concerned, the State Governments may be
encouraged to undertake vertical constructions instead of horizontal to weed out the problem
of shortage of land. (Para 37)
ACCESS TO JUSTICE (A2J) PROJECT
14. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Justice in this regard.
(Para 40)
FAMILY COURTS
15. Family Courts Act, 1984 makes it mandatory for the State Governments to set up a
Family Court for every area in the State comprising of a city or a town whose population
exceeds one million. However, the Committee is disappointed to note that even after almost
thirty years very little progress has been made in the establishment of Family Courts in
different parts of the country. The meagre amount of financial allocation, as appraised by the
States is one of the major causes for the slow pace of establishment of Family Courts. Except
Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the States sought higher assistance both for
establishing and meeting the cost for continuing them. The Committee believes that setting-
up of more Family Courts will help in delivery of justice to maximum number of people with
minimum financial burden and will also help in reducing pendency of cases. Thus, the
Committee recommends the Ministry to revisit and revise the financial assistance aspect, so
that the maximum number of Family Courts can be set-up. (Para 45)
FAST TRACK COURTS
16. The FTCs were established to expeditiously dispose of long pending cases in the
Sessions Courts and long pending cases of under trial prisoners and had become synonymous
with the speedy delivery of justice. The States expressed their willingness to continue and
establish more Fast Track Courts to try cases related to murder, rape and issues related to
children and the elderly, however, the limited financial resources are hindrances. In the wake
of gang rape in Delhi, the Ponzi scheme scam in several States and the languishing of innocent
youths accused of terrorism, the establishment of Fast Track Courts become more important.
Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendations contained in Fifty-seventh Action
Taken Note of Government, that all possible steps to be taken to ensure that the Fast Track

15
Courts are set up in appropriate situations in the States and the States do not face impediments
in this regard. (Para 49)
PENDENCY OF CASES AND SHORTAGE OF JUDICIAL PERSONNEL
17. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the large number of vacancies
existing in the Subordinate Courts. Similarly, the large number of pending cases is in
Subordinate Courts are major challenges before the Government. The Committee is of the
view, that both these issues are closely related to each other. The Committee feels that
recruitment and training of judicial personnel and supporting staffs at Subordinate Courts may
help in reducing the pendency of cases and the judge-population ratio may be corrected by
appointing more judges in the Subordinate Courts to reduce pendency. The Committee is of
the view that an efficient judicial system which delivers quality justice in minimum time can
reinforce the confidence of people in the rule of law. (Para 55)
18. The Committee feels that regular conducting of morning/evening, holiday courts, lok
adalats, alternative dispute redressal mechanisms etc. wherever feasible can help in reducing
the problem of pendency of cases in Subordinate Judiciary. Sincere efforts are also required
on the part of State governments to fill the existing vacancies at the Subordinate Courts, so
that the disposal rate of cases may be enhanced. The National Mission for Justice Delivery and
Legal Reforms which is formed to deal with the dual need of addressing the issues of delays
and arrears in the Indian judicial system as well enforcing better accountability, including
setting and monitoring of performance and enhancement of capacity through training at
various levels can go a long way in reducing the problem of high pendency of cases, which is
a major problem faced by the Subordinate judiciary. (Para 56)
19. The Committee considers that existing court procedures which are age old needs a
thorough review. Many of such procedures are avoidable; consume inordinate time; and
unnecessary complications; very often leads to the harassment of litigants; often misused/
abused by the interested parties and; ultimately creates the hassles which result in pendency.
The Committee, therefore, strongly believes that unless procedures are cut short and streamlined,
howsoever best be our judge- population ratio, issue of pendency cannot be resolved. The
Committee understands that it is a huge task but it has to be undertaken if we are really
serious to tackle the issue of pendency. The Committee impress upon both the Central and
State Governments to focus in this direction with a sense of urgency. (Para 58)
20. The cost of litigation in the Courts has been exorbitant which is not affordable for the
litigation of the weaker sections of the society. The recommends that the fees paid to advocate/
counsel engaged under various legal aid schemes should be enhanced suitably. (Para 59)
ALL INDIA JUDICIAL SERVICE
21. The Committee impress upon the Department of Justice to seriously pursue creation of
AIJS. The Committee feels it is the need of hour and should be created without further delay.
(Para 62)
22. The Committee strongly feels that through All India Judicial Service, the subordinate
judiciary would be benefitted by the best talent in the country. It will benefit both the
subordinate as well as higher judiciary as 33 percent of the judicial officers are elevated to the
Bench of High Courts. The creation of AIJS will also help in reducing pendency of cases in
subordinate and higher courts. (Para 63)

MINUTES

19
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 3 rd March, 2010 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
7. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
8. Shri Devji M. Patel
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
12. Shri Manish Tewari
13. Adv. P.T. thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Justice
Shrimati Bhupinder Prasad, Secretary
Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary
Shri S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
Shri C.L.M. Reddy, Deputy Director General, NIC
Shri J.P. Kukrety, Senior Technical Director, NIC

20
Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of the Subordinate Courts in the Country
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
and senior officers of the Department to the meeting and requested the Secretary to make a
presentation on the subject “Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of the Subordinate Courts
in the Country”.
3. The Secretary, while making a power point presentation on the subject, elaborated upon the
hierarchy of the judicial system existing in the country. She apprised the Committee that the
subordinate judiciary is the responsibility of the State Government and that the infrastructure and the
staffing of these Courts, including appointment of Judicial Officers, is done by the State Governments
in consultation with the respective High Courts having jurisdiction. She further stated that the
administrative expenses of the High Courts including the salaries etc. are charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of the State.
4. She informed the Committee that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of
Infrastructure Facilities for the Subordinate Judiciary is under implementation since 1993-94 and that
the Scheme covers construction of Court buildings and residential quarters for Judges/Judicial Officers.
She clarified that the Central assistance is confined to expenditure on Capital works and that the
Scheme envisages a 50:50 pattern of sharing between the Centre and the States. She also stated that
maintenance costs are to be met by the State Governments from their own funds.
5. She deposed that though the Gram Nayalayas Act came into force w.e.f. 2
nd October, 2009 the
response from the State Governments to set up Gram Nayalayas has been far from satisfactory.
Speaking on the matter of Fast Track Courts, she stated that the Central assistance for the Fast Track
Courts will continue upto 31
st March, 2010 and that the system of Fast Track Courts is under review.
As regards Family Courts, she informed the Committee that many of the State Governments have not
agreed to setting up Family Courts in their respective States.
6. She apprised the Committee that the computerization of subordinate Courts is in progress and
that training is being imparted on a regular basis to the Judges and Court staff in the subordinate
Judiciary. She stated that non-furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by State Governments is one of the
hurdles in releasing further grants for development of infrastructure in the subordinate Courts. She
responded to the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee.
7. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee stressed upon the need to enhance the
existing infrastructure in the subordinate Courts and opined that State Governments should be
persuaded to ensure optimum utilization of funds and effective implementation of Central policies/
schemes. The Committee desired to be apprised of the action taken by the Department of Justice on
the recommendations made by the Committee in its previous reports on the “Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006”, “The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008” and “The High Court
and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008”. The Secretary
assured the Committee that the Status Note will be furnished in due course.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 4.23 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

21
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3 rd January, 2014 in Committee Room No. ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Anu Aga
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
4. Shri T.R. Baalu
5. Shir E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri N.V .S. Chitthan
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. * * *
2 . ***
3 . ***
4 . ***
21
*** Relate to some other matters.

22
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee then considered the draft Sixty-seventh and Sixty-eighth Reports on the
“Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of Subordinate Courts” and “Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 60
th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions” and adopted the
same.
13. * * *
14. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
15. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

23
ANNEXURES

25
ANNEXURE-I
Details of New Court Buildings Completed between 12 th July, 2010 and 16 th September, 2012
Sl. Name of State/ T otal Total Total Total Total Remarks
No. Union Territory number of number of number of amounts number of (detailing
proposals proposals proposals sanctioned court problem, in
cleared by cleared by cleared by (in lakhs) buildings of any, being
Collectors the High the State for which faced for
and land Court for Governments/ infrastructure construction early
acquired construction Administrators (including has been progress in
of new for construction new got proceeding
court of new court construction, completed with
buidlings buildings repairs and projects)
granting maintenance)
administrative
and financial
sanction
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Andaman and Nicobar 1 1 0 500.000 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 4 4 8 23 9675.670 1
3. Arunachal Pradesh 2 0 0 0.000 0
4. Assam 5 0 0 1202.280 5
5. Bihar 2 50 17 16594.560 3
6. Chandigarh 7 6 1879.420 1
7. Chhattisgarh 4 8 6 2938.680 2
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 65.820 0
9. Daman and Diu 0 0 0 0.000 0
@10. Govt. of NCT of Delhi 0 0 0 0.000 1
11. Goa 0 0
@ 12. Gujarat 6 1 0 4
13. Haryana 0 19 11 4070.000 12
14. Himachal Pradesh 0 1 1 360.250 1
15. Jammu and Kashmir 3 2 2 4345.740 3
16. Jharkhand 73 37 37 1801.639 25
17. Karnataka 42 44 43 25790.250
18. Kerala 12 11 5
19. Lakshadweep NA NA NA 20.000 NA
20. Madhya Pradesh 5 1 22 15333.660 7

26
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
21. Maharashtra 50 102 95 50863.000 46
22. Manipur 0 4 3 51.030 2
23. Meghalaya 4 1 1 0.000 0
24. Mizoram 178.000 0
@25. Nagaland 0 0 0 0.000
26. Odisha 10 30 30 3751.670 6
27. Puducherry 0 0 1 1250.000 0
28. Punjab 9 10 1 0 20955.000 10
29. Rajasthan 37 3 5 5014.300 48
30. Sikkim 2 2 2 1555.000
31. Tamil Nadu* 4 3 2 32 21148.520 19
32. Tripura 0 1 3 48.850 6
33. Uttarakhand 4 5 21 885.870 19
34. Uttar Pradesh 2 81 23 17280.100 8
35. West Bengal 0 8 8 3352.420 0
T
OTAL: 269 510 413 210908.729 234
@ Data has not yet been received, hence the data of previous year has been included.
* Column No. 6 contains the amount for the Financial year 2010-11 to 2012-13.

27
27
ANNEXURE-II
Details of Residential Quarters Completed between 12 th July, 2010 and 16 th September, 2012
Sl. Name of State/ T otal Total Total Total Total Remarks
No. Union Territory number of number of number of amounts number of (detailing
proposals proposals proposals sanctioned residential problem, in
cleared by cleared by cleared by (in lakhs) quarters of any, being
Collectors the High the State for which faced for
and land Court for Governments/ infrastructure construction early
acquired construction Administrators (including has been progress in
of new for construction new got proceeding
residential of new residential construction, completed with
quarters quarters repairs and projects)
granting maintenance)
administrative
and financial
sanction
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Andaman and Nicobar 0 500.000 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 4 2 8 16 1272.100 0
3. Arunachal Pradesh 3 0 0 0.000 1
4. Assam 4 3 3 1048.400 7
5. Bihar 1 63 8 1940.940 0
6. Chandigarh 1 1 204.500 8
7. Chhattisgarh 0 4 5 235.300 1
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli
9. Daman and Diu 1
@10. Govt. of NCT of Delhi 0 0 0 0.000 0
11. Goa 2 2 30.000 0
@ 12. Gujarat 2 0 0 0.000 2
13. Haryana 21 18 4000.000 48
14. Himachal Pradesh 2 94.730 7
15. Jammu and Kashmir 2 2 2 60.000 0
16. Jharkhand 109 31 37 2062.774 10
17. Karnataka 185 205 205 19942.500 0
18. Kerala 0 2 3 0.000 1
19. Lakshadweep NA NA NA 2.960 NA
20. Madhya Pradesh 9 181 124 4571.530 51

28
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
21. Maharashtra 46 82 96 5168.390 23
22. Manipur 0 0 0 0.000 0
23. Meghalaya 4 0 0 0.000 0
24. Mizoram 3 1 65.360 0
@25. Nagaland 0 0 0 0.000 0
26. Odisha 18 7 7 118.900
27. Puducherry 0 0 1 300.000 0
28. Punjab 9 9 9 20955.000 9
29. Rajasthan 33 1 0 575.800 18
30. Sikkim 2 2 2 899.000 0
31. Tamil Nadu* 12 33 24 4426.750 47
32. Tripura 0 0 1 60.370 2
33. Uttarakhand 3 3 26 972.700 10
34. Uttar Pradesh 2 49 17 3836.420 9
35. West Bengal 0 1 3 13 878.440 0
T
OTAL: 452 742 617 74222.864 254
@ Data has not yet been received, hence the data of previous year has been updated.
* Column No. 6 contains the amount for the Financial year 2010-11 to 2012-13.

29
29
ANNEXURE-III
Status of Gram Nyayalayas as on 31 st March, 2013
(R in lakh)
Sl. State Gram Gram Amount Released
No. Nyayalayas Nyayalayas (in Lakhs) between
notified operationalised 2009-10 to 2012-13
1. Madhya Pradesh 89 89 1534.20
2. Rajasthan 45 45 954.00
3. Odisha 14 8 126.40
4. Karnataka 2 – 158.00
5. Maharashtra* 10 10 25.20
6. Jharkhand 6 – 75.60
7. Goa 2 – 25.20
8. Punjab 2 – 25.20
9. Haryana 2 – 25.20
T
OTAL: 172 152 2949.00

30
ANNEXURE-IV
Statement indicating number of Family Courts functional in the States
Sl. Name of the State Number of Family Courts
No. functional in the State
1. Andhra Pradesh 27
2. Assam 2
3. Bihar 30
4. Chhattisgarh 19
5. Delhi 5
6. Gujarat 9
7. Jharkhand 8
8. Karnataka 10
9. Kerala 16
10. Madhya Pradesh 15
11. Maharashtra 22
12. Manipur 1
13. Mizoram
* –
14. Nagaland 2
15. Odisha
$ 5
16. Puducherry 1
17. Rajasthan # 6
18. Sikkim 1
19. Tamil Nadu 6
20. Tripura 3
21. Uttar Pradesh 15
22. Uttarakhand 7
23. West Bengal 2
T
OTAL: 212
* Four Family Courts notified.
# Seven more Family Courts notified
$ Seven more Family Courts notified.

31
ANNEXURE-V
Sanctioned Strength and Vacancies in Subordinate Courts as on 31.03.2012
Sl. State/Union Sanctioned Vacancies in
No. Territory concerned Strength Subordinate Courts
12 3 4
1. Uttar Pradesh 2102 268
2. Andhra Pradesh 834 117
3.a Maharashtra 2016 185
3.b Goa 49 7
3.c Daman, Diu and Silvasa 7 0
4. West Bengal 933 156
5. Chhattisgarh 276 38
6. Delhi 623 158
7. Gujarat 1727 852
8.a Assam 356 108
8.b Meghalaya 36 22
8.c Tripura 92 27
8.d Manipur 31 5
8.e Nagaland 29 6
8.f Mizoram 65 32
8.g Arunachal Pradesh 2 0
9. Himachal Pradesh 132 17
10. Jammu and Kashmir 206 17
11. Jharkhand 499 89
12. Karnataka 945 174
13.a Kerala 411 36
13.b Lakshadweep 3 1
14.a T amil Nadu 866 123
14.b Puducherry 20 7
15. Madhya Pradesh 1321 151

32
12 3 4
16. Odisha 625 79
17. Bihar 1458 507
18.a Punjab 493 116
18.b Haryana 476 125
18.c Chandigarh 20 0
19. Rajasthan 922 180
20. Sikkim 13 4
21. Uttarakhand 278 126
TOTAL: 17866 3732

33
33
ANNEXURE-VI
Statement of cases pending in Subordinate judiciary as on 31.03.2012
Sl. Name of State Total Cases pending
No. as on 31.03.2012
12 3
1. Uttar Pradesh 5798272
2. Andhra Pradesh 917620
3. Maharashtra 3144426
4. Goa 30052
5. Daman and Diu Silvasa 4997
6. West Bengal 2638937
7. Andaman and Nicobar 13384
8. Chhattisgarh 266220
9. Delhi 689766
10. Gujarat 2197565
11. Assam 264204
12. Nagaland 4130
13. Meghalaya 3357
14. Manipur 14238
15. Tripura 43954
16. Mizoram 4426
17. Arunachal Pradesh 6148
18. Himachal Pradesh 195018
19. Jammu and Kashmir 207588
20. Jharkhand 298240
21. Karnataka 1115280
22. Kerala 1071305
23. Lakshadweep 240
24. Madhya Pradesh 1129432
25. Tamil Nadu 1193541

34
12 3
26. Puducherry 27141
27. Odisha 1159482
28. Bihar 1628291
29. Punjab 544972
30. Haryana 594733
31. Chandigarh 57890
32. Rajasthan 1432967
33. Sikkim 1310
34. Uttarakhand 152640
TOTAL: 26851766

35
APPENDIX

APPENDIX
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
37
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Right to
Information Bill, 2004.
Report on the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other
Backward Classes (Reservation
in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29
th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
Date of
Adoption
3
23.08.2004
-do-
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
-do-
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
Session
No.
5
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204

38
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
-do-
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
Report on the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2003.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005.
Report on the National Tax
Tribunal Bill, 2004.
Report on the Contempt of
Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

39
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice).
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Legislative Department.
Report on the Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
Report on Working of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on Action Taken Replies
on Law’s Delays : Arrears in
Courts (85
th Report of Home
Affairs)
Report on The Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008
Report on Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism
-do-
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

40
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Report on Constraints Being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
Report on the “Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
29
th Report of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”.
Report on “The Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”.
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010.
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

41
12 4 35
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
Being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Report on The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fourteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Public Interest
Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and Lok Sabha on 10.08.11.
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
-do-
29.07.2010
-do-
16.11.2010
-do-
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

42
12 4 35
Report on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010.
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011.
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods
and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011.
Report on The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2012.
Report on The Registration of
Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
47
th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
-do-
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012. Laid to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

43
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013.
Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
Report on the “Electoral
Reforms-Code of Conduct for
Political Parties & Anti Defection
Law”.
Report on the “S tatus of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”.
Report on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013.
Report on the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill,
2013.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment
and Validation) Bill, 2013.
Report on the Right to
Information (Amendment) Bill,
2013.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013.
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
27.11.2013
06.12.2013
13.12.2013
228
228
228
228
229
229
230
230
230
230

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.