 
 
           
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2022 / Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
119 
 
ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON "STRENTHENING OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA" 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2022) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2022) 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 

 3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                           6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                   7 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                              8  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                 10 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                 12                                                                                      
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                              16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         

 4 
                                             COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. @Vacant 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. &Vacant 
8. ^Vacant 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. *Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. #Shrimati Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
______________________ 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.11.2021 
#Nominated w.e.f.07.02.2022 
@Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. Sasmit Patra on 01.07.2022  
^Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Vivek K. Tankha on 29.06.2022  
&Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla on 04.07.2022  

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Nineteenth Report (119th) on Action Taken on One 
Hundred Eleventh (111th) Report of the Committee on "Strengthening Of 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism Of Government Of India"  pertaining to the 
Department Of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions). 
2. The One Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Lok Sabha on the 10th December, 2021.  
3. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundred Eleventh Report of the Committee on 4 th 
February, 2022. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Nineteenth 
Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 4th August, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
4th August, 2022 SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                      Law and Justice 
 

 6 
ACRONYMS 
 
AR&PG   Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
 
ATR   Action Taken Report 
 
 
BSNL   Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
 
 
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DPG                     Directorate of Public Grievances (DPG) 
HOD  Head of Department 
JK-IGRAMS Jammu and Kashmir Integrated Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System   
J&K   Jammu and Kashmir 
MOS PP  Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
OM   Office Memorandum 
PG   Public Grievance 
PMO  Prime Minister‟s Office 
RTI   Right to Information  
SMS  Short Message Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
R E P O R T  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken 
by the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions ) on the recommendations  / 
observations of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred Eleventh 
(111th) Report on "Strengthening of Grievance Redressal Mechanism of 
Government of India", which was pre sented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on the 10th December, 2021. 
2. The Committee had made 9 recommendations/observations in its 111th 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies 
have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations ( 3) which have been accepted 
by the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.19, 2.21 and 2.25 of 
the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
Department has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (2) which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.16 and 2.26 of the Report. 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by 
the Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations ( 4) in respect of which 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. 
with regard to paras 2.6, 2.12, 2.13 and 2.22 of the Report. The 
Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Department 
and reiterates the same. 
3. The Committee de sires that the Department should furnish pointed and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in 
the succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report 
(i.e. of 111 th Report) have been  mentioned at the end of each 
recommendation/observation.   
 
--- 

 8 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.0 The Committee recommends the Department that feedback and 
suggestions on the performance of grievance redressal system should be taken 
from the public in order to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and credibility 
of grievance redress mechanism and grievance prevention possibilities.  Best 
suggestions should be rewarded and their implementation and value addition 
should be highlighted for improving the credibility of the system. (2.19) 
Action Taken 
1.1 DARPG is in the process for setting up permanent Feedback call centre. 
The call centre will seek feedback from the Citizens on disposed of Grievances. 
Further, the suggestion may also be sought for improvement of the system 
through this Feedback Call Centre. 
Further observation of the Committee 
1.2 The Committee takes notes of the reply.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.3 The Committee recommends the Department to strengthen public 
interface mechanisms for redress like lok adalats and jan sunvais, wherever 
feasible taking it to the doorstep of the people needing redress.  This can be 
decided in the light of complaints as well as the very field of policy, as and 
when it is location specific. (2.21) 
Action Taken 
1.4 As per the instructions of the Department of  Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances, Wednesdays are observed as meeting -less day so that the 
citizens can meet the officers concerned with their Grievances.   Recently the 
Government organized a weeklong Nationwide campaign on “Prashashan Gaon 
ki Aur” on the occasion of Good Governance Week (GGW) from 20 -25 
December 2021. Target was to resolve public grievances and deliver services to 
the people at their door steps.   All Districts in the country participated in the 
campaign by holding camps at tehs ils and panchayats total 380  citizen charters 
were updated, 621 new services have been added in Citizen Charters, 6.67 lakh 

 9 
public grievances were attended to and 2.89 cr applications under service 
delivery were disposed of.   
Further observation of the Committee 
1.5 The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the 
Department for conducting Lok Adalats and Jan Sunvais for redressal of 
public grievances at their door step.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.6 The Committee recommends the Department to create a Dashboard on 
the website pertaining to grievance redressal comprising performance indicators 
such as average complaints per day, disposal rate, average disposal time, 
Excellent / Satisfactory Feedback, Complaint shared from different channels . 
(2.25) 
Action Taken 
1.7 A dashboard is already on the website of DARPG. However further 
improvement in dashboard as suggested  by the Committee is  under 
consideration of Technical team.    DARPG is in the process of developing 
Grievance redressal Index.  The Index parameter will be integrated with 
Dashboard to provide a glimpse of performance of Ministries   on dashboard. 
Further observation of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
--- 
  

 10 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.0 The Committee is pleased to note that DARPG is gradually making way 
for One Nation – One Grievance Redressal Portal.  However, the Committee 
recommends the Department to ensure that certain features are incorporated 
while integrating CPGRAMS with State Portals, namely, identifying ri ght 
stakeholders for redressal, facility of auto forwarding delayed or specific kind of 
grievances to right team/ person and creating a dashboard for monitoring 
grievance statistics on regular basis including features for logging and 
presenting root cause analysis and trend analysis.  (2.16) 
Action Taken 
2.1 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance.  
DARPG   is in the process of improving CPGRAMS with next generation 
technology which will help in identifying right authority for redressa l, better 
monitoring through real -time dashboard and data analytics for root cause of 
grievances. 
Further observation of the Committee 
2.2 The Committee is glad  to note that the Department is in the process 
of bringing about improvements in the CPGRAMS wit h next generation 
technology. However, the Committee desires that the portal may be as soon 
as possible be audited by an independent specialized agency for identifying 
bottlenecks in the current system and process and suggesting further 
improvements.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.3 The Committee recommends DARPG to impress upon Ministries/ 
Departments to undertake a regular review of grievances, which are raised in 
print and electronic media and include the analysis in the quarterly report 
submitted to the DARPG.  It should also ensu re that the review undertaken by 
them and the action taken on the suggestions are put on its website. (2.26) 
 

 11 
Action Taken 
2.4 In 2016 DARPG had requested all Ministries/Departments to regularly 
examine the Grievances column of the newspapers to pick up th e cases coming 
under their purview and take expeditious action to redress the grievances in a 
time bound manner.  Ministries/ Departments do take   cognizance of complains 
published in Newspapers/ social media etc, however a structured mechanism for 
the same is yet to be developed.  DARPG is working with IIT Kanpur team to 
develop a technology solution for the same so that the grievances published in 
newspapers/social media can be registered suo motto  in CPGRAMS for the 
action by the appropriate authorities. 
Further observation of the Committee 
2.5 The Committee has time and again underlined the role of newspapers 
as a source of public grievances. At times, newspapers bring to light 
unheard grievances of the underprivileged sections and the vulnerable 
groups. Accordingly, the Committee strongly feels that there should be an 
effective mechanism in each Ministry/Department for picking and 
processing newspaper grievances. Accordingly, till the technological 
solution for this, as suggested by the Department is formalized, the DARPG 
should issue guidelines in this regard to all 
Ministries/Departments/Organizations for regularly examining the 
Grievances emanating from the daily newspapers and addressing the ones 
falling within the jurisdiction of the respectiv e 
Ministries/Departments/Organizations. 
 
--- 
  

 12 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE 
REASONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND 
REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.0 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the grievance redressal 
mechanism of an organization is an instrument to measure its efficiency and 
effectiveness as it provides important feedback on the working of that 
organization.  However, it is also important to und erstand that governance is an 
area where the citizen too has a specific role to play at every given point.  The 
Committee notes that, in their eagerness to comply with established instructions, 
grievances are increasingly being disposed of by some departme nts or 
organizations simply with the suggestion to approach another agency, 
sometimes a subordinate office.  In some cases, the grievance is being re -sent to 
the agency against which the complaint is made and in some others, the online 
grievances are being disposed with the advice to take the grievance to the portal 
of the agency or some complaint committee.  The Committee notes that 
DARPG has instructed the Ministries/Departments to give valid reasons for 
closure.  However, in many cases this is not being done. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministries/Departments to strictly comply with the 
instructions issued by Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances from time to time in respect of grievance redressal. (2.6) 
Action Taken 
3.1 In order to make the grievance handling mechanism more sensitive and 
responsible, DARPG has mandated a detailed Action Taken Report (ATR) 
before a grievance is closed in CPGRAMS. The ATR captures with granularity 
the attempts made by the Grievance officer to resol ve the grievances and if not 
resolved then reason for the same. ATR would help to differentiate between the 
actual resolution and disposal of grievance. The ATR also provides for a matrix 
for assessment of quality of resolution and performance of Grievance Officers.    
Further observation of the Committee 
3.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the initiative 
of the Department  in directing the Organizations/Departments/Ministries 
to p repare a detailed ATR before a grievance is closed in CP GRAMS. 
Though, it is hoped that the initiative is being implemented by all the 

 13 
Organizations/Departments/Ministries in the intended manner and it does 
not remains on paper only, as just another set of guidelines issued by the 
Department. 
3.3 In this connection the Committee would like to suggest that there 
must be a system of reward and punishment for the officials entrusted for 
resolution of grievances. The department should develop a mechanism to 
ensure accountability of the government offic ials dealing with the citizen's 
grievances. For this the appellate authority for grievances should be 
empowered to impose some penalty and reward based on the assessment of 
officials dealing with grievances.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.4 The Committee appreciates the Department for sparing no efforts in 
strengthening the grievance redressal system.   The Committee opines that 
having a grievance redressal platform is one thing, demonstrating the right 
intentions are another thing.   Thus, the Committee rec ommends that the 
following goals should also be on radar of the Department while developing 
the next version of CPGRAMS, namely, opening channels for effective 
communication, promoting productive relationship, mitigating and preventing 
adverse impact on st akeholder caused by department‟s operations, and more 
importantly making stakeholders part of the process.  (2.12) 
Action Taken 
3.5 DARPG is in the process for setting up permanent Feedback call centre. 
The call centre will seek feedback from the Citizens on their satisfaction with 
resolution provided to them, help citizens to file/track their grievances. The Call 
Center will also provide requisite data on performance Call Center will make 
the grievance handling mechanism more accountable and participatory for all 
stakeholders including citizens.   
Further observation of the Committee 
3.6 The Committee takes note of the reply. Setting up of a permanent 
Feedback call centre is a welcomed move. The feedback gathered from the 
Call Centre may not only be used fo r gauging the citizen's satisfaction level 
for his/her grievance redressal, but the data emanating from it can help in 
bringing about further improvement in the grievance redressal system . It 
is hoped that the Call Centre does not become a mechanical cust omary 

 14 
exercise, as experienced in case of some other service providers, and serves 
its intended purpose.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.7 The Committee has observed that many grievances received on 
CPGRAMS are related to State governments.  Some grievances  received on 
CPGRAMS revealed that in several of these cases, the petitioner was asked to 
approach the State government and the grievance was disposed rather than 
forwarded.  There was no redressal.  The Committee recommends that 
CPGRAMS should play the ro le of facilitator for the public without impinging 
on the nature of federalism.  The performance of States on the portal can be left 
to them but the facilitation responsibility of the Centre cannot be shed when a 
public grievance is registered, and there i s a jurisdictional conflict involved. 
(2.15) 
Action Taken 
3.8 The Grievances pertaining to the State Governments are handled keeping 
in view the federal principle of the Government. However, DARPG makes all 
efforts that State Governments may address the gr ievances in a meaningful 
manner.  Periodic review meetings are done on regular basis for disposal of 
pendency. 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.9 The Committee takes note of the reply. However, given the fact that 
majority of services to citizens are  offered by the State Governments and 
its agencies; the grievances pertaining to State Governments are 
voluminous. Though many states have evolved grievance redressal 
mechanisms for their respective states and many of them have also 
launched their online g rievance redressal system on the lines of 
CPGRAMS, the grievance redressal system in the States needs to be 
augmented, expanded and made more effective. In this, the DARPG from 
its experience and expertise can play the role of facilitator and guide to the 
State Governments, without encroaching upon their jurisdiction, to help 
states to establish a robust system of grievance redressal system for the 
services offered by them to the citizens.  
 
 

 15 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.10 The Committee notes that CPGRAMS has not been uniformly 
operationalized in all organizations.  Besides, wide variations are apparent 
across the Ministries/ Departments and other organizations in respect of the 
extent of commitment, framework and processes instituted and the capacity to 
handle grievances.  Some organizations have not taken any initiative in this 
regard.  Efficiency and effectiveness of the administrative processes and 
policies are directly dependant on the state of public grievances in any 
organization.  Timely ventilation and redressal of grievances are necessary for 
any citizen friendly administration. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
there should be an overall review/evaluation of the procedure of handling 
grievances of the Ministr ies/ Departments/ Organizations in the Government of 
India. (2.22) 
Action Taken 
3.11 As stated earlier the DARPG is in the process of improving citizen 
experience as far as grievance redressal is concerned.  Technology 
improvement, Action Taken Report and Feedback call centre will help the 
Department to understand the roadblocks, tighten the processes, and develop 
institutional capacity   of Ministries in redressal of public grievances. 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.12 The Committee takes note of t he reply. The CPGRAMS portal is in 
vogue for a quite long time and it is surprising to note that the portal is yet 
to be operationalized uniformly across organizations and there is a wide 
variation amongst them in respect of framework and processes institu ted 
and the capacity to handle grievances. Accordingly, it is reiterated that the 
DARPG should impress upon all organizations to strictly adhere to their 
guidelines related to the operationalization of the CPGRAMS.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 

 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 17 
 
XXV 
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 05:00 PM on 04.08.2022 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block -A, Parliament House Annexe Ext. Building, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iii) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(iv) Shri P. Wilson 
(v) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(vi) Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
(vii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(viii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(ix) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(x) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Smt. Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 18 
WITNESSES 
*                                                           *                                                  * 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He apprised them that the Committee will first consider and adopt 
two reports  *                                                   *                                                 * 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the 118 th Report on „Review of 
Guardianship and Adoption Laws‟ and 119 th Report on „Action Taken on 111 th 
Report of the Committee on Strengthening of Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
of the Government of India‟.  
4. *                                                             *                                                 * 
5. *                                                             *                                                 * 
6. *                                                             *                                                 * 
7. *                                                             *                                                 * 
8. *                                                             *                                                 *  
9. *                                                             *                                                 * 
10. *                                                             *                                                 * 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 05.57 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
4th August, 2022                                                                               DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances,  Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
** Relate to other matters 