PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LA W AND JUSTICE
NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken on 91st Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana 1939 (Saka)
94
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 185
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken on 91st Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ ( i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-24
(i) Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Ministry.................................................................................... 2
(ii) Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry...... 3-4
(iii) Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee
has not accepted replies of the Ministry ..................................... 5-22
(iv) Chapter IV Recommendation/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Ministry have not been received....................................... 23-24
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 25-29
5. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 31-35

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva
*10. Shri Anand Sharma
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode
15. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhury
16. Adv. Joice George
17. Shri Radadiya Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai
18. Shri Pralhad Joshi
19. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
20. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
21. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
22. Shri Bhagwant Mann
23. Shri B.V . Naik
24. Shri Vincent H. Pala
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 10.11.2017 consequent on his resignation from the Committee.

(ii)
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
28. Shri V. Panner Selvam
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
30. Adv. Anshul Verma
†31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
† Dueto change of nomination of Shri Santosh Kumar from the Committee w.e.f. 03.11.2017.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-fourth Report on Action Taken on 91st Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice.
2. The Ninety-first Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2017.
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department, Department of Legal Affairs, and
Department of Justice) furnished the Action Taken Replies on Ninety-first Report of the Committee on
13th June, 28th September and 9th October, 2017, respectively. The Committee considered the draft
Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 14th November, 2017.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
NEW D ELHI; BHUPENDER YADA V
14th November, 2017 Chairman,
Kartik 23, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
A2J : Access to Justice
A2J-NEJK : Access to Justice -NE and J&K
ADR : Alternate Dispute Resolution
AIJS : All India Judicial Service
A TR : Action Taken Report
BCI : Bar Council of India
BEL : Bharat Electronics Limited
COS : Committee of Secretaries
CPC : Central Project Coordinators
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSR : Computer Server Room
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Scheme
ECI : Election Commission of India
ECIL : Electronics Corporation of India Limited
EPIC : Electoral Photo Identity Cards
EVMs : Electronic V oting Machines
FACT : Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FLC : First Level Checking
HLMC : High Level Monitoring Committee
HRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development.
ICADR : International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICPS : Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
ICT : information and Communication Technology
IIIDEM : India International Institute of Democracy and Election
Management
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
ILDR : Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research
ILI : Indian Law Institute
ITA T : Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
(iv)

JSC : Judicial Service Centre
LAN : Local Area Network
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority
NHPC : National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
NJA : National Judicial Academy
OLW : Official Language Wing
SLP : State Litigation Policy
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
SVEEP : Systemic V oters' Education and Electoral Participation
TFC : Thirteenth Finance Commission
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UC : Utilization Certificates
VVP A T : V oter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail
W AN : Wide Area Network
WCD : Ministry of Women and Child Development
(v)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Law and
Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Ninety-first Report on the Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha
on the 15th March, 2017.
2. The Action Taken Replies of Legislative Department, Department of Legal Affairs, Department of
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report were received on 13th June, 28th September and 9th October, 2017, respectively. Replies of the
Departments have been categorised as follows:
Chapter-I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry i.e., in
respect of para 3.9 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted
its recommendations.
Chapter-II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 5.7 and 6.22 of the Report. The
Committee has accepted the explanations furnished by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue
them further as of now.
Chapter-III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 2.9, 3.6, 4.15, 5.4, 5.10, 5.16, 5.17, 5.20,
5.23, 6.15, 6.25, 6.29, 6.31 and 6.32, of the Report. The Committee expresses its concern for not
accepting the recommendations of the Committee dealt with in Chapter - III of this Report and
reiterates its recommendations.
Chapter-IV : The recommendations/observations on which final replies of the Ministry of Law and
Justice have not been received. The Committee expresses its deep concern that it did not receive
the replies from the Legislative Department/Election Commission in respect of Committee's
recommendations vide Para Nos. 4.0 to 4.26 except para 4.15, 6.8 and 6.16. Similarly, the reply
of Department of Justice was not received in respect of Committee recommendation vide Para 7.2.
The Committee desires that Ministry should furnish action taken report in respect of recommendations
mentioned in Chapter - IV without any further delay.

CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH (ILDR)
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee observes that the Institute has been in existence for almost three decades now and
substantial amount of public fund already spent on it. It would, therefore, be useful for the Department
to get a third party evaluation made of the quality of training being imparted at the Institute and the
extent to which training at the Institute has resulted in improved legislative drafting skills, so that
shortcomings, if any, could be removed and Institute involves into a globally reputed centre for legislative
drafting. (Para 3.9)
Action Taken
1.1. As regards the Secretarial staff and infrastructure of ILDR, the same are being audited on regular
intervals by the K.B.S. Certifying Agency as part and process of the ISO 2001-2008 Certificates which
have been awarded to the Institute. So far as imparting of training in legislative drafting is concerned,
the ILDR is imparting both theoretical as well as practical training with the assistance of serving and
retired draft persons. After the completion of the Basic Course and Appreciation Course in legislative
drafting, feedback is taken from the trainee officers and on the basis of inputs received, the quality of
training is improved. Further, the very existence of this Department which prepares the draft Bills and
scrutinizes the subordinate legislations of all the Ministries and Departments of the Central Governments
under the respective Acts administered by them is itself an evaluation that the ILDR is competent to
impart training in legislative drafting. However, if the ILDR receives any suggestions for its improvements,
the same will be adopted for the improvement in training in legislative drafting in the ILDR.
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee also appreciates the activities of
ILDR and is of the view that it should forge Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with similar
institutions around the world to keep pace with the best global practices in legislative drafting.
The Committee also feels that ILDR should be developed as an institution of national importance
and should play active role in imparting training on legislative drafting to personnel of developing
countries.
2

CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange (ATFE)
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee notes that disposal rates in the years 2015 and 2016 exceed the institution rate. In
2016, the number of appeals registered was quite low as compared to previous two years and, therefore,
there was some decline in pendency of cases. The disposal rate, however, needs to be improved significantly
if pendency is to be cleared in near future. The Committee notes with anguish that while there is
substantial pendency, the post of Chairperson is lying vacant for several months now. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that post of Chairperson be filled at the earliest and effective steps be taken to
clear pendency. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
1.1. After enactment of the Finance Act, 2017, the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange (ATFE) is
no more in existence and it has been merged with the Appellate Tribunal under the Smugglers and Foreign
Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 which is administered by the Ministry of
Finance.
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee notes the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Infrastructure Development of Subordinate Judiciary
Recommendation/Observation
2. The amount allocated in BE (2017-18) is 
` 629.20 crore which is ` 270.8 crore less than the
projection (` 900 crore) made by the Department. The Committee feels that the activities of the Department
may be affected / delayed, leading to construction of lesser number of court halls and residential quarters
for subordinate court officials, which would ultimately affect the justice delivery system. The Committee
notes that infrastructure development for judiciary represents a major component of the scheme allocation
of the Department of Justice in BE (2017-18), which is around 60 percent and there is an increase of
` 85 crore over the RE of 2016-17. This is a welcome trend. The Committee would like the Department
to ensure that there is a robust monitoring of utilization of the funds so that the targets are achieved.
(Para 6.22)
Action Taken
2.1. The proposal for continuation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for Development of
Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary from 01st April 2017 to 31st March 2020 continued to be implemented
in a Mission Mode through National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms with an estimated
3

4
outlay of `3,320 crores was placed before Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) headed by Finance
Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) for appraisal. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its
meeting held on 09.08.2017 has recommended as below:
(a) An on-line monitoring system will be set up by the Department of Justice enabling data
collection on progress, completion of court halls and residential units under construction as
well as better asset management.
(b) Besides, regular meetings of the Monitoring Committee may be organised in various States
with State Chief Secretaries and PWD officials to enable speedy and good construction. It may
also be monitored if the funds released by the Centre are released without delay onward to
PWD by the State Governments.
(c) Norms and Specification of court halls and residential units to be constructed under Scheme
for implementation throughout the country will be formulated for future.
(d) Continuation of the Scheme up to 31.03.2020 is for completion of on-going under construction
projects only.
(e) Continuation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for Development of Infrastructure
Facilities for Judiciary beyond 12th Five Year Plan i.e. from 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 in
Mission Mode through National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms with an outlay
of `3,320 crores as below:
Financial Year Proposed sanction of funds (in ` crore)
2017-18 1,000
2018-19 1,110
2019-20 1,210
Total 3,320
(f) The following outputs will be achieved by end of 2019-20:
Financial Year 2017-18 Financial Year 2018-19 Financial Year 2019-20
  Measurable targets Measurable targets Measurable targets
1000 court halls and 600 1000 court halls and 600 1000 court halls and 600
residential units for judicial residential units for judicial residential units for judicial
officers of District and officers of District and officers of District and
Subordinate Courts Subordinate Courts Subordinate Courts
Further Observation
2.2. The Committee appreciates the Department for continuing the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
(CSS) for up to the year 2020. It further feels that proper evaluation of implementation of the
CSS would help in reducing infrastructural requirement for subordinate judiciary, thereby,
improving the justice delivery system.

5
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Budgetary Allocations to the Ministry
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee observes that the projection under BE (2016-17) of the Ministry was reduced at RE
stage. This implies that either spending units have overestimated their expenditure or the utilization pace
was tardy. Either of the two situations is not desirable as unutilized funds mean unnecessary financial
burden on the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that every unit of the Ministry should
realistically assess its requirement of funds and seek funds only on the basis of its realistic requirements
and closely monitor expenditure so that situation of large amount of funds remaining unutilized is
avoided. The Committee recommends units which are not able to utilize funds sought by them should be
made accountable for it. (Para 2.9)
Action Taken
1.1. As against ` 5100.00 crore in BE 2016-2017, ` 4063.00 crore was allocated by Ministry of Finance
in RE 2016-17. The reduction amounts to ` 1037.00 crore, which is 20.33% of BE 2016-17. The
reduction in RE stage was due to trend of expenditure till September, 2016 in some of the Major Heads.
The Major Head wise/Unit wise reduction in RE and reasons thereof are as under:
(Figure in crores)
Sl. Spending Units B E RE BE - RE  Reason for reduction
No. 2016-17 2016-17 2016-17
12 3 4 5 6
1. Income Tax Appellate 87.69 30.00 57.69 Due to non-materialization of
Tribunal (ITAT) purchase of land and construction
(Capital Outlay) of building in various benches of
ITAT. Accordingly less provision
was kept in RE stage.
2. EVMs 1700.00 780.00 920.00 The purchase of Voter Verifiable
Paper Audit Trail Units (VVPAT)
has been proposed by Election
Commission did not materialize due
to administrative reasons involving
consultations/approval of different
authorities. In respect of EVMs the
sanction was given by the Cabinet
5

6
1         2 3 4 5               6
on 20/07/2016 only. Payment shall
be released only after supply of
EVMs and necessary bills raised
by ECI. This has not been
received so far. This lead to
reduction of funds at RE stage.
3. NALSA (Grants-in-Aid) 140.00 83.95 56.05 NALSA release funds to State Legal
Service Authorities from the Grants
received from GOI. Since, UC's
not received from State Legal
Service Authorities for the
provisional release, NALSA claimed
less grants from GOI. Accordingly
less provisions has been made in
RE Stage.
1.2. Keeping in view the trend of expenditure and amount reduced at RE 2016-17 stage, in the above
mentioned three Heads the provision for 2017-18 (BE) reduced considerably. The following table indicate
the same:
(Figure in crores)
Sl. No. Spending Units BE 2016-17 RE 2016-17 BE 2017-18
1. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT) 87.69 30.00 71.00
(Capital Outlay)
2. EVMs 1700.00 780.00 1000.00
3. NALSA (Grants-in-Aid) 140.00 83.95 100.00
Further Observation
1.3. The Committee expresses its dismay over the slow pace of expenditure in the above three
major heads, which led to a 20.33% decrease in the allocation of funds to the Ministry at the
RE (2016-17) stage and also considerably reduced fund allocation in BE (2017-2018) under these
heads. The Committee feels that reasons cited for underutilization of funds could have been
managed better by close monitoring of the pace of expenditure. The Committee notes that in BE
(2017-2018) only Rs 1000 Cr has been allocated for EVMs and VVPATs, which is approximately
38% less than the projection and strongly recommends that funds allocated for VVPATs/EVMs
should be proactively utilized keeping in view the General Elections to the Lok Sabha in the year
2019. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments to
furnish Utilisation Certificates so that more funds from NALSA could be released.

7
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING AND VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee expresses its displeasure over non-utilization of funds allocated to Official Languages
Wing and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan year after year despite Committee's repeated recommendations of full
utilization of funds allotted. The Committee is also not happy with the reasons furnished for non-
utilisation of funds. Matter ought to have been taken up with the Government of India Press if delayed
receipt of its bills was contributing to non-utilisation of funds. As regards other reasons, the units ought
to have asked for lower funds if it was to reduce its expenditure. (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
2.1. Of ficial Languages Wing was allocated `9,90,00,000/- in RE 2016-17. Out of this, `9,70,47,007/
- was utilized during the year 2016-17 and `19,52,993/- was left during the aforesaid financial year. It
is mentioned that `10.64 Crore is allocated for the financial year 2017-18. This amount will be utilized
during the financial year 2017-18. It may further be stated that this Wing has projected the budget for
the financial year 2017-18 as per genuine requirement. In so far as Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is concerned,
proposals are under consideration to fill the vacant post in different grades. Measures have been taken
to purchase required items/goods for office. Initiative has already been taken to pay the pending bills with
the government press for printing the Uchhcha Nayalaya Patrikas/Uchchtama Nayalaya Patrikas. Proposals
of domestic travel under propagation of Hindi are under consideration.
Further Observation
2.3. The Committee notes that the meagre funds allocated to Official Languages Wing and Vidhi
Sahitya Prakashan in BE (2016-2017) were further reduced at the RE (2016-2017) stage. Official
Languages Wing have submitted in their reply that they were not able to fully utilise the funds
allocated at the RE (2016-2017) stage but have not cited any reasons for the same. The ATR of
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is completely silent on the extent of utilization of funds allocated to
them in RE (2016-2017), which they ought to have provided. However, they had an unutilized
amount of Rs 1.34 Cr up to January, 2017. The Committee desires that it be informed as to what
extent Official Languages Wing was able to utilize the amounts sanctioned to them in BE (2017-
2018) and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan in RE (2016-2017) and BE (2017-2018). The Committee,
therefore, recommends that these spending units should seek funds from the Ministry of Finance
on the basis of their realistic requirements and closely monitor their expenditure.
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Voting Rights of Domestic Migrants
Recommendation/Observation
3. According to Census 2011 and National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), migrants constitute
about 30 percent of the country's population and also of the total working force. The Economic Survey
(2016-17) also noted that annual migration in the country increased to 9.00 million in 2016 from 3.30
million in 2011. As per the existing law they can cast their vote in the constituencies where they are
registered as voters. During the elections they are not able to cast their vote at their place of work or
in their constituency as they are constantly on move from one place to another in search of better

8
livelihood. The Commission during the Demands for Grants (2017-18) informed that a Committee was
constituted to look into the issues of domestic migrant and it has already given its recommendations,
which has been forwarded to Legislative Department, to enable them to cast their vote at their place
of work or business. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Commission and the Legislative
Department to expedite the matter so that domestic migrants are not deprived of their right to vote which
is a basic right of every citizen in the country. (Para 4.15)
Action Taken
3.1. The Commission has forwarded a copy of the 'Report of Committee of Officers on Domestic
Migrants' which was submitted by the Commission before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in W.P.
No. 1005 of 2013. It was also forwarded to the Ministry of Law and Justice, vide Commissions letter
dated 29.05.2017.
3.2. The Legislative Department has referred to the above report of the Commission and has forwarded
their comments on the recommendations contained in the report. They have further submitted that the
whole idea of putting in place alternative modes of voting for domestic migrants is contingent on (i) the
development of fool-proof system for two-way postal ballot; and (ii) consultation with stakeholders by
the Election Commission. Therefore, no actionable proposal is pending in the Legislative Department.
However, the Election Commission has been separately requested to examine the matter further and
come-up with definite proposals for consideration of the Government.
Further observation
3.3. The Committee is of the view that voting rights of domestic migrants are as important as
for any other citizen and delay on the part of the Department/Election Commission of India is
a serious issue as it deprives millions of citizens of exercising their democratic right to vote. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Commission and the Legislative Department should
expedite the matter so that domestic migrants are not deprived of their right to vote.
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Shortage of Officers in the Department
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the acute shortage of officers in the Department.
The Department needs to urgently address the causes responsible for this state of affairs and ensure that
vacancies of officers are filled up at the earliest. (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
4.1. Department of Legal Affairs is making continuous efforts to fill up its vacant posts and vehemently
pursuing the matter with the recruiting agencies i.e. Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff
Selection Commission (SSC). Pursuant to persistent efforts, all the three posts of Additional Secretaries
have been filled by promotion. Three Joint Secretary & Legal Advisers have joined this Department by
direct recruitment. Besides, proposal for filling up of 6 posts of Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser is under
active consideration of this Department and the matter has been taken up with the UPSC for obtaining
of NOC. Further, in pursuance of the recruitment process for two posts of Additional Legal Adviser in
DR quota, fresh recommendation from UPSC has been solicited and the same is awaited for these two
posts. In addition to this, a proposal has been approved by the Hon'ble Minister of Law & Justice for

9
diversion of 8 vacancies of Additional Legal Adviser falling under Promotion Quota to Direct Recruitment
Quota. This, however, requires approval of Department of Expenditure for revival of these posts as the
same have come under deemed abolition. Approval of Department of Expenditure to this effect has been
sought. After approval, a proposal will be taken up with the UPSC for filling up of 8 vacancies of
Additional Legal Adviser on DR basis. Similarly, the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) has conveyed that
the recruitment process for 08 posts of Assistant (Legal) is in final stage and the same would be over
in 2-3 months' time and thereafter the names of selected candidates would be recommended for appointment.
Further observation
4.2. The Committee notes that the reply of the Department only provides information regarding
status of recruitment to various posts in the Department and is completely silent on the causes
responsible for the shortage of manpower in the Department. The Committee wishes to be
apprised of the latest post wise vacancy position in the Department, as well as causes responsible
for the shortage of manpower and remedial actions being taken by the Department to evolve a
mechanism for timely filling of vacancies so that functioning of the Department is not hampered.
LA W COMMISSION OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee is of the view that vacancies of officers in the Law Commission of India need to
be filled-up urgently to ensure efficient and smooth functioning of the Commission. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation contained in Seventy-fifth and Eighty-fourth Reports on the Demands for
Grants (2015-16 and 2016-17) and suggests that all the agencies like concerned Department, UPSC and
DoP&T sit together to find out the ways to expeditiously fill the vacant posts in the Commission.
(Para 5.10)
Action Taken
5.1. The matter for filling up the posts of Additional Law Officer and Deputy Law Officers in the Law
Commission of India was taken up the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Department of
Personnel & Training (DoP&T). The UPSC and DoP&T have suggested to amend the recruitment Rules.
The Proposal for amendments in the Indian Legal Service Rules, 1957, is under consideration and
necessary steps are underway in this regard.
Further observation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that the decision on the proposal
for amending the Indian Legal Service Rules, 1957 should be expedited so that the recruitment
process is initiated. The Department is further requested to furnish status of the amendment of
the Rules ibid to the Committee. The Committee also notes that the reply of the Department
is silent on the status of recruitment for the post of Assistant Law Officer and wishes to be
apprised of the same.
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee expresses its serious concern and anguish over the pendency existing in Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal. The Committee notes that between the years 2004 and 2010, pendency was substantially

10
reduced but thereafter, disposal rate has not been commensurate with the disposal rate of the year 2004-
05 and, therefore pendency, in the Tribunal again has increased to an alarming level. This is a serious
reflection on the state of affairs existing in the Tribunal and the Committee recommends that the
Department should urgently review the reasons for this state of affairs and take remedial measures
urgently so that the pendency shows substantial improvement. (Para 5.16)
Action Taken
6.1. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal has reported that during the year 2015-16, 39 New Members
(Judicial/Accountant) have joined ITAT and it took some time for them to settle down. ITAT has, in this
regard, also issued necessary instructions to its Benches to scrutinize and identify cases (group and small
matter) which are covered by decisions of ITAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court and post / list them
on priority basis. The Bar has also been requested to bring to the notice of ITAT, all such covered cases
for out of turn posting. Besides, Search & Seizure cases and appeals u/s 263 are being given priority
in their disposal. The ITAT has also introduced use of information technology for early disposal of appeal
by introducing e-court i.e. hearing through video conferencing. Such stations where e-courts have been
made functional are Delhi-Jabalpur, Ahmedabad-Rajkot and Mumbai-Nagpur. Recently, Kolkata-Guwahati
has been linked. Efforts are also on for linking Ahmedabad-Surat and Kolkata-Ranchi. ITAT has assured
that all best possible efforts shall be made so that gradually pendency of appeals is reduced considerably
in near future. Department of Legal Affairs, on its part, has also urged, President, ITAT to put in place
an effective mechanism to increase monthly disposal rate by each Member of the Tribunal, with a view
to reduce pendency in ITAT.
Further observation
6.2. The Committee notes that the reply is silent on whether the Department has reviewed the
reasons for declining rate of disposal of cases by ITAT, resulting in huge pendency. The reply only
states the measures being taken by ITAT in an effort to reduce pendency. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the reasons for decline in the disposal rates by ITAT and also whether all
the above measures undertaken by ITAT are proving effective to reduce pendency and, if so, to
what extent. The Committee observes that the disposal rate in 2015-16 was higher than that of
in the years from 2009-10 to 2014-15, it therefore, fails to understand the reasoning given by
ITAT that increase in pendency is due to the fact that during the year 2015-16, 39 New Members
joined ITAT and it took some time for them to settle down.
6.3. Further, as per the Annual Report 2016-17 of the Ministry of Law & Justice, out of the
sanctioned strength of 126 Members of Tribunals, 25 posts were lying vacant. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that proactive measures should be taken to fill all the existing vacancies
expeditiously as this would also improve the disposal rate in ITAT. The Committee would also like
to be apprised whether the President, ITAT has put in place any mechanism to increase monthly
disposal rate by each Member of the Tribunal. The Committee also feels that the Department
should develop some rating mechanism for ITAT Benches and an annual exercise of rating each
Bench should be followed to gauge their performance and may be suitably reflected in the Annual
Report of the Ministry.

11
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee also recommends that the Government should seriously review continuance of such
Tribunals which have become non-functional or have very few cases. The Government should also
comprehensively address the problem of overlapping jurisdiction of the Tribunal to ensure efficient
functioning of the Tribunals. (Para 5.17)
Action Taken
7.1. Eight Tribunals have been merged with the other Tribunals, by the Finance Act, 2017. The details
of these Tribunals are as under:
(i) The Employees Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal merged with The Industrial Tribunal.
(ii) The Copyright Board under the Copyright Act, 1957, merged with The Intellectual Property
Appellate Board.
(iii) The Railway Rates Tribunal merged with the Railway Claim Tribunals.
(iv) The Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange with the Appellate Tribunal under the Smugglers
and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976.
(v) The National Highways Tribunal with the Airport Appellate Tribunal.
(vi) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal with the Telecom Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal.
(vii) The Airport Economic Regulatory Authority Tribunal with the Telecom Dispute Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal.
(viii) The Competition Appellate Tribunal with the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
Further Observation
7.2. The Committee notes the reply and feels that merging of tribunals was sine qua non  to cut wasteful
expenditure of government and speed-up disposal of cases. However, the Committee notes that the reply
of the Department is silent on the measures taken/ proposed to be taken by the Government to address
the problem of overlapping jurisdiction of the Tribunals.
INDIAN LA W INSTITUTE (ILI)
Recommendation/Observation
8. Indian Law Institute being a premier legal research institute which has been granted deemed
university status in the year 2004, should strive to become a self-sustaining Institute imparting high
quality of legal education and research and avoid being a permanent drag on public funds. It is not
befitting the status of this premier legal Institute to raise any part of its resources by renting a portion
of its building. It should ideally use all its resources only for imparting legal education and research and
raise funds from them. However, in order to make it self-sustaining, if Government funds are to be
provided for a limited period, the Committee recommends that such funds should be provided.
(Para 5.20)
Action Taken
8.1. The Ministry of Law and Justice shares the concern of the Committee on making Indian Law
Institute (ILI) self-sustainable. As per the provisions of a loan agreement with the Ministry, ILI has leased

12
out space other than the Ground floor to the Ministry and receives rent in lieu thereof. The institute
otherwise generates revenue from course fee, sale of publication, etc. and in total earns ` 4 Crore approx
annually. In addition, Department of Legal Affairs provides recurring grant to ILI to meet its expenses
on salary, and other administrative expenditure. This Department's endeavor is to provide all deficit funds
to ILI to make it self-sustainable. In last three years, ILI has been extended grants amounting to `
7,02,72,250/- (2014-15, 2015-16, and 2016-17). In the current financial year, beside recurring grant, a
proposal to fund additional requirement of ILI in lieu of implementation of the recommendations of the
Seventh Central Pay Commission is also under active consideration. On its part, the Institute is taking
necessary steps for filling up their faculty positions with a view to improving research activities and to
enhance the stature of the Institute at par with International Standards. Further, the Institute is exploring
new avenues for expansion of its activities, if required by allotment of additional space and enhancement
of its Corpus Fund.
Further Observation
8.2. The Committee is of the view that it is not befitting the status of this premier legal Institute
to raise any part of its resources by renting a portion of its building. It should use all its
resources only for academic/research activities and raise funds by expanding these activities. The
Committee notes that as per the submissions of Director, ILI during DFG (2017-2018), almost
50% of posts in ILI were vacant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that vacant positions
in ILI should be filled-up immediately so that it is able to expand its activities and move in the
direction of becoming a self-sustaining Institute. The Committee also desires to be apprised of
the status of the recruitment process in ILI. The Committee also reiterates the recommendation
made in its Eighty-fourth report for statutory back-up to the Institute.
NOTARIES APPOINTMENT
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee is of the view that Notaries are important link in the judicial system and provide
cost effective services to public for various basis services viz., verification, authentication, certification
of documents etc. in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that the process of appointment of
Notaries needs to be further streamlined and made more robust so that competent persons are appointed
as Notaries. (Para 5.23)
Action Taken
9.1. Department of Legal Affairs is in agreement with the observation made by the Hon'ble Parliamentary
Committee that the competent person may be appointed as Notaries. In this regard, it is submitted that
to judge the competency of person for appointment as a Notary, Interview Board, is constituted under
Rule 7 of the Notaries Rule, 1956. As per Rule 7 of the Notaries Rules, the Interview Board shall consist
of the officers dealing with legal matters and the Chairperson of the Board shall be an officer not below
the rank of Joint Secretary or Law Officer. The Interview Board, after accessing the suitability of person,
submits its recommendation and after taking into the consideration of the recommendation of the
Interview Board, Notaries are appointed. To streamline the process for appointment of Notaries, the
Department of Legal Affairs has started to accept online applications for appointment of Notaries. Further

13
action to improve the process of appointment of Notaries is envisaged through continuous and periodic
assessment of current procedures.
Further Observation
9.2. The Committee appreciates the initiative of accepting online applications for Notaries but
it still feels that the process of appointment of Notaries needs to be further streamlined. The
Department may consider awarding points on some broad parameters to short list applicants for
Notaries interview and publish the result online so that candidates may know the fate of their
application. They may be kept informed at various stages of the appointment process and the said
process should be time bound. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the periodicity
of assessment of the procedure of appointment of Notaries since the Notification of the Notaries
Rule, 1956.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
National Legal Services Authority (NALSA)
Recommendation/Observation
10. NALSA has an important role in making justice available to poor and marginalized section of the
society. The Committee, however, notes that the funds provided to the Authority are inadequate and
recommends that the Government should appropriately enhance Grants-in-aid made available to the
Authority. The Authority may also explore other avenues for raising resources for achieving its objectives.
The Committee, however, is not happy over the quality of legal services being made available under the
Scheme. There is need not only to provide legal services to the needy but also that the quality of legal
service provided is of a high standard. The Committee feels this is where the Authority falls short of the
expectations of the Committee and would like the Authority to concentrate on improving the quality of
legal services being provided by it. It may also consider suitably revising the fee paid to the advocates
who provide legal services under the Scheme. It should also make the system of empanelment of lawyers
for providing services under the Scheme more transparent, robust and accountable. (Para 6.15)
Action Taken
10.1.In order to improve the quality of legal services provided by the State Legal Services Authorities,
the National Legal Services Authority has recently taken measures addressing a procedure for selection
of panel lawyers, monitoring of cases assigned to them and enhancement of the fee payable to them.
Some of the steps taken are as follows:
(a) NALSA has enhanced the Lawyers fee for Panel Lawyers assigned to the Legal Aid applicants.
All the State Legal Services Authorities have been requested to take necessary steps to implement
the minimum fee structure as prescribed by NALSA.
(b) State Legal Services Authorities have also been requested to take steps for appointing remand
advocates in all the Magisterial Courts/Sessions Court, wherever required, and to fix their
honorarium at par with the retainer lawyers, as per the guidelines of NALSA. This is to ensure
that every undertrial prisoner gets legal assistance right from the first day of his production
in the court.
(c) NALSA has passed a resolution that in places where the monitoring committee has not been
constituted, as per Regulations 10 of NALSA (Free and Competent Legal Services) Regulations,
2010, the same shall be constituted at the earliest.

14
(d) As regards the appointment of efficient and committed Panel Lawyers, it may be stated that
a committee has been constituted by NALSA, comprising of Three Executive Chairpersons of
State Legal Services Authorities and two Chairperson of High Court Legal Services Committee,
to whom all the SLSA's shall give their suggestions for appointment of efficient and committed
panel lawyers.
(e) The committee in its first meeting has started preparing guidelines as to how the SLSAs to
empanel the lawyers so as to strengthen the core activity of providing of court based legal
aid.
(f) NALSA has prepared training modules for legal services lawyers which would better facilitate
the process of training of the panel lawyers. Two parts of the module have already been
released and are being utilised by the SLSAs. NALSA is already working on the third part.
NALSA is also training Master Trainers to conduct training as per the module in their respective
States.
(g) NALSA in partnership with Department of Justice and UNDP has introduced a new legal aid
scheme namely 'Tele Law'. This has been introduced in 1000 Gram Panchayats of UP and
Bihar. This scheme facilitates legal aid to marginalized persons through video conference/chat/
telephone at the Common Service Centres. Tele-law model is facilitating legal advice and
referral through expert panel lawyers placed with State Legal Service Authorities. As on date,
out of 2859 cases registered, legal advice has been rendered in 2098 cases. Most of the
beneficiaries are women, SC, ST and other marginalized persons.
(h) The Government has also introduced a Pro Bono Legal Service scheme for marginalized
persons. An online application procedure for interested lawyers to enroll has been launched at
doj.gov.in. As on date 158 advocates have enrolled in the portal.
(i) The Government is going to engage 227 Nyaya Mitras to be selected from retired judicial
officers as well as this Nyaya Mitras will be engaged in the district where there are large
number of 10 years old cases pending. This will also assist nearby litigants for speedy disposal
of their cases.
Further Observation
10.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the initiatives of NALSA. The
Committee feels that a respectable fee to lawyers is a pre-requisite for a quality legal service
and accordingly, appreciates NALSA for enhancing fee of lawyers. The fee may also be revised
periodically. The Committee also appreciates the initiative of Tele-Law and feels that it will go
a long way in delivering justice to the marginalized sections, especially in underdeveloped and
backward regions of the country. The Committee notes that NALSA has constituted a committee
to whom all the SLSA's shall give suggestions for appointment of efficient and committed panel
lawyers and it would like to be apprised of the recommendations of this committee. However, the
Committee expresses its deep concern over under-utilization of funds by NALSA, leading to fund
reduction. Accordingly, the Committee impresses upon NALSA to fully utilize funds allocated to
it each year so that quality legal services are made available to poor and marginalized sections
of the society.

15
Recommendations/Observations
11. The Committee appreciates use of Information and Communication technologies in justice delivery
system for benefit of the litigants and court officials and to cut red-tapism, increase efficiency, transparency
and account-ability in the system. The Committee hopes the Department will make use of experiences
gained in Phase-I of the project, for robust and effective implementation of the Phase-II. The Committee
recommends that the Department should expedite the process of digitization and hardware installations
under the project and achieve targets set in a time-bound manner. The Committee further recommends
that periodic evaluations of the project be carried out so as to make timely intervention, if any, needed
for completion of the project, as scheduled. (Para 6.25)
Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department
11.1.(1) Salient Features of the Project :
(a) Decentralised Implementation:  In Phase II of the eCourts Project, as designed by the
eCommittee of the Supreme Court of India and also approved by the Government of India,
the implementation of the Project has been decentralized to the High Courts for the Courts
falling under the jurisdiction of the particular High Court. Based on the technical specifications
finalised by the eCommittee in consultation with the Government of India, all the High Courts
have started the procurement of the hardware for their Courts.
(b) Direct Funds to High Courts: The funds of the eCourts Project have been transferred to
the High Courts by the Government of India to be expended by the High Courts for approved
activities of the Project.
(c) Cloud Architecture: The Case Information Software for District Courts is mandated to be
shifted to Cloud based architecture in Phase II of the eCourts Project.
(d) Litigants' Charter: 30 different services on 7 different e-platforms as referred in the Litigants'
Charter of eCourts Project, are aimed to be delivered by way of implementation of the Phase
II of the eCourts Project.
(e) Horizontal and Vertical Integration through National Judicial Data Grid : Though uniquely
identifying each and every case of Courts of all level through a CNR (Case Number Record)
number, it has been planned to establish horizontal and vertical integration of data of all the
Courts so that in case of inter se transfer of cases and filing of cases at higher level of Courts
against the orders/judgments of courts under those courts, there would be fetching of data
and status of the case horizontally and vertically respectively.
2. Activities so far in Phase II:
(a) Total budget of Phase II of eCourts project is `1670 crore. The duration of the project is four
years, i.e July 2019 or until the project is completed, whichever is later. The project sanction
notification was issued on 04.08.2015. So far `893.40 crore has been released by the
Government of India to various High Courts and other agencies towards implementation of
various project components. So far Utilization Certificates have been received for ` 225.48
crore only.

16
(b) Actual transfer of funds has started since January, 2016. Almost all High Courts have already
procured the required computer hardware i.e computers, printers, Display boards, etc., and
got them installed. LAN installation process is in progress. Procurement of Information Kiosks
are yet to be completed by many High Courts.
(c) Video Conferencing for remaining Court Complexes and Jails: The desktop based video
conferencing infrastructure has been established at 488 court complexes and 342 jails in Phase
I of the Project. The eCommittee now has decided to establish Video Conferencing facility at
the remaining 2768 Court Complexes and 958 Jails. During the current FY the Government
has released `64.33 crore to various High Courts for establishment of Video Conferencing
system.
(d) SMS based Case Information Services: Through the National Core Case Information Software
(NC CIS 1.1) and also the new CIS version 2.0, SMS services have been launched at majority
of the Court Complexes having leased line connectivity given in the eCourts Project. SMS is
sent to the lawyer/litigant whose mobile number is fed into the system on filing, registration,
listing and disposal of the case. Presently 886 Court Complexes out of total 2589 Computerised
Court Complexes are delivering SMS based services.
(e) Mobile Application for E-Courts :  NIC has developed a mobile based eCourts application to
render all services as presently available from website of ecourts.gov.in. The same was
released in August 2017. The mobile app has received a huge response from litigants, advocates
and other interested groups. In a short period of less than a month since it has been released
about one lakh users has downloaded the app. The app is available for Android and iOS
platforms.
(f) E-filing Application for High Courts and District Courts:  The eCommittee software
development team has developed an efiling application for High Courts and District Courts.
The application also offers integration with online payment gateways. Alerts through SMS and
Email are integrated in the application. It is under the process of security audit.
3. National eCourts Portal and National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG):
(a) National eCourts Portal:
(i) The e-Courts National portal (ecourts.gov.in), which was launched by Hon'ble the Chief
Justice of India on 7th August, 2013, provides cause-list, case status information and
order/judgments etc. in respect of more than 8.59 crore cases (pending and decided).
Presently, case information of about 2.52 Crores pending cases of subordinate judiciary
is disseminated through eCourts portal.
(ii) Almost all the District Courts in the country have launched their websites for the
convenience of litigants and others. All these websites are integrated with eCourts portal
i.e. ecourts.gov.in and case related information can be directly accessed using these
websites.
(b) National Judicial Data Grid i.e NJDG:
(i) The NJDG is a very powerful and useful tool which enables the High Court and the
District Judge to effectively monitor cases, including pendency and arrears. The e-Courts

17
National portal and NJDG also provide a number of statistical reports that can be used
as a judicial management information system. This portal is expected to play a key role
in bringing about judicial reforms.
(ii) Through NJDG, the figures of pendency of District Judiciary Courts across the country,
in aggregate for country and states as well as individual Court/Judge wise were left open
for being accessed by anyone visiting the National eCourts portal ecourts.gov.in.
(iii) This NJDG public access page, as available at ecourts.gov.in/services disseminates national
and state, district and court wise information about institution and disposal of last month
of cases and also the cases filed by senior citizens and women in the total pendency.
These statistics, which are being updated almost everyday by the respective Court
Complexes covered under the eCourts Project, show case pendency broken into Civil and
Criminal Cases segregated into age-wise categories of upto 2 years, between 2 to 5 years,
between 5 to 10 years and more than 10 years.
4 Change Management Exercise :
(i) Change Management exercise has been successfully implemented. All judicial officers in
the country have been trained in the use of Ubuntu Linux Operating System through 470
judicial officers who had been trained as Master Trainers as part of the Change Management
Programme conducted by the eCommittee. 222 of these master trainer judicial officers
have also been trained in the Case Information Software (CIS) 2.0 being implemented for
Courts across the country. Ubuntu Linux OS has been specially customized by the
eCommittee for the use in the laptops of the Judicial Officers and the Court Computers,
which has been widely appreciated by one and all.
(ii) About 480 CIS Master Trainers (District System Administrators) have been trained from
amongst the court staff in the use of the Case Information Software. These CIS Master
Trainers have trained more than 4000 System Administrators in the effective use of
computers and CIS. These CIS Trainer cum District System Administrator Court Officials
have also undergone a Refresher Training Programme conducted by the eCommittee in
the year 2014.
5. Digitization of Judicial Records:
As this component for District Judiciary was not a part of the approved activities in Phase
I of the eCourts Project, the same had been included and principally approved by the eCommittee
for Phase II of the eCourts Project. But during the financial approval process of the same at
Government level, this component has been shifted to 14th Finance Commission resources.
Accordingly, ` 752.50 Crore have been recommended in the 14th Finance Commission Report
towards scanning & digitization of case records. eCommittee has requested the High Courts
to pursue the State Governments for allocation of resources under 14th Finance Commission
for scanning and digitization of case records of subordinate judiciary.
6. Evaluation of the Project:
The evaluation of Phase-I of the project has been completed by National Council of Applied
Economic Research (NCAER). NCAER carried out an assessment study to evaluate the effect

18
of computerization in District and Subordinate Courts across the country. The NCAER assessment
study has found that the eCourts project has created awareness about computerization among
courts and about the application software, namely, case, information system among the important
stakeholders. The project has achieved more than 90% in ICT deployment in terms of asset
creation and the eCourts project was able to save time in work process through computerisation.
The Department floated an EOI-cum-RFP for Mid-term evaluation of eCourts Mission Mode
Project Phase-II during December, 2016; but did not attract eligible bidders. The Department
has now decided to re-start the Mid-Term evaluation tender process.
Further Observation
11.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and also appreciates the initiatives of the Department
for the computerization of subordinate courts. However, the Committee fails to understand the
reasons for non-receipt of eligible bidders to evaluate mid-term progress of the eCourts Mission
Mode Project and accordingly recommends the Department to initiate the process on priority
basis so that impact of the scheme could be evaluated. The Committee also recommends the
Department to impress upon the High Courts to furnish Utilisation Certificates so that more
funds under the scheme could be released and the scheme doesn't suffer.
GRAM NYAYALAYAS
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee takes note of increased allocation by Rs 3 crore for Gram Nyayalayas in BE (2017-
18) over BE & RE (2016-17). The Committee, however , expresses its concern at the slow pace of
establishment of Gram Nyayalayas in the Country as only ten states have notified Gram Nyayalayas, and
out of these not a single Gram Nyayalayas is functional in the states of Karnataka, Jharkhand and Goa.
Uttar Pradesh, which has the highest population in the country, has only two functional Gram Nyayalayas.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to find reasons for slow implementation of the
project as also to study if Gram Nyayalayas which are functional serving the intended purpose and
inform the Committee as to how Government proposes to proceed with the establishment of Gram
Nyayalayas throughout the country. (Para 6.29)
Action Taken
12.1.In terms of Section 3 (1) of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to
establish Gram Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High Courts. As per information made
available by State Governments / High Courts, 320 Gram Nyayalayas have been notified so far by 11
States, out of these, 204 are operational in eight States at present, as per details given below:
Sl. State Gram Nyayalayas Gram Nyayalayas
No. Notified Functional
12 3 4
1. Madhya Pradesh 89 89
2. Rajasthan 45 45
3. Karnataka 2 0

19
12 3 4
4. Odisha 16 13
5. Maharashtra 23 23
6. Jharkhand 6 0
7. Goa 2 0
8. Punjab 2 1
9. Haryana 2 2
10. Uttar Pradesh 104 2
11. Kerala 29 29
Total 320 204
12.2. The difficulties faced by States in setting up of Gram Nyayalayas were discussed in the meeting
of the Law/Home Secretaries and Registrar Generals of the High Courts held on 19 - 20 April, 2012.
One of the main reasons for the slow pace has been the request by the States for more financial
assistance. Besides, response of the Bar, reluctance of police officials and other State functionaries to
invoke jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas, non-availability of notaries and stamp vendors and more importantly,
problem of concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts, are other issues highlighted by the States which are
coming in the way of speedy operationalization of the scheme.
12.3.In the year 2011, the Indian Law Institute (ILI) was entrusted by the Department of Justice to
conduct a study on the effectiveness of functioning of Gram Nyayalayas in two states - Madhya Pradesh
and Rajasthan. The study concluded that Gram Nyayalayas in the states of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan
have not achieved the objectives of either speedy disposal or inexpensive justice for the poor. The Study
put forth a series of recommendations to improve the functioning of these Gram Nyayalayas. The
suggestions include:
(i) Establishment of Permanent Gram Nyayalayas: Gram Nyayalayas may be established in
every Panchayats at intermediate level or group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level
depending upon the number of disputes normally arise from that area. Whilst determining the
location of Gram Nyayalayas, the location of courts having parallel jurisdiction may also be
considered;
(ii) Infrastructure and Security: Separate building for the functioning of the Gram Nyayalayas
as well as for the accommodation of the Gram Nyayadhikaris  and other staff needs to be
constructed;
(iii) Creation of a regular cadre of Gram Nyayadhikaris: It is also imminent that a regular cadre
of Gram Nyayadhikari is created. Another suggestion was to make it a compulsory service
for a certain period for a newly recruited judicial officer to the regular cadre of First Class
Judicial Magistrate;
(iv) Training of Nyayadhikaris:  Apart from the legal and procedural requirements of Gram
Nyayalayas, training may also include the local language of the community amongst whom
they are posted;

20
(v) Jurisdiction of the Gram Nyayalayas  may be re-defined: In order to remove the ambiguities
regarding the jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas, the Act may be amended;
(vi) Creating awareness among various stakeholders: Suitable steps may be taken for creating
awareness among various stakeholders including the revenue and police officers.
12.4.  The report concluded that despite initial problems, institution of Gram Nyayalayas would succeed
if concrete, well planned and continuous efforts are made. The issues affecting operationalization of the
Gram Nyayalayas were discussed in the Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers
of the States on 7th April, 2013. It was decided in the Conference that the State Governments and High
Courts should decide the question of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas wherever feasible, taking into
account their local problems. The focus is on setting up Gram Nyayalayas in the Talukas where regular
courts have not been set up.
Further Observation
12.5. Despite the enhanced allocations to States under the 14th Finance Commission, the
Committee expresses its disappointment on the slow pace of development of Gram Nyayalayas
and impresses upon the Department, in consultation with State Governments, to initiate an all-
out effort to root out the hindrances affecting their establishment. The Committee is of the view
that delegation of responsibility to establish Gram Nyayalayas to High Courts and State
Governments in Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of the States
since 2013 has not seen any heartening improvement. Accordingly, the Committee impresses
upon the Department to explore a tri-partite model so that expertise of the Department could
also be utilized in establishing Gram Nyayalayas.
12.6. The Committee also notes that the study conducted by Indian Law Institute (ILI) on the
effectiveness of functioning of Gram Nyayalayas in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan concluded
that despite initial problems, institution of Gram Nyayalayas would succeed if concrete, well
planned and continuous efforts are made. The Study put forth a series of recommendations to
improve the functioning of these Gram Nyayalayas; however, the reply of the Department is
silent on whether these recommendations have been implemented or not. The Committee desires
to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
VACANCIES OF JUDGES IN HIGHER JUDICIARY
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee is concerned with the large number of vacancies of Judges in High Courts and
reiterates recommendations contained in Eighty-seventh Report on the Committee on the Inordinate Delay
in Filling up the Vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts". It further recommends that pending
finalization of supplemental Memorandum of Procedure/review of judgements/ Constitutional amendments,
appointments of Judges should continue as per hitherto existing practice as an ad-hoc measure so that
administration of justice does not suffer. (Para 6.31)
Action Taken
13.1. The appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts is a continuous and collaborative
process of the Judiciary and Executive. While every effort is made to fill vacancies expeditiously,
vacancies keep on arising on account of retirement, resignation or elevation of Judges and increase in
Judge strength.

21
13.2. All appointments of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts are being made as per the existing
procedure pending finalization of the revised Memorandum of Procedure. As per the existing procedure
the initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court vests with the Chief Justice
of India, while initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the High Courts vests with the Chief
Justice of the concerned High Court. As per the existing Memorandum of Procedure for appointment
of Judges of High Courts, the Chief Justice of the High Court is required to initiate the proposal for filling
up of vacancies of a Judge in a High Court six months prior to the occurrence of vacancies. However,
this timeline is rarely adhered to by the High Courts.
13.3. As the process of finalization of the revised Memorandum of Procedure (MoP) for appointment
of Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts was likely to take some time, on the initiative of the
Government of India the matter was taken up with the Supreme Court and the process of appointment
of Judges was resumed, so that administration of justice does not suffer pending finalization of the
revised MoP. Due to the combined efforts of the Government and Judiciary, during 2016, 126 fresh
appointments of Judges in High Courts which is the highest number of appointments made in a given
year. Besides, based on the proposal received from the Supreme Court Collegium, 4 Judges were
appointed in the Supreme Court in 2016. During the current year, as on date, 5 Judges have been
appointed in Supreme Court and 75 Judges have been appointed in High Courts.
13.4. The Judge strength of the Supreme Court (including the Chief Justice of India) is 31. As on
1.09.2017, 25 Judges are in position, leaving 6 vacancies of Judges to be filled. So far the Government
has not received any proposal for filling up the 06 vacant posts of Judges from the Supreme Court. As
on 1.09.2017 against the sanctioned strength of the High Court Judges of 1079, 666 Judges are in
position, leaving 413 vacancies of Judges to be filled. 135 proposals received from various High Courts
for filling up of vacancies are under various stages of process and proposals for remaining 278 vacancies
of Judges are awaited from the High Courts. Government is committed to filling up of vacancies in all
the High Courts. The observations/recommendations of Committee mentioned in 87th Report on Committee
on "Inordinate Delay in filling up vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts" have been noted and
are under consideration of Government and Judiciary.
Further Observation
13.5. The Committee appreciates the combined efforts of the Department and the Judiciary
which led to 126 fresh appointments of Judges in High Courts in the year 2016. However, a large
number of vacancies still exist in various High Courts. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates
that the Department should give effect to the recommendations of Committee in its Eighty-
seventh Report on "Inordinate Delay in filling up vacancies in the Supreme Court and High
Courts" and ensure that the vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up as soon as these arise
so that the justice delivery in the country is not hampered.
INCLUSIVENESS IN HIGHER JUDICIARY
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee also desires that the Bench of Higher Judiciary to be reflective of composition of
society and its diversity and recommends that suitable measures to include more and more people from
marginalized communities and women in the judiciary may be taken. (Para 6.32)

22
Action Taken
14.1. Appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts is made under Articles 124 and
217 of the Constitution of India respectively. These Articles do not provide for reservation for any caste
or class of persons. The initiative of the proposal for appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and High
Courts vest with the Chief Justice of India/Supreme Court Collegium and Chief Justice/ High Court
Collegium respectively. If the Chief Minister desires to recommend the name of any person, he should
forward the name to the Chief Justice of the High Court for consideration. The Government has been
requesting the Chief Justices of the High Courts that while sending proposals for appointment of Judges,
due consideration be given to suitable candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other
Backward Classes, Minorities and Women.
Further Observation
14.2. The Committee feels that in a diverse country like ours, inclusive and representative
judiciary will go a long way in instilling faith in the justice delivery system. Therefore, the
Committee reiterates the view taken in its Eighty-seventh Report on 'Inordinate delay in filling
up the vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts' that composition of higher judiciary
should reflect the diversity and composition of Indian society.

23
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Legislative Department/Election Commission of India
1. The Committee notes with concern that the Replies of Legislative Department/Election Commission
of India pertaining to the Committee's recommendations contained paras 4.0 to 4.26, except para 4.15,
have not been received despite two reminders to Legislative Department/Election Commission of India
on the 14th September and 10th October, 2017, respectively. The Committee is not happy with the casual
approach of the Department/Election Commission of India in the matter. The Committee accordingly
impress upon the Department/Election Commission to furnish their action taken replies along with the
reasons for the delay at the time of seeking budgetary grants in the financial year 2018-19.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
National Judicial Academy
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee notes with concern that National Judicial Academy is facing shortage of faculty as
also fund crunch. The Committee suggests that the Academy should draw a blue print for evolving into
an Institute of excellence by studying the global practices in the field and should strive to raise its own
resources to meet at least its operational needs and become less and less dependent on public funds.
(Para 6.8)
Action Taken
2.1. The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been consulted with the
National Judicial Academy (NJA). The suggestions of the Committee will be submitted before the
forthcoming meeting of the Governing Council of the NJA proposed to be held on the 05th October, 2017
for its consideration.
Further Observation
2.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the decision of NJA
on the issue. The Committee also notes that it had requested the Department to submit the
comments/decision of the NJA on the recommendation of the Committee in para 6.14 of its
Eighty-eighth report on Action Taken on 84th report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice while furnishing Action Taken Report on
the recommendations of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (2017-2018). However, the
said information has not been provided; therefore, the reply is not complete.
23

24
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes that the Supreme Court has been allocated 240 crores against its demand of
` 266 crores. The Committee also notes that the Supreme Court has not been able to spend funds allotted
to it in RE 2016-17 to the tune of ` 29.61 Crores as on 13.2.2017. The Committee hopes that, if required,
allocation made to the Supreme Court would be suitably enhanced at RE stage. (Para 7.2)
Further Observation
3.1. The replies of the Department have not yet been received.

25
RECOMMENDA TIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee also appreciates the activities of
ILDR and is of the view that it should forge Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with similar
institutions around the world to keep pace with the best global practices in legislative drafting.
The Committee also feels that ILDR should be developed as an institution of national importance
and should play active role in imparting training on legislative drafting to personnel of developing
countries. (Para 1.2)
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.2)
The Committee appreciates the Department for continuing the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
(CSS) for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary up to the year 2020. It further
feels that proper evaluation of implementation of the CSS would help in reducing infrastructural
requirement for subordinate judiciary, thereby, improving the justice delivery system.
(Para 2.2)
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS
NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee expresses its dismay over the slow pace of expenditure in the above three
major heads, which led to a 20.33% decrease in the allocation of funds to the Ministry at the
RE (2016-17) stage and also considerably reduced fund allocation in BE (2017-2018) under these
heads. The Committee feels that reasons cited for under utilization of funds could have been
managed better by close monitoring of the pace of expenditure. The Committee notes that in BE
(2017-2018) only ````` 1000 cr. has been allocated for EVMs and WPATs, which is approximately 38%
less than the projection and strongly recommends that funds allocated for WPATs/EVMs should
be proactively utilized keeping in view the General Elections to the Lok Sabha in the year 2019.
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments to furnish
Utilisation Certificates so that more funds from NALSA could be released. (Para 1.3)
The Committee notes that the meagre funds allocated to Official Languages Wing and Vidhi
Sahitya Prakashan in BE (2016-2017) were further reduced at the RE (2016-2017) stage. Official
Languages Wing have submitted in their reply that they were not able to fully utilise the funds
allocated at the RE (2016-2017) stage but have not cited any reasons for the same. The ATR of
25

26
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is completely silent on the extent of utilization of funds allocated to
them in RE (2016-2017), which they ought to have provided. However, they had an unutilized
amount of ````` 1.34 cr. up to January, 2017. The Committee desires that it be informed as to what
extent Official Languages Wing was able to utilize the amounts sanctioned to them in BE (2017-
2018) and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan in RE (2016-2017) and BE (2017-2018). The Committee,
therefore, recommends that these spending units should seek funds from the Ministry of Finance
on the basis of their realistic requirements and closely monitor their expenditure. (Para 2.3)
The Committee is of the view that voting rights of domestic migrants are as important as
for any other citizen and delay on the part of the Department/Election Commission of India is
a serious issue as it deprives millions of citizens of exercising their democratic right to vote. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Commission and the Legislative Department should
expedite the matter so that domestic migrants are not deprived of their right to vote.
(Para 3.3)
The Committee notes that the reply of the Department only provides information regarding
status of recruitment to various posts in the Department and is completely silent on the causes
responsible for the shortage of manpower in the Department. The Committee wishes to be
apprised of the latest post wise vacancy position in the Department, as well as causes responsible
for the shortage of manpower and remedial actions being taken by the Department to evolve a
mechanism for timely filling of vacancies so that functioning of the Department is not hampered.
(Para 4.2)
The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that the decision on the proposal
for amending the Indian Legal Service Rules, 1957 should be expedited so that the recruitment
process is initiated. The Department is further requested to furnish status of the amendment of
the Rules ibid to the Committee. The Committee also notes that the reply of the Department
is silent on the status of recruitment for the post of Assistant Law Officer and wishes to be
apprised of the same. (Para 5.2)
The Committee notes that the reply is silent on whether the Department has reviewed the
reasons for declining rate of disposal of cases by ITAT, resulting in huge pendency. The reply only
states the measures being taken by ITAT in an effort to reduce pendency. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the reasons for decline in the disposal rates by ITAT and also whether all
the above measures undertaken by ITAT are proving effective to reduce pendency and, if so, to
what extent. The Committee observes that the disposal rate in 2015-16 was higher than that of
in the years from 2009-10 to 2014-15, it therefore, fails to understand the reasoning given by
ITAT that increase in pendency is due to the fact that during the year 2015-16, 39 New Members
joined ITAT and it took some time for them to settle down. (Para 6.2)
Further, as per the Annual Report 2016-17 of the Ministry of Law & Justice, out of the
sanctioned strength of 126 Members of Tribunals, 25 posts were lying vacant. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that proactive measures should be taken to fill all the existing vacancies
expeditiously as this would also improve the disposal rate in ITAT. The Committee would also like
to be apprised whether the President, ITAT has put in place any mechanism to increase monthly

27
disposal rate by each Member of the Tribunal. The Committee also feels that the Department
should develop some rating mechanism for ITAT Benches and an annual exercise of rating each
Bench should be followed to gauge their performance and may be suitably reflected in the Annual
Report of the Ministry. (Para 6.3)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that merging of tribunals was sine qua non to cut
wasteful expenditure of government and speed-up disposal of cases. However, the Committee
notes that the reply of the Department is silent on the measures taken/ proposed to be taken
by the Government to address the problem of overlapping jurisdiction of the Tribunals.
(Para 7.2)
The Committee is of the view that it is not befitting the status of this premier legal Institute
to raise any part of its resources by renting a portion of its building. It should use all its
resources only for academic/research activities and raise funds by expanding these activities. The
Committee notes that as per the submissions of Director, ILI during DFG (2017-2018), almost
50% of posts in ILI were vacant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that vacant positions
in ILI should be filled-up immediately so that it is able to expand its activities and move in the
direction of becoming a self-sustaining Institute. The Committee also desires to be apprised of
the status of the recruitment process in ILI. The Committee also reiterates the recommendation
made in its Eighty-fourth report for statutory back-up to the Institute. (Para 8.2)
The Committee appreciates the initiative of accepting online applications for Notaries but
it still feels that the process of appointment of Notaries needs to be further streamlined. The
Department may consider awarding points on some broad parameters to short list applicants for
Notaries interview and publish the result online so that candidates may know the fate of their
application. They may be kept informed at various stages of the appointment process and the said
process should be time bound. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the periodicity
of assessment of the procedure of appointment of Notaries since the Notification of the Notaries
Rule, 1956. (Para 9.2)
The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the initiatives of NALSA. The
Committee feels that a respectable fee to lawyers is a pre-requisite for a quality legal service
and accordingly, appreciates NALSA for enhancing fee of lawyers. The fee may also be revised
periodically. The Committee also appreciates the initiative of Tele-Law and feels that it will go
a long way in delivering justice to the marginalized sections, especially in underdeveloped and
backward regions of the country. The Committee notes that NALSA has constituted a committee
to whom all the SLSA's shall give suggestions for appointment of efficient and committed panel
lawyers and it would like to be apprised of the recommendations of this committee. However, the
Committee expresses its deep concern over under-utilization of funds by NALSA, leading to fund
reduction. Accordingly, the Committee impresses upon NALSA to fully utilize funds allocated to
it each year so that quality legal services are made available to poor and marginalized sections
of the society. (Para 10.2)
The Committee takes note of the reply and also appreciates the initiatives of the Department
for the computerization of subordinate courts. However, the Committee fails to understand the
reasons for non-receipt of eligible bidders to evaluate mid-term progress of the eCourts Mission

28
Mode Project and accordingly recommends the Department to initiate the process on priority
basis so that impact of the scheme could be evaluated. The Committee also recommends the
Department to impress upon the High Courts to furnish Utilisation Certificates so that more
funds under the scheme could be released and the scheme doesn’t 7 suffer. (Para 11.2)
Despite the enhanced allocations to States under the 14th Finance Commission, the
Committee expresses its disappointment on the slow pace of development of Gram Nyayalayas
and impresses upon the Department, in consultation with State Governments, to initiate an all-
out effort to root out the hindrances affecting their establishment. The Committee is of the view
that delegation of responsibility to establish Gram Nyayalayas to High Courts and State
Governments in Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of the States
since 2013 has not seen any heartening improvement. Accordingly, the Committee impresses
upon the Department to explore a tri-partite model so that expertise of the Department could
also be utilized in establishing Gram Nyayalayas. (Para 12.5)
The Committee also notes that the study conducted by Indian Law Institute (ILI) on the
effectiveness of functioning of Gram Nyayalayas in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan concluded
that despite initial problems, institution of Gram Nyayalayas would succeed if concrete, well
planned and continuous efforts are made. The Study put forth a series of recommendations to
improve the functioning of these Gram Nyayalayas; however, the reply of the Department is
silent on whether these recommendations have been implemented or not. The Committee desires
to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. (Para 12.6)
The Committee appreciates the combined efforts of the Department and the Judiciary which
led to 126 fresh appointments of Judges in High Courts in the year 2016. However, a large
number of vacancies still exist in various High Courts. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates
that the Department should give effect to the recommendations of Committee in its Eighty-
seventh Report on "Inordinate Delay in filling up vacancies in the Supreme Court and High
Courts" and ensure that the vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up as soon as these arise
so that the justice delivery in the country is not hampered. (Para 13.5)
The Committee feels that in a diverse country like ours, inclusive and representative
judiciary will go a long way in instilling faith in the justice delivery system. Therefore, the
Committee reiterates the view taken in its Eighty-seventh Report on 'Inordinate delay in filling
up the vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts' that composition of higher judiciary
should reflect the diversity and composition of Indian society. (Para 14.2)
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
The Committee notes with concern that the Replies of Legislative Department/Election
Commission of India pertaining to the Committee's recommendations contained paras 4.0 to
4.26, except para 4.15, have not been received despite two reminders to Legislative Department/
Election Commission of India on the 14th September and 10th October, 2017, respectively. The
Committee is not happy with the casual approach of the Department/Election Commission of

29
India in the matter. The Committee accordingly impress upon the Department/Election Commission
to furnish their action taken replies along with the reasons for the delay at the time of seeking
budgetary grants in the financial year 2018-19. (Para 1)
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the decision of NJA
on the issue. The Committee also notes that it had requested the Department to submit the
comments/decision of the NJA on the recommendation of the Committee in para 6.14 of its
Eighty-eighth report on Action Taken on 84th report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice while furnishing Action Taken Report on
the recommendations of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (2017-2018). However, the
said information has not been provided; therefore, the reply is not complete. (Para 2.2)
The replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs have not yet been received. Therefore, the
Committee requests the Department to obtain the reply of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
furnish it to the Committee. (Para 3.2)
23. The replies of the Department have not yet been received. (Para 4.1)

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th November, 2017 in Committee Room No.-4,
Block - 'A', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray - In the chair
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
10. Shri B.V . Naik
11. Dr. A. Sampath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray chaired the meeting and extended a warm welcome to all the Members
of the Committee. (* * *)
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 93rd and 94th Reports on Action Taken
by the Government on 90th and 91st Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2017-18)
pertaining to the Ministries of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions and Law & Justice, respectively.
Some Members suggested that they need more time and may also like to give suggestions, if any. It was
then agreed to take up the reports for adoption in its next meeting.
4. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.19 
P.M.
33
***Relate to other matters.

34
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th November, 2017 in Committee Room No.-3,
Block - 'A', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav — Cheirman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
12. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
15. Dr. A. Sampath
16. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the (i) draft Ninety-third Report of the Committee on Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Ninetieth Report on Demands for
34

35
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; and (ii) the draft Ninety-
fourth Report on the Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Ninety-first Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Law and
Justice respectively Hon'ble Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were
adopted unanimously.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 3.26 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.