  
 
 
D
       SPEC
DEPARTME
ON PE
ONE
CIFIC ASP
(Pres
(Laid 
ENT-RELA
ERSONNEL
Ra
Au
E HUNDR
PECTS O
sented to th
on the Tab
PARLIAM
RAJ
ATED PARL
L, PUBLIC G
ajya Sabha 
ugust, 2023 
RED THIR
O
F ELECT
he Rajya S
ble of Lok S
 
 
 
 
 
 
MENT OF 
JYA SABH
LIAMENTA
GRIEVANC
 
 
 
 
Secretariat
/ Sravana, 1
 
RTY SECO
ON 
TION PRO
Sabha on 4t
Sabha on 4
 
INDIA 
HA 
ARY STAND
CES, LAW 
 
, New Delhi
1945 (Saka)
OND REP
OCESS AN
th August, 2
4th August, 
DING COM
AND JUST
i 
) 
ORT 
ND THEIR
2023) 
 2023) 
MMITTEE 
TICE 
REPO
1
R REFOR
 
ORT NO. 
132 
RM 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
2

   
C O N T E N T S 
PAGES 
 
1. C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E  C O M M I T T E E           4 
 
2. I N T R O D U C T I O N               5 
 
3. A C R O N Y M S               7 
 
4. ISSUE NUMBER ONE: 
STATUS OF COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 8  
 
5. ISSUE NUMBER TWO: 
FALSE DECLARATIONS DURING FILING OF NOMINATION                                                24                
FOR ELECTIONS                   
  
6. ISSUE NUMBER THREE: 
ESTABLISHING PARITY BETWEEN THE MINIMUM AGE OF 4 2  
VOTING AND CONTESTING ELECTIONS TO PARLIAMENT/STATE 
LEGISLATURES/LOCAL BODIES 
 
7. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                 52 
  
8. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETINGS                         59 
 
9. A N N E X U R E                         70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
2. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Meera Nair, Assistant Research Officer 
_________________________ 
* vacant due to change in nomination of Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand w.e.f. 08.12.2022 
4

   
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing C ommittee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances,  Law and Justice, having been a uthorised by the 
Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the 132 nd Report on the Subject 
‘Specific aspects of Election Process and their Reforms'.  
2. The report analyses the significance of elections in India a nd their 
influence on democratic governance, political representation, a nd societal 
progress. It explores different  facets, including voter partici pation and 
comprehensive representation through a single electoral roll, a nd transparency 
and accountability of candidature and minimum age for contesting elections. 
3.  The report emphasizes the significance of elections in Indi a and the 
necessity of overhauling specific components of the electoral s ystem to maintain 
a thriving democracy in the count ry. Due to the vastness of the  topic, the report 
has been divided into multiple s ections for improved organisati on and 
preparation. 
4.  To gain a comprehensive understanding of the electoral proc ess, the 
Committee has divided the subject into three issues and organis ed them into the 
following categories:  
i. Status of Common Electoral Roll for conducting elections in the country;  
ii. False declarations during filing of nomination for elections; and 
iii. Establishing parity between the minimum age of voting and conte sting 
elections to Parliament/State Legislatures/local bodies 
5.  At its meetings on December 21st, 2021, and January 9th, 20 23, the 
Committee heard the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and  Justice) 
Government of India and the Election Commission of India, on th e subject. 
Additionally, the Committee had also sought input from various National Political 
Parties. At the time of present ation of this Report, replies of  two National 
Political Parties namely, A.A.P and C.P.I (M) have been receive d and the same 
are appended at the end of this report as an Annexure.  
5

   
6.  The Committee reviewed the f ollowing documents/information in regard to 
the subject: 
i. Background note on the Subject submitted by the Legislative 
Department; 
ii. Background note on the Subject submitted by the Election 
Commission of India; 
iii. The Constitution of India; 
iv. The Representation of People Act, 1950; 
v. The Representation of Peoples Act, 1951; 
vi. The Registration of Electors Rules, 1960; 
vii. The Conduct of Election Rules, 1961; 
viii. Two Hundred and Forty Forth Report of Law Commission of India o n 
Electoral    Disqualifications 
ix. Two Hundred and Fifty-Fifth Report of Law Commission of India o n 
Electoral Laws; and 
x. Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reform, 2002 AIR 2112 
xi. People’s Union for Civil Liberties  v .  Union of India, ( 2 0 0 3 )  4  S C C  
399; (2019) 3 SCC 224. 
xii. Resurgence India v Election Commission of India and Another, (2014) 
14 SCC 189 
xiii. Satish Ukey  v  Devendra Gangadharrao Fadnavis & Anr,  (2019) 9 
SCC 1 
xiv. Krishnamoorthy v. Sivakumar and Other, (2015) 3 SCC 467 
7.  The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meet ing held on 
the 31st July, 2023. 
8.  For the facility of referenc e and convenience, the observat ions and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold lett ers in the body 
of the Report. 
 
New Delhi SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
04-08-2023 Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
   Law and Justice  
6

   
ACRONYMS 
 
A.A.P Aam Admi Party 
B.L.Os Booth Level Officers 
C.E.O  Chief Electoral Officer 
C.P.I (M) Communist Party of India (Marxist) 
Cr. P.C. The Code of Cr iminal Procedure, 1973 
E.C.I Election Commission of India 
E.P.I.C  Elector Photo Identity Card 
E.V.Ms Electronic Voting Machines 
I.P.C Indian Penal Code, 1860 
M.C.C  Model Code of Conduct 
M.P  Member of Parliament 
R.O  Returning Officer 
R.P.A The Representation of the People Act 
S.C Supreme Court of India 
S.E.Cs State Election Commissions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7

   
ISSUE NUMBER ONE 
STATUS OF COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 
INTRODUCTION 
1.0 In India, the electoral system is complex and diverse, refl ecting the 
country's federal structure and the division of responsibilitie s between different 
constitutional authorities. As a result, various types of elect oral rolls exist to 
accommodate the different levels of government and their corres ponding 
elections. 
1.2  India has two main types of e lectoral rolls: the general e lectoral rolls 
overseen by the Election Commission of India for national and s tate-level 
elections, and the separate electoral rolls prepared by the Sta te Election 
Commissions for municipal and Pa nchayat elections. This distinc tion arises from 
the constitutional division of responsibilities between these t wo authorities, 
allowing for effective management  of the diverse electoral proc esses in the 
country. 
1.3  At the national level, the  Election Commission of India (E CI) holds the 
responsibility for conducting elections to the highest offices of the country, such 
as the President and Vice-President, as well as for Parliament,  State Assemblies, 
and Legislative Councils. The electoral rolls used for these el ections are 
commonly known as the ‘ General Electoral Rolls’ . These rolls encompass 
eligible voters from across the country, regardless of their sp ecific region or local 
jurisdiction. 
1.4  However, when it comes to M unicipal and Panchayat Election s, the 
supervision and conduct of these polls are entrusted to the Sta te Election 
Commissions (SECs). Each State in India has its own State Elect ion Commission, 
which is independent of the Election Commission of India. The S ECs are 
responsible for overseeing the electoral processes of Municipal ities and 
Panchayats within their respective states. 
1.5  The State Election Commissions have the authority to prepa r e  t h e i r  o w n  
electoral rolls exclusively for the local body elections. These  rolls are distinct 
8

   
from the general electoral rolls used for national and state-le vel elections. The 
SECs have the flexibility to design and manage these Electoral Rolls as per their 
requirements and local demographics without the need for coordi nation with the 
Election Commission of India. 
THE PRESENT NATURE OF ELECTORAL ROLLS  
1.6  The system of Electoral Rolls for local body elections in India varies from 
State to State, and not all States have a separate list exclusi vely for these 
elections. The State Election Co mmissions (SECs) are governed b y individual 
State Acts, which provide guidelines for their functioning and electoral processes. 
1.7  The use of separate lists  for local body elections in Indi a depends on the 
State's legislation and the approach taken by the respective St ate Election 
Commissions. While some States utilise the ECI's rolls either i n their entirety or 
as a foundation, others have their  own independent processes fo r maintaining 
electoral rolls for Municipal a nd Panchayat Elections, resultin g  i n  a  d i v e r s e  
electoral landscape across the country. 
1.8  Only a few States statutor ily permit State Election Commis sions (SECs) to 
borrow and utilise voter rolls from the Election Commission of India (ECI) for 
local body elections. In these states, the same Electoral Rolls  a r e  u s e d  f o r  
National and State-Level Elections, maintained by the ECI, and are also used for 
Municipal and Panchayat Elections . This practice allows for a s treamlined 
process and consistency in the voter database. 
1.9  In contrast, several States have laws mandating the use of  the Election 
Commission's Electoral Rolls as a basis for creating and updati ng voting lists, 
especially for local government elections in Municipalities and  Panchayats. In 
these cases, the SECs build upon the ECI's rolls, making necess ary amendments 
and additions to suit the requirements of the local body polls. 
1.10  It is worth noting that some States do not implement the EC's rolls for their 
local body elections. Nine State s/ UTs, namely Uttar Pradesh, U ttarakhand, 
Odisha, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Ke rala, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagal and and, 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, do not adopt the EC's rol l s  f o r  t h e i r  
9

   
Municipal and Panchayat polls. Instead, they follow their own d istinct processes 
for creating and maintaining electoral rolls for local body elections. 
HISTORY OF COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL  
1.11  In 1999, the Chief Election Commissioner proposed a Commo n Electoral 
roll through a letter to the Pri me Minister. This proposal sugg ested the use of a 
shared Electoral Roll to enhance the electoral process by promo ting collaboration 
between the Election Commission of India and the State Election  Commission. 
The implementation of this proposal aimed to increase accuracy,  efficiency, and 
transparency, ultimately ensuring fairness and inclusivity in t he National 
Elections.1The suggestion was reiterated once again in 2004. 
THE BENEFITS OF HAVING A COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 
1.12  The Common Electoral Roll is designed to streamline resou rces, minimise 
effort, and reduce expenses. The current practice of having dif ferent agencies 
prepare voter lists for each election leads to duplication of e fforts. Multiple 
agencies perform the same task o f identifying eligible voters, resulting in 
unnecessary expenses and effort. By consolidating the Electoral  Rolls into a 
single, comprehensive database, the government would be able to  e l i m i n a t e  
duplication and streamline the process. This would entail synch ronising the 
efforts of various agencies involved in maintaining electoral r olls, including the 
Election Commission of India and relevant State Election Commis sions. The 
Common Electoral Roll would serve as a centralised repository o f voter 
information accessible to all concerned authorities. 
1.13  Moreover, reducing duplica tion enhances the efficiency an d accuracy of 
the electoral process. It would enable easier verification of v oter credentials, 
prevent multiple entries, and facilitate the identification of eligible voters across 
different elections. Further, the  registration process for vote rs can be made more 
streamlined by allowing them to register just once and having t heir information 
automatically updated for all future elections. 
PRESENT STATUS OF COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 
                                                            
1 Proposed Electoral Reforms, Election Commission of India, 2004. Pp.20 
10

   
1.14  According to Article 324(1)  of the Constitution, the Elec tion Commission 
of India (ECI) is empowered to supervise, direct, and control t he preparation and 
revision of Electoral Rolls for all elections to Parliament and  State Legislatures. 
Similarly, for local body electi ons, the State Election Commiss ion is responsible 
for overseeing the preparation and revision of Electoral Rolls in accordance with 
relevant State laws. However, th ere needs to be more coordinati on between the 
ECI and State Election Commissions regarding the preparation of Electoral Rolls. 
1.15  In a background paper on Electoral Reforms prepared by th e Legislative 
Department of the Law Ministry in 2010, it was observed that wh ile some States 
have aligned their electoral rol ls with those prepared by the E CI, others have 
made significant modifications. In fact, certain States even ha ve different 
qualifying dates for their Electoral rolls compared to the roll s prepared by the 
Election Commission. 
1.16  Acknowledging this non-unifo rmity, the ECI has recognised three different 
approaches taken by State laws regarding the use of electoral r olls for local body 
elections. 
 First, some States use the Electoral Rolls prepared by the ECI as the basis 
for drafting and revising rolls for local body elections.  
 Second, the ECI's Electoral Rolls are directly used in their entirety for local 
body elections.  
 And third, the ECI's Parliamentar y and Assembly Rolls are used as a draft 
for local elections, subject to further modifications in terms of inclusions 
and exclusions.  
1.17  In some instances, the qualifying dates for the ECI's ele ctoral rolls and the 
rolls for local body elections may vary. 
1.18  One way to address the issue is through the use of Common  Electoral 
Rolls. This would save time and resources as the Election Commi ssion of India 
already has a significant amount of data from Parliamentary and  Assembly 
Elections. Essentially, this approach involves using the existi ng rolls as a 
foundation for local body elections and making necessary adjust ments based on 
specific wards or polling areas. In addition, the Electoral Rol l, whether prepared 
or adopted, should be reviewed before each by-election to fill a casual vacancy in 
11

   
a seat allotted to the ward. The revision should adhere to pres cribed rules based 
on the qualifying date. The Election Commission may also direct  the revision of 
the electoral roll in any year if necessary. However, the valid ity or continued 
operation of the electoral roll is only impacted if it is revised as stipulated.2 
RECOMMENDATION MADE BY LAW COMMISSION  
1.19  The Law Commission has give n its unwavering support for t he Election 
Commission of India's (ECI) propos al to establish a Common Elec toral Roll that 
is applicable to various types of  elections, comprising Parliam entary, Assembly, 
and local body elections. This initiative is expected to enhanc e the efficiency and 
transparency of the electoral process, enabling more accurate and reliable results. 
1.20  The Commission highlighted t he challenge of implementing this proposal, 
which involves changing State laws that govern local body elect ions. To 
overcome this difficulty, the Law Commission proposed that the Central 
Government should take the lead in persuading different States to adopt a 
standard electoral roll. The Commission expects that the States  will take these 
recommendations into account, a ppreciate the advantages of stre amlining the 
electoral rolls, and implement the laws proposed by both the EC I and the Law 
Commission to create a more efficient and consistent electoral system.3 
CURRENT LEGAL FRAMEWORK OF ELECTIONS   
1.21  The Constitution of India, by virtue of Article 324(1), h as entrusted the 
Election Commission of India w ith the responsibility of oversee ing the 
preparation and revision of electoral rolls for elections to th e House of the People 
and State Legislative Assemblie s. This includes functions such as 
superintendence, direction, and control.  
324. Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an 
Election Commission 
(1) The superintendence, direction and  control of the preparation of the 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the 
                                                            
2 Report on ‘Proposals for Electoral Reforms’, ECI, 2004. Pp. 29‐30 
3255 Report of Law Commission of India on ‘Electoral Reforms’, 2015. Pp. 214 
12

   
Legislature of every State and of elections  to the offices of President and Vice 
President held under this Constituti on shall be vested in a Commission 
(referred to in this Constitution as the Election Commission) 
1.22  Further, Article 325 of the  Indian Constitution states th at each territorial 
constituency must have a single general electoral roll.  
325. There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial 
constituency for election to either Hous e of Parliament or to the House or 
either House of the Legislature of a State, and no person shall be ineligible 
for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be included in any special electoral 
roll for any such constituency on grounds onl y of religion, race, caste, sex or 
any of them. 
1.23  Similarly, Articles 243K  and 243ZA of the Constitution, a s inserted by the 
Constitution (73rd and 74th Amendm ents) Acts, 1992, entrust the  State Election 
Commissioners with the task of overseeing the preparation and r evision of 
electoral rolls for Local Body elections. 
243K. (1) The superintendence, directi on and control of the preparation of 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats shall 
be vested in a State Election Commission consisting of a State Election 
Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provis ion with respect to all matters relating to, or in 
connection with, elections to the Panchayats. 
********* 
243ZA. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Municipalities 
shall be vested in the State Election Commission referred to in Article 243K. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provis ion with respect to all matters relating to, or in 
connection with, elections to the Municipalities. 
13

   
1.24  Under Article 327 of the Cons titution, Parliament has the authority to enact 
laws regarding all aspects of elections for either House of Par liament or either 
House of the Legislature of a State, including preparing electo ral rolls. Parliament 
enacted the Representation of the  People Act 1950 to exercise t his power. 
Similarly, under Article 328, the  State Legislatures are entrus ted to make laws 
with respect to all matters relating to elections to the Legisl ature of the concerned 
state, including the preparation of electoral rolls. 
327. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from time 
to time by law make provision with resp ect to all matters relating to, or in 
connection with, elections to either Hous e of Parliament or to the House or 
either House of the Legislature of a State including the preparation of 
electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other matters 
necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses. 
328. Subject to the provisions of this  Constitution and in so far as provision 
in that behalf is not made by Parliame nt, the Legislature of a State may from 
time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or 
in connection with, the elections to the House or either House of the 
Legislature of the State including the preparation of electoral rolls and all 
other matters necessary for securing th e due constitution of such House or 
Houses. 
1.25  Further, the preparation and revision of electoral rolls for Parliamentary 
and Assembly Constituencies are governed under the provisions c ontained in 
PART IIB Section 13D of the Repr esentation of the People Act, 1 950 (R.P. 
Act,1950), made by Parliament.  
[13D. Electoral rolls for parliamentar y constituencies.— (1) The electoral 
roll for every parliamentary constituency, other than a parliamentary 
constituency in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in a Union territory not 
having a Legislative Assembly, shall cons ist of the electoral rolls for all the 
assembly constituencies comprised with in that parliamentary constituency; 
and it shall not be necessary to prepar e or revise separately the electoral 
roll for any such parliamentary constituency: 
14

   
Provided that for the period referred to  in clause (2) of article 371A, it shall 
be necessary to prepare and revise separ ately the electoral roll for that part 
of the parliamentary constituency of Nagaland, which comprises the 
Tuensang district and the provisions of Part III shall apply in relation to the 
preparation and revision of the electoral roll of the said part as they apply in 
relation to an assembly constituency. 
(2) The provisions of Part III shall apply in relation to every parliamentary 
constituency in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in a Union territory not 
having a Legislative Assembly as th ey apply in relation to an assembly 
constituency.] 
1.26  Whereas the preparation and revision of rolls for local b odies elections are 
regulated by the State laws of the state concerned. 
1.27  According to the Articl e 324 of the Constitution, the Ele ction Commission 
has the authority to supervise the generation and modification of electoral rolls in 
compliance with the Representa tion of the People Act, 1950 and the Registration 
of Electors Rules, 1960. The Election Commission can improve th e electoral rolls 
by putting out executive orders, fortifying the electoral organ ization, prohibiting 
transfers/postings of officials who are part of the process, an d enforcing measures 
to ensure the security and upkeep of the electoral database. 
1.28  The Election Commission's instructions and directions are  highly regarded 
by election authorities, State governments, and political parti es, but their legal 
authority is limited. Despite this, these instructions and dire ctions are generally 
adhered to in order to ensure a fair and seamless election proc ess. The 
Commission's powers are restricted by two conditions: their dir ectives must 
comply with existing laws, and they cannot violate the principl e of natural 
justice.4 
OBSERVATION MADE BY THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
(ECI) 
1.29  The electoral rolls for the Assembly and Parliamentary Co nstituencies are 
prepared by ECI under the provisions of Sections 15 and 13D of the RP Act, 
                                                            
4 Manual on Electoral Rolls, ECI, 2016 
15

   
1950. According to ECI, 32 States/UTs presently utilise ECI's electoral roll, albeit 
in varying forms. Maharashtra and Goa use the same electoral ro ll, while other 
States release a draft, receive claims and objections, and then  create their own 
final roll. 
Issues in the Preparation of Common Electoral Rolls 
1 . 3 0   T h e r e  a r e  t w o  c r i t i c a l  i s s ues identified by the ECI regar ding the 
implementation of the Common Electoral roll.  
1.31  Firstly, there is a difference between the Assembly elect oral roll and the 
local bodies' electoral roll. The Assembly electoral roll database is permanent, but 
local bodies do not maintain a permanent electoral roll. Before  every election, a 
fresh electoral roll for the local body is prepared.  
1.32 ECI informed that at present, only three states - Odisha, Telangana, and 
West Bengal - have specific provisions in their acts to use ECI  electoral roll, and 
except for Odisha, all States/UTs use January 1st as the qualif ying date for 
creating their electoral rolls. F our States (Meghalaya, Uttar P radesh, Uttarakhand 
and Lakshadweep) do not use the ECI’s electoral roll for elections to local bodies. 
1.33  Out of remaining 32 States which are using ECI's electora l roll, though in 
different forms, 4 states (Tamil Nadu, Andaman and Nicobar Isla nds, Chandigarh 
and NCT of Delhi)  use the current electoral roll; Two States ( Sikkim and 
Gujarat) use either draft or final electoral roll of ECI, while  remaining 26 states 
use the final roll with modifications.  
1.34  Only Maharashtra and Goa utilize the Commission's elector al roll without 
many modifications and independen tly create their own ward-wise  roll. 
Remaining 30 States use Commission's roll as draft and invite c laims and 
objections for preparing their final roll. 
1.35  It has been submitted that several Indian States have not  been utilizing the 
data provided by the Election Co mmission of India (ECI) for the ir electoral 
processes. For instance, Arunachal Pradesh has only utilized it  for municipal 
elections and urban local bodies but not for rural local bodies . Similarly, Kerala 
has not used ECI data since 2014 and instead relied on its own electoral roll. 
16

   
Nagaland last utilized ECI data in  2016 and has not done so sin ce. Uttarakhand 
has also not used ECI data and has created its own electoral ro ll. Uttar Pradesh 
stopped using ECI data in 2005. However, the other 30 states/union territories use 
ECI's electoral roll as a draft and invite claims and objection s to prepare their 
final roll. According to the Election Common of India, this can  lead to variations 
in the electoral data as State Election Commissions (SECs) use ECI electoral data 
at different stages and categorise it on a ward-wise basis. 
1.36  According to the ECI, establishing a Common Electoral Rol l would 
enhance efficiency and minimise administrative expenses. Althou gh the ECI can 
incorporate fields for Election Wards in its database, the resp onsibility of 
populating this data according to their requirements lies with State Election 
Commissions (SECs). To achieve a consolidated electoral roll, S ECs must 
cooperate on a common platform to compile voter information flawlessly. 
1.37  Secondly, the delimitation of assembly and parliamentary constituencies 
happens less frequently, usually e very 15 to 20 years. Delimita tion of local 
bodies, on the other hand, is often done before elections. Thes e periodic 
delimitation processes play a critical role in ensuring fair an d equitable 
representation within the broader political landscape. 
STEPS TAKEN BY ECI 
1.38  The ECI has informed that t hey have been assisting the St ate ECs by 
sharing the electoral database upon request from the respective  State's Chief 
Electoral Officer (CEO). To further aid the SECs, the ECI has d irected CEOs to 
add additional columns of wards on an 'as is where is'  basis. In the past, the ECI 
proposed electoral reforms, including the use of Common Elector al Rolls, in a 
letter dated 22nd November 1999 a ddressed to the Hon'ble Prime Minister. This 
proposal has been reiterated multiple times. 
1.39  The Election Commission of  India (ECI) has stated that it has implemented 
a standard policy for sharing the Electoral Roll/Election Photo  Identity Card 
(ER/EPIC) database since Decem ber 10, 2008. Upon request from S tate Election 
Commissions (SECs) to prepare the roll, the ECI shares this dat a. Moreover, in 
January, 2012, ECI sent a letter a llowing the sharing of the EC I database, 
including new columns for Ward-Level details, on an as-is-where-is basis. It has 
17

   
been informed that Blank columns for Panchayat and Municipal bodies were also 
added. In 2013, a pilot project  was conducted in Himachal Prade sh, where the 
State Election Commission was provided with an electoral databa se with an 
additional field for capturing ward details.  
1.40  It was also stated that t he Union Cabinet had approved th e Election 
Commission's proposal to link Aadhaar with Voter ID, which aims to improve the 
accuracy of electoral rolls by el iminating duplicate entries. The Representation of 
the People Act of 1950 and 1951 ha s been amended and Section 23  now includes 
sub-sections (4) and (5). The electoral registration officer ca n use the Aadhaar 
number provided by the Unique Ide ntification Authority of India  to confirm a 
person's identity under sub-section (4). Additionally, the offi cer can require the 
Aadhaar number from those already on the electoral roll to veri fy their 
registration in various constitue ncies or the same constituency  more than once. 
Sub-section (5) allows individu als on the electoral roll to pro vide their Aadhaar 
number in the prescribed manner before a date announced by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette. Sub-section (6) ensures tha t individuals who 
are unable to provide their Aadhaar number due to a valid reaso n will not be 
denied inclusion in the electora l roll nor have their entries d eleted. Section 26B 
requires existing electors to inform the registration officer o f their Aadhaar 
number using Form 6B. Forms I, 2, 2A, 3, 6, 7, 8, II, II A, 18,  and 19 of the 
Registration of Electors Rules,  1960 have been revised, and a n ew Form 6B has 
been added. However it was submitted that linking the Aadhaar with the Voter 
ID is optional and not mandatory. 
SUGGESTIONS FROM ECI 
1.41  The Election Commission of India has put forward a plan f or the 
implementation of a Common Electoral Roll. Two options have been proposed:  
(i) The Election Commission of India (ECI) has suggested that c reating a 
Common Electoral Roll could benef it both ECI and State Election  Commissions. 
However, concerns have been raised about maintaining citizens' privacy and the 
security of the electoral database. While the ECI has a policy for sharing the 
database with other departments, implementing a Common Electora l Roll would 
grant SECs the same level of access. To mitigate these concerns , a Standard 
18

   
Operating Procedure (SoP) needs to be developed to determine th e extent of 
database sharing with SECs while  ensuring citizens' privacy and  cyber security. 
Additionally, it is suggested that SECs must also implement the  ECI's policy in 
their system. 
(ii) The delimitation of local wards and panchayats is mandated  by the State 
Government and State Election Commissions before every local bo dy and 
panchayat elections. While these  boundaries are not essential c omponents for the 
preparation of electoral rolls for Assembly and Parliamentary C onstituencies, 
coordination between the Election Commission of India (ECI) and  SECs can be a 
major challenge. Challenges may arise when attempting to establ ish a common 
electoral roll and delimitation pr ocess. The boundaries of ECI polling stations 
may not match those of local bodies, and delimitation of ACs/PC s occurs less 
frequently than local ward delimit ation. To establish a Common Electoral Roll, it 
is necessary to map the wards of local bodies and panchayats wi th the Assembly 
Constituencies (ACs). The entire ward/panchayat should remain w ithin a part 
(polling station) of an AC. An AC should consist of entire ward s/panchayats, 
similar to how a PC consists of a few ACs. To capture the mappi ng of the basic 
unit of SEC rolls, such as pancha yat and urban wards, structura l changes in the 
ECI roll and amendments in States ' laws are required. State gov ernments will 
need to be pursued for necessary law amendments. 
1.42  The Law Commission and the Election Commission of India h ave both 
suggested the implementation of C ommon Electoral Rolls for Parl iamentary, 
Assembly, and local bodies elections in their respective propos als/ 
recommendations.  
OBSERVATION MADE BY THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
1.43  According to a report from the Legislative Department, th e Government 
has been giving thorough consideration to the issue of Common E lectoral Roll. 
Accordingly, Section 14(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 has 
been amended. The proposed amendment aimed to introduce four qu alifying 
dates that are relevant to the creation and revision of the com mon electoral roll. 
The Amendment Bill in question has already been passed by both the Rajya 
Sabha and the Lok Sabha in December 2022.  
19

   
1.44  The Government aims to promo te the use of information gat hered by the 
Election Commission of India through the proposed legislation. This data will be 
utilized to form electoral rolls for Panchayat and Municipal El ections at the local 
level.  
1.45  The Department, however, stated that many States have sho wn reluctance 
in receiving electoral roll from the ECI, as it had only one qu alifying date - 
January 1st. This caused indivi duals turning 18 after January 2 nd to wait a year 
before registering as voters, leading to a smaller voter base. To address this 
problem, the Department aims to develop its own electoral roll that encompasses 
all eligible individuals with di fferent qualifying dates. With the introduction of 
the new Act featuring four elect oral dates, the Department anti cipates that the 
States will now be more open to accepting their data. 
1.46  The Department has suggest ed an alternative solution to a mending Article 
243K and Article 243-ZA, which gi ve State Governments the power  to create a 
joint electoral roll. Instead, they propose that States adopt t he electoral roll 
produced by the Election Commission of India. This approach aim s to ease the 
burden on States and ensure a sea mless electoral roll. The Elec tion Commission 
has committed to compiling the roll with voter classification b y ward and booth, 
and they plan to share their results in the near future. 
THE OBSERVATION, SUGGESTI ONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
FROM THE COMMITTEE ARE AS FOLLOWS: 
1.47  The Committee observers tha t an amendment has been passed  b y  
Parliament to Section 14(b) of th e Representation of the People  Act to insert four 
qualifying dates (or cut-off dates) to enroll as voters and is awaiting the 
President's approval. This amendm ent increases the qualifying d ates to four, 
tentatively set for January 1 st, April 1 st, July 1 st, and October 1 st, instead of only 
January 1st. This change can be beneficial for States to effectively use d ata from 
the Election Commission. With the additional dates, the ECI can  create a more 
comprehensive electoral roll, improve the database, and help St ate Governments 
develop their own databases. 
1.48  The Committee while extending its  appreciation to the Election 
Commission of India for their diligent efforts in conducting fr ee and fair 
20

   
elections in the country recomme nds that citizens should have g reater 
transparency when it comes to the Common Electoral Roll and the  
integration of Aadhaar with EPIC . However, Committee emphasised  that 
linking Aadhaar with Voter ID is voluntary and not obligatory. 
1.49  During discussions, some members of the Committee raised doubts  
about the linking of Aadhaar with EPIC of non-citizens, which l ed the 
Committee to suggest that the ECI should establish a legal prov ision or an 
alternative mechanism to ensure that non-citizens with Aadhaar are not 
included in the voter list. Additionally, citizens who have not  yet linked their 
Aadhaar should be assured that they can still exercise their le gal right to 
vote. The Committee emphasized the importance of these clarific ations in 
addressing concerns related to the implementation of a Common E lectoral 
Roll.  
1.50  The implementation of electoral reforms has faced signifi cant delays, with 
limited progress made since the Election Commission of India  f irst presented the 
Common Electoral Roll proposal to the Prime Minister in 1999 an d subsequently 
in 2004. This has resulted in a delay of approximately 20 to 23  years.  T h e  
Committee therefore recommends that the ECI may develop a 
comprehensive plan that considers all the factors involved in i mplementing a 
Common Electoral Roll before making any changes to the current 
regulations. 
1.51  To ensure a fair and effective implementation, the Commit tee 
recommends that extensive consultations be held with the Legisl ative 
Department and with the various State Governments and Political  P a r t i e s ,  
including those who use their own  electoral rolls for local bod y elections. By 
conducting these consultations, final proposal on Common Electoral Roll can 
be developed taking into consideration the different viewpoints  and concerns 
of all parties involved. 
1.52  The Committee points out two important issues in implemen ting 
Common Electoral Roll, namely the current legal framework and 
Constitutional regulations that guide the creation of electoral  r o l l s  b y  t h e  
ECI, and the process for conducting local body polls.  The Committee 
21

   
expressed concern about the pote ntial impact on State powers, m entioned 
under Chapter IX and IX A of the Constitution of India.  The Committee 
therefore suggests that the ECI before taking up the responsibi lity of 
preparing the Common Electoral Roll may give due consideration to the 
constitutional provisions and powers of the States. The ECI may  also keep in 
mind the principles of federalism enshrined under the constitut ion and the 
powers reserved for the State Election Commissions under List II Entry 5.   
1.53  The Committee observes that impl ementing a Common Electoral Rol l, 
as proposed by the Central Govern ment and ECI, is presently out side the 
scope of Article 325 of the Constitution. This article stipulat es that separate 
electoral rolls must be used for elections to Parliament and th e State 
Legislatures. To ensure that all actions are in line with the C onstitution, the 
Committee suggests consensus sha ll be made in line with Article  3 2 5 .  T h e  
Committee advises the government to proceed with caution, adher e to the 
principles of federalism enshrined in the Constitution, and car efully assess 
the potential consequences before taking any action. 
1.54 According to Article 243D ( 1) and (6) and Article 243T (1)  and (6) of the 
Constitution, it is the responsibility of the individual State Governments to 
reserve seats for the Scheduled  Classes and Scheduled Tribes (S Cs/STs) in the 
Municipality and Panchayat Electi ons. Some Members of the Commi ttee have 
raised concerns about the nature of power proposed to be confer red to the 
Election Commission of India for preparing the Common Electoral  Roll. The 
Committee suggests that the Election Commission should be caref ul and 
avoid overstepping its boundaries into the State's domain. Inst ead, the 
Commission should aim to propose a solution that benefits all t he parties 
involved. 
1.55  The Committee recommends tha t the Legislative Department and the 
Election Commission collaborate to examine the effects of the d elimitation 
process, especially in challenging terrains.  The Election Commission lacks 
the authority to direct State Election Commissions or appraise the 
performance of State Election Commissioners.  The Committee draws the 
attention of ECI to the fact that treating all regions in India  as identical can 
22

   
pose a significant risk. It is therefore imperative to recogniz e this reality and 
take appropriate measures to address it. 
1.56  The Committee has taken note of the potential benefits that cou ld be 
derived from the creation of a Common Electoral Roll through th e 
collaborative participation of officials who serve in both the Election 
Commission of India and State Election Commissions . However, it stresses 
the importance of proper consti tutional and statutory authoriza tion before 
the Election Commission takes charge of creating or managing el ectoral rolls 
for State Election Commissions. The Committee suggests that Sta tes may 
continue the practice of utilizing the final electoral roll of the Election 
Commission, calling claims and objections, until necessary lega l changes are 
made. Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommends that the E lection 
Commission of India and the Legislative Department collaborate to preserve 
the rights of both State Election Commissions and State Governm ents when 
preparing the Common Electoral Roll. 
1.57  The Committee suggests that the Election Commission and L egislative 
Department collaborate to encour age States to utilize the Elect ion 
Commission's electoral roll when creating their own until there  is a change 
in constitutional and statutory provisions. The Committee stron gly 
emphasizes the significance of preserving the rights of State E lection 
Commissions and State Governments while taking action. 
      ********* 
23

   
ISSUE NUMBER TWO 
FALSE DECLARATIONS DURING FILING OF NOMINATION FOR 
ELECTIONS 
INTRODUCTION  
2.0 In any democratic society, it is imperative to maintain a f air and 
transparent democratic process to ensure the credibility and su rvival of 
institutions.  
2.1 In order to maintain a healthy democracy and fair elections , it is 
important that voters are provided with relevant information ab out the 
candidates. To ensure the purity  of elections and a healthy dem ocracy, voters 
must be well-informed about the candidates they are voting for.  This includes 
information such as the candida te's assets, educational qualifi cations, and any 
criminal history. It is important that voters are not kept in t he dark about 
relevant facts. 
2.2 False affidavits submitted during elections can be extremel y detrimental 
t o  t h e  f a i r n e s s  o f  t h e  p r o c e s s  a s they can mislead voters and a ffect their 
choices. To prevent this from ha ppening, the Representation of the People Act, 
1951 was enacted. This Act sets out qualifications and disquali fications for 
candidates running for public o ffice and provides a structured framework that 
promotes free and fair elections. It ensures that voters have a ccess to accurate 
and unbiased information about the candidates. 
2.3 Candidates contesting electi ons must file an Affidavit in F orm 26 under 
the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961. This affidavit discloses various details, 
such as their assets, liabilitie s, and educational qualificatio ns, among others. It 
is mandatory for candidates to p rovide truthful information, fa iling which will 
be considered a violation of the law and can result in imprison ment under 
Section 125A of the RPA. 
2.4  However, despite the strict regulations, false affidavits remain prevalent 
during elections. The punishment for this offence is only six m onths 
imprisonment and does not result in disqualification under S. 8 (1) or (2) of the 
24

 
RPA
con
As 
info
the 
to 
d
Sour
2.5 
unio
Miz
Lak
decl
Kar
Ben
the h
 
A. Moreo v
stitute corr
a result, 
ormation w
democratic
deter the fil
rce: Election
 T h e  a bo
on territo r
zoram, Nag
kshadweep,
larations. B
rnataka, M
ngal, UT of
highest nu
ver, sub m
rupt practic
there is a
without faci
c process, 
ling of fals
n Commissio
ove list sh o
ry of Indi a
galand, Sik
, and UT o
Bihar, Chh
Maharashtra
f Jammu &
umber bein
mitting fa l
ces, and it 
a w i d e s p re
ing signific
it is cruci a
se declarati
on of India  
ows the n u
a. Arunac
kkim, Trip
of Dadar N
hattisgarh, 
a, Odisha
& Kashmir
g 54 in Utt
lse infor m
cannot nul
ead trend 
cant conse
al for the g
ions/ affida
umber of f
hal Prade
ura, UT of
Nagar Have
Goa, Guja
, Punjab, 
, and Delh
tar Pradesh
mation on 
llify an ele
of dispen
equences. T
governmen
avits. 
false decla
sh, Assa m
f Chandiga
eli and D a
arat, Himac
Rajasthan
hi had some
h. 
an affid a
ection unde
sing inco r
To ensure t
nt to take s
arations in 
m, Manip u
arh, UT of
aman & D i
chal Prade
n, Uttar P
e false dec
avit does 
er Section 
rrect/unreli
the integrit
strict meas
each state
ur, Megha l
f A&NI, U
iu had no f
esh, Jharkh
Pradesh, W
clarations, 
 
not 
100. 
iable 
ty of 
sures 
 
e and 
laya, 
UT of 
false 
hand, 
West 
with 
25

   
GENESIS OF FILING AFFIDAVITS. 
2.6  In 1999, the Law Commission  Report on Electoral Reforms 
recommended an addition to the Representation of the People Act, 1951, which 
required candidates to disclose th eir assets, their spouse's an d dependent 
relatives' assets, and any charges they faced for specific crim inal offences. 
Following this recommendation, in 2002, the Association of Demo cratic 
Reforms (ADR) 5  requested the Hon'ble Supreme Court to implement the 
Commission's suggestion. The Supreme Court directed the Electio n 
Commission to mandate details of candidates' assets, liabilitie s, criminal cases, 
and educational qualifications on affidavits filed with their n omination papers. 
Following the SC order, the ECI has notified that the candidate s who failed to 
comply with this directive could face penal consequences under the Indian 
Penal Code. The Returning Office r has given responsibility for reviewing 
nomination papers and had the power to reject candidacy for significant errors. 
2.7  In 2002, Sections 33A and 33B were added to the RPA, 1951.  Section 
33A required candidates to discl ose information about charges f ramed by a 
court against them for offences punishable by more than two yea rs 
imprisonment and any convictions resulting in imprisonment of o n e  y e a r  o r  
more. However, Section 33B nullified the directives issued by t he Election 
Commission, pursuant to the Association of Democratic Reforms judgment and 
state that, candidates are only required to provide certain inf ormation related to 
their election. Regardless of any court decision, order from th e Election 
Commission, or other instructions, candidates are not obligated  to disclose or 
furnish any information beyond what is required by the Act and its rules. 
2.8  In 2013, the Constitutional va lidity of Section 33B was challenged in the 
case of PUCL v. Union of India ,6 and it was declared unconstitutional by the 
Supreme Court. The Court observed that the right to vote is a f orm of free 
expression that cannot be infri nged upon by Section 33B. The Su preme Court 
requested the Law Commission to submit a report on Election Dis qualification, 
which was released in 2014 as Report No. 244. The report recomm ended 
                                                            
5 (2002) 5 SCC 294. 
6 (2013) 10 SCC 1 
26

   
several amendments to the RPA, 1951 to tackle the violation of laws related to 
candidate affidavits. The recomme ndations included imposing a m inimum 
sentence of two years for filing false affidavits, disqualifyin g any individual 
convicted of this offence, and categorising it as a corrupt pra c t i c e .  T h e  L a w  
Commission also suggested that the Supreme Court may order the relevant 
courts to conduct trials on a da ily basis and that there should  be a one-week 
gap between the deadline for submitting nomination papers and t he date of 
scrutiny. 
2.9  The Law Commission also rec ommended amendments to the law on 
false disclosure on affidavits. The proposed changes included a mending 
Section 125A of the Representa tion of the People Act, 1951, whi ch would 
require a candidate who fails to furnish information or provide s false 
information in his/her nomination paper or affidavit to be puni s h e d  w i t h  a  
minimum of two years of imprisonment and also be liable to pay a fine. The 
amended Section 125A would expe dite the trial process and manda te that the 
case is heard on a daily basis. Additionally, Section 8(1)(i) w ould be amended 
to include Section 125A as an offence, imposing disqualification on conviction. 
Finally, Section 123 would have a  new clause added, which would  d e e m  
failure to provide information or giving false information in t he nomination 
paper or affidavit as a corrupt practice. 
CURRENT LEGAL FRAMEWORK UNDER THE REPRESENTATION 
OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
Section 33A  
1[33A. Right to information.— 
(1) A candidate shall, apart from any in formation which he is required to 
furnish, under this Act or the rule s made thereunder, in his nomination 
paper delivered under sub-section (1) of section 33, also furnish the 
information as to whether— 
27

   
(i) he is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two 
years or more in a pending case in which a charge has been framed by the 
court of competent jurisdiction; 
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence [other than any offence referred to 
in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2),  or covered in sub-section (3), of 
section 8] and sentenced to imprisonment for one year or more. 
(2) The candidate or his proposer, as th e case may be, shall, at the time of 
delivering to the returning officer the nomination paper under sub-section 
(1) of section 33, also deliver to him an affidavit sworn by the candidate in 
a prescribed form verifying the information specified in sub-section (1). 
(3) The returning officer shall, as soon as may be after the furnishing of 
information to him under sub-section (1), display the aforesaid 
information by affixing a copy of the affidavit, delivered under sub-section 
(2), at a conspicuous place at his o ffice for the information of the electors 
relating to a constituency for which the nomination paper is delivered.] 
Section 125A of the Representation of People Act of 1951, deals  with the 
penalties for providing false in formation in the affidavit subm itted by a 
candidate under Section 33A of the Act. 
1[125A. Penalty for filing false affidavit, etc.—A candidate who himself or 
through his proposer, with intent to be elected in an election,— 
(i) fails to furnish information relati ng to sub-section (1) of section 33A; 
or 
(ii) gives false information which he knows or has reason to believe to be 
false; or 
(iii) conceals any information in  his nomination paper delivered under 
sub-section (1) of section 33 or in his affidavit which is required to be 
delivered under sub-section (2) of sec tion 33A, as the case may be, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
28

   
force, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both.] 
Corrupt Practice  
Section 123 (4) 
*123. Corrupt practices.—The following shall be deemed to be corrupt 
practices for the purposes of this Act:—  
(4) The publication by a candidate or  his agent or by any other person 
9[with the consent of a candidate or his election agent], of any statement 
of fact which is false, and which he e ither believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, in relation to the personal c haracter or conduct of any 
candidate or in relation to the candidat ure, or withdrawal,10[***] of any 
candidate, being a statement reasona bly calculated to prejudice the 
prospects of that candidate’s election. 
Filing of Election Petition 
Section 83 
1[83. Contents of petition.— 
(1) An election petition— 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the 
petitioner relies; 
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the 
petitioner alleges including as full a st atement as possible of the names of 
the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date 
and place of the commission of each such practice; and 
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of 
pleadings: 2[Provided that wher e the petitioner alleges any corrupt 
practice, the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the 
29

   
prescribed form in support of the a llegation of such corrupt practice and 
the particulars thereof.] 
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the 
petitioner and verified in the same manner as the petition.] 
Grounds for declaring the election void.  
Section 100 
"100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.- (1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2) if the High Court is of opinion- (a) that on 
the date of his election, a returned candidate was not qualified, or was 
disqualified, to be chosen to fill the se at under the Constitution or this Act 
or the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963); or 
(b) that any corrupt practice has been  committed by a re turned candidate 
or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned 
candidate or his election agent; or 
(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or 
(d) that the result of the election, insofar as it concerns a returned 
candidate, has been materially affected- 
(I) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or 
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned 
candidate by an agent other than his election agent, or 
(iii) by the improper reception, refusa l or rejection of any vote or the 
reception of any vote which is void, or 
(iv) by any non-compliance with the pr ovisions of the Constitution or of 
this Act or of any rules or orders made under this Act, The High Court 
shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void. 
 
30

   
PROVISIONS UNDER INDIAN PENAL CODE  
2.10  Apart from the aforementione d provision, other enabling p rovisions are 
available. Section 171G and 177 of  the IPC contains penal provi sions for 
furnishing false information to a public servant in general.  
Section 171G of the Indian Penal Code 
171G. False statement in connection with an election.—Whoever with 
intent to affect the result of an el ection makes or publishes any statement 
purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which he either 
knows or believes to be fa lse or does not believe to be true, in relation to 
the personal character or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with 
a fine. 
Section 177 of the Indian Penal Code 
177. Furnishing false informati on.—Whoever, being legally bound to 
furnish information on any subject to any public servant, as such, 
furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or has 
reason to believe to be false, shall be punished with simple imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six m onths, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both;  or, if the information which he is 
legally bound to give respects the commission of an offence, or is required 
for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to 
the apprehension of an offender, with im prisonment of either descrip-tion 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
2.11 Under Section 195 of Cr. P .C., no court shall take cognisa nce of any 
offence punishable under Section 177 of IPC, except on the comp laint in 
writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public  servant to 
whom he is administratively subordinate. 
 
 
 
31

   
OBSERVATIONS MADE BY THE COURT  
2.12  In the case of the Public Interest Foundation and Ors . v. Union of India 
and Anr.7the Supreme Court emphasised the importance of de-criminalizati on 
of politics and disqualification for filing false affidavits. 
2.13 In Resurgence India v. Election Commission of India and Another 8, the 
Supreme Court of India had exhaustively discussed the purpose o f filing an 
affidavit along with the Nomination Paper, and it has been held as follows: - 
“The voter has the elementary right to know full particulars of a 
candidate who is to represent him in Parliament/Assemblies, and such 
right to get information is universally recognised. Thus, it is held that the 
right to know about the candidate is a natural right flowing from the 
concept of democracy and is an integral part of Article 19(1)(a) of the 
Constitution.  
The ultimate purpose of filing of affidavit along with the nomination paper 
is to effectuate the fundamental right of the citizens under Article 19(1)(a) 
of the Constitution of India. The citizens are supposed to have the 
necessary information at the time of  filing of nomination paper, and for 
that purpose, the Returning Officer can very well compel a candidate to 
furnish the relevant information. 
Filing of an affidavit with blank par ticulars will rende r the affidavit 
nugatory. 
It is the duty of the Returning Offi cer to check whethe r the information 
required is fully furnished at the tim e of filing of an affidavit with the 
nomination paper since such information is very vital for giving effect to 
the "right to know" of the citizens. If  a candidate fails to fill in the blanks 
even after the reminder by the Returning Officer, the nomination paper is 
fit to be rejected. We do comprehend that the power of the Returning 
                                                            
7(2019) 3 SCC 224.  
8 (2014) 14 SCC 189, at Para. No. 29 
32

   
Officer to reject the nomination paper must be exercised very sparingly, 
but the bar should not be laid so high that the justice itself is prejudiced. 
We clarify to the extent that para 73 of the People's Union for Civil 
Liberties case will not come in the way of the Returning Officer to reject 
the nomination paper when the affidavit is filed with blank particulars. 
The candidate must take the minimum effo rt to explicitly remark as "NIL" 
or "Not Applicable" or "Not known"  in the columns and not to leave the 
particulars blank. 
Filing of affidavits with blanks will be directly h it by Section 125-A(i) of 
the RP Act. However, as the nominat ion paper itself is rejected by the 
Returning Officer, we find no reason why the candidate must be again 
penalised for the same act by prosecuting him/her.”  
2.14  Further, in Satish Ukey  v Devendra GangadharraoFadnavis&Anr 9, The 
Supreme Court of India has discussed the Right to information as follows: 
“10. The new Section 33-A, which is th e bone of contention in the present 
case, deals with the "Right to Information" and reads as under  
33A. Right to information :(1) A candidate shall, apart from any 
information which he is required to furnish, under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, in his nomination paper delivered under Sub-section (1) 
of Section 33, also furnish the information as to whether- 
(i) he is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two 
years or more in a pending case in which a charge has been framed by the 
court of competent jurisdiction; 
(ii) he has been convicted of an offe nce other than any offence referred to 
in Sub-section 
(1) or Sub-section (2), or covered in Sub-section (3), of section 8 and 
sentenced to imprisonment for one year or more. 
                                                            
9  (2019) 9 SCC 1, at Para. No. 10 
33

   
(2) The candidate or his proposer, as th e case may be, shall, at the time of 
delivering to the returning officer the nomination paper under sub-section 
(1) of Section 33, also deliver to him an affidavit sworn by the candidate 
in a prescribed form verifying the information specified in sub-section (1). 
The returning officer shall, as soon as may be after the furnishing of 
information to him under Sub-section (1), display the aforesaid 
information by affixing a copy of the affidavit, delivered under Sub-section 
(2), at a conspicuous place at his o ffice for the information of the electors 
relating to a constituency for which the nomination paper is delivered. 
14. It is pertinent to note here t hat Section 33-A (1), as worded and 
drafted, requires furnishing of the information of cases where the person 
filing the nomination has been convic ted; and (ii) where charges have 
been framed against the person filing the nomination but excluded cases 
where cognizance had been taken. This  was despite the order of the Apex 
Court, to the effect that details of  the case(s) of which cognizance has 
been taken should also be furnished.” 
2.15  In the case of People's Union for Civil Liberties  (PUCL), it was held as 
under: 
“114. …. The Election Commission was di rected to call for details from 
the contesting candidates broadly on three points/ namely/ (I) criminal 
record/ (ii) assets and liabilities/ and (iii) educational qualification…. 
….It is common knowledge that on acc ount of a variety of reasons, such 
as the delaying tactics of one or the other accused and inadequacies of the 
prosecuting machinery, framing of formal charges gets delayed 
considerably, especially in serious  cases where committal procedure has 
to be gone through. On that account, th e voter/citizen shall not be denied 
information regarding cognizance ta ken by the Court of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for two years or more. The citizen's right to 
information, when once it is recognised to be part of the fundamental right 
under Article 19(1)(a), cannot be trunc ated in the manner in which it has 
been done. Clause (i) of Section 33-A(I) therefore, falls short of the 
34

   
avowed goal to effectuate the right of  information on a vital aspect. Cases 
in which cognizance has been taken  should therefore be comprehended 
within the area of information accessible to the voters/citizens, in addition 
to what is provided for in clause (i) of Section 33- A. 
123. Finally, the summary of my conclu sions: (3) The directives given by 
this Court in Union of India v. Assn. for Democratic Reforms were 
intended to operate only till the law wa s made by the legislature and, in 
that sense, "pro tempore" in nature . Once legislation is made, the Court 
has to make an independent assessment in order to evaluate whether the 
items of information statutorily ordained are reasonably adequate to 
secure the right of information available to the voter/citizen. In embarking 
on this exercise, the points of disclosure indicated by this Court, even if 
they be tentative or ad hoc in nature, should be given due weight, and 
substantial departure there from cannot be countenanced. 
123(6) The right to information provided for by Parliament under Section 
33-A in regard to the pending criminal cases and past involvement in such 
cases is reasonably adequate to safeguard the right to information vested 
in the voter/citizen. However, th ere is no good reason for excluding the 
pending cases in which cognizance has been taken by the Court from the 
ambit of disclosure.” 
2.16  The Supreme Court of the People's Union of Civil Libertie s has declared 
Section 33-B unconstitutional as it violates citizens' fundamen tal right to know 
the background of candidates participating in elections. This right is considered 
an essential aspect of freedom of speech and expression, as enshrined in Article 
19(1)(a) of the Indian Constitution. Any limitations to this ri ght must comply 
with the restrictions outlined in Article 19(2) of the Constitution. 
2.17  In Krishnamoorthy v .  Sivakumar and Others 10, the Supreme Court of 
India held that in cases of non disclosure of pending cases in the Form 26, it 
amounted to commission of corrupt practice of 'undue influence'; the election is 
                                                            
10 (2015) 3 SCC 467  
35

   
to be declared null and void, and the question whether it mater ially affects the 
election or not will not arise. It was held as under: 
“60. The purpose of referring to the same is to remind one that the right to 
contest in an election is a plain and simple statutory right and the election 
of an elected candidate can only be declared null and void regard being 
had to the grounds provided in the statutory enactment. And the ground of 
'undue influence' is a part of corrupt practice.………. 
62. ……., if the corrupt practice is proven, the Election Tribunal or the 
High Court is bound to declare the el ection of the returned candidate to 
be void. The said view has been laid  down in M. Narayan Rao V. G. 
Venkata Reddy & Ot hers (1977) 1 SCC 771 and Harminder Singh 
Jassi(supra). 
INPUTS RECEIVED FROM THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF 
INDIA  
2.18  The ECI informed the Committee that the requirements for a valid 
nomination are laid out in Section 33 of the 1951 RP Act, which  outlines the 
necessary procedure and information that a candidate must discl ose. In 2022, 
Section 33(a) was added which re quires candidates to disclose w hether they 
have been accused of offences punishable by two years or more i n a pending 
case where charges have been framed or have been convicted of a n offence not 
already mentioned in the RP Ac t and sentenced to one year or mo re of 
imprisonment.  
2.19  In case the Form 26 prescribed under the Conduct of Elect ions Rules. 
1961, declaration is left incomplete, the Returning Officer has  the authority to 
instruct the candidate to make  necessary amendments. Failure to  comply with 
the instructions would result in t he candidate's nomination bei ng rejected or 
declared invalid. In the event of a public disclosure of affida vits, particularly 
related to criminal activities, any Indian citizen can file a p etition. The Election 
Commission is collaborating with the Ministry of Law and Justic e to establish 
the repercussions of such non-compliance. 
36

   
2.20  The Election Commission of India, in April, 2006, had giv en direction 
tothe Returning Officers to file a formal complaint and take ac tion on the basis 
of  documentary evidence agains t any candidate, who is found to  have 
submitted false information. Further in July, 2008, in a letter  addressed to the 
Chief Electoral Officers of all States and Union Territories, t he ECI had 
stipulated that “ it is clarified that in the sec ond affidavit to be filed in the 
format prescribed by the Commissi on’s order dated 27- 03-2003, all pending 
cases are required to be mentioned even if charges have not been framed in the 
cases as directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”11 
2.21  On April, 2014, the Election Commission issued another Ci rcular, which 
states that any person who files a false affidavit in Form 26 c an be taken to 
court under Section 125A of the Re presentation of the People Ac t, 1951. This 
way, it is not only restricted to the Returning Officer to move  the court for 
complaints received on false affidavits. Anyone who is aggrieve d can file a 
petition before the appropriate competent court.  
2.22  The relevant excerpts from the Circular are as follows: 
"3..... (Under Section 125A, there is no stipulation that complaints under 
that section have to be made by the public servant concerned (in this case 
the R.O.). Therefore, it would be ope n to any aggrieved person to move 
petition before the appropriate Court of competent jurisdiction with 
petition for action under section I25A in the case of any false declaration 
or concealing of information in the affidavit in Form 26. 
When the guidelines have been issued that have got statutory force also, 
have to be followed by all the concer ned officials unless Statute requires 
expressly." 
2.23 Further, in 2014, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 12 reiterated that 
Section 125A of the Representati on of the People Act, 1951 does  not require 
the Election Officer to take legal action against individuals who submit false or 
                                                            
11 COMPENDIUM OF INSTRUCTIONS ON CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS, VOLUME – II, Nomination, 
Scrutiny and Related Instructions, 2009 
12 WP No.12066 of 2014  
37

   
incomplete information in an affidavit. The provision simply ou tlines penalties 
for such actions but does not give any power or duty to the Ele ction Officer to 
take any action. Similarly, in the case of A.R.Antulay v .  RammdasSriniwas 
Nayak &Anr13, the court held that any person can initiate criminal proceedi ngs 
unless the statute creating the offence indicates otherwise. 
2.24  Recognizing the importance of truthful and complete affid avits, the 
Election Commission of India has reviewed its stance on the mat ter and issued 
a press note on 16.06.2020. It was highlighted that filing such  affidavits 
undermines the right of voters t o be fully informed about their  political 
representatives. To address the issue of false affidavits, the Election 
Commission of India has outlined its efforts to uphold the inte grity of elections 
in the country through its Press Release. The excerpts from the  press Note are 
as follows: 
“The Commission has reviewed this position and decided that, in pursuit 
of a level-playing field, it will ta ke cognisance of co mplaints, which 
indicate serious omission on the part of the candidate, and refer such 
matters to the relevant investigating authorities on a case-to-case basis.” 
2.25  Further, the Election Comm ission of India has put forward  a proposal to 
the Ministry of Law & Justice to include a sub-section in Secti on 125A that 
would allow individuals to file complaints against candidates f or making false 
statements in their affidavits. It was proposed that to file a complaint, the 
individual must provide substantiating evidence and submit it t o the relevant 
R.O. within 30 days of the election declaration. The R.O. is re sponsible for 
taking appropriate action. 
2.26  Further, in 2004, the Commission proposed another modific ation in the 
provision to increase the punishment for filing false affidavit s, whereby 
offenders would face a minimum se ntence of two years imprisonme nt. The 
Commission subsequently reiterated the proposal in 2011. 
                                                            
13 (1984) 2 SCC 500  
38

   
2.27  According to the Election Commission of India, Section 12 5 and the 
relevant forms have not been upda ted recently, and there is an ongoing dispute 
in the courts. Although the Commission is working on resolving the issue, it 
cannot make any commitments to the Committee due to the pending  public 
interest litigations. The Commission did point out that the pen a l t y  f o r  n o n -
compliance is currently low and has only been in effect for a y ear. However, if 
the penalty is set for more than  two years, automatic disqualif ication comes 
into play, which is emphasised in public interest litigations. Various courts are 
currently hearing public interes t litigations, which are advoca ting for severe 
consequences for any type of defa ult or mistake, while the cour t has stated that 
only significant mistakes will be considered a default. 
SUGGESTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
2.28  For elections to be truly free and fair, it is crucial to  ensure that 
accurate information is provided to voters. The Supreme Court r ecognizes 
this importance and this Committee also emphasizes the need to define 
what is considered a False Declaration/affidavit and when penal ties, 
criminal action, or disqualification are warranted. It's import ant to note 
that minor factual errors should not be treated as significant enough to 
require penalization. 
2.29  The Committee observes that it is essential to uphold the  integrity of 
the democratic processes in accordance with the Constitutional mandate. 
The Committee recommends that the government sets up a verifica tion 
process for affidavits and promptly informs the Election Commis sion of 
any false data to ensure adherence to regulations. 
2.30  The Committee observes that it is important to involve st akeholders 
in the process of creating fair regulations for defining reason able 
declarations in election affidavits. This is crucial to protect  innocent 
individuals and distinguish fraudulent declarations from uninte ntional 
mistakes. To ensure fair and effective elections, it is necessa ry to address 
the challenges faced by political parties and candidates. 
39

   
2.31  The Committee strongly recommends that the RP Act of 1951  needs 
t o  h a v e  a  c l e a r  d e f i n i t i o n  o f  w h at constitute a false declarati on/affidavit 
which is presently mentioned under Section 123(4) that covers c orrupt 
practices, and concealment of inf ormation specified under Secti on 125A 
which specifies penalties for filing false affidavits respectiv ely, so as to 
establish fair practices in election process.  
2.32  The Committee also recommends that the penalties associat ed with 
these actions should be based on their severity of the act committed and be 
included as a  separate provision  in addition to or in place of  the existing 
Section 125A that deals with penalties for false declarations. 
2.33 The Committee suggests that the Election Commission should  bear 
the primary responsibility of taking legal action against false  
declarations/affidavits instead of placing the burden on the general public. 
2.34.  The Committee also recommends that if a candidate is found to have 
provided false information, under the updated/new provision pro posed by 
the Committee, they should be deemed ineligible for any benefit s resulting 
from such election. This measure is aimed at ensuring a level p laying field 
for all candidates and upholding the integrity of the election process. 
2.35 The Committee observes that the current punishment, which is only 
six months under Section 125A, is insufficient and should be in creased. 
The severity of punishment should  be based on the severity of t he offence 
committed. The Committee suggests that if someone files a false  affidavit, 
their offence level should be taken into account and may be add ed to the 
list of offences under Section 8(1) that lead to disqualification.  
2.36 The Committee, therefore, su ggests that in order to ensure  f a i r  
elections and to protect citizens' rights according to Article 19(1)(a), 
punishment under Section 125A should be increased to a maximum of two 
years imprisonment and a fine. However, this penalty should onl y be 
applied in exceptional cases, and not for minor errors or unint entional 
mistakes. Under the new provision , submitting a false affidavit  should be 
40

   
considered a violation of constitutional provisions, and an ele ction may be 
invalidated under sub-Section 1(d)(iv) of Section 100 of the Act. 
2.37 Further, the Committee propos es that intentionally disrega rding 
other requirements, such as the furnishing of information outli ned in 
Section 33A of the RP Act, 1951, as listed in Section 125A, sho uld be 
considered a "Corrupt Practice" under Section 123 of the RP Act , 1951, 
for the ease of filing election petitions. 
2.38 The Committee also recommends the removal of the phrase 'with the 
intent to be elected in an election ' from the Section 125A as it creates legal 
ambiguity in finalizing the penalty.   
2.39 The Committee also recommen ds empowering the Election 
Commission of India with the authority to review and make a ver dict on 
the falsification of affidavits based on a referral from the Re turning 
Officer. The Committee also sugge sts expediting the resolution of 
disqualification cases, as prol onged litigation undermines the intended 
purpose of the legal provisions. 
********* 
 
41

   
ISSUE NUMBER THREE 
ESTABLISHING PARITY BETWEEN THE MINIMUM AGE OF 
VOTING AND CONTESTING ELECTIONS TO PARLIAMENT/STATE 
LEGISLATURES/LOCAL BODIES. 
INTRODUCTION  
3.0 In a democracy, it is possible for the interested citizens to actively 
participate in the political process by running for public office. Nevertheless, to 
ensure that only qualified and trustworthy individuals hold pos itions of power, 
there are certain regulations in place. These regulations prima rily involve age 
requirements that must be met by the contenders in order to see k public office. 
In recent times, an increasing emphasis has been placed on the participation of 
young adults in political organizations, rather than their excl usion from the 
political arena.  
3.1  In the past, political partie s have usually favored experi enced politicians 
for public office and viewed younger candidates as lacking in e xperience. This 
belief suggests that political competence comes with age, a not ion that Plato 
argued for over two thousand year s ago. However, in the 21st ce ntury, this 
belief is increasingly being cons idered outdated. Due to increa sed education, 
globalization, and digitalization,  younger individuals are now more than 
capable of running for office in all countries. It is important  to have a diverse 
range of individuals, including you nger candidates, represented  i n  e l e c t e d  
assemblies from a normative perspective. 
3.2  Having a significant number of young individuals in legisl ative bodies is 
important for a few reasons. Firstly, they can act as spokesper sons for other 
young people. Secondly, young parliamentarians may prioritize a nd introduce 
issues that are relevant to youths. Furthermore, having a high representation of 
young individuals in parliament c ould change the way political discussions 
happen, both inside and outside of the government. Research sug gests that 
having minority groups represented in parliament can help their  emancipation 
in other areas of society, and we  believe that the same could b e true for young 
people. In short, having young d eputies in legislative bodies can strengthen the 
42

   
representational links of young people and foster positive atti tudes towards the 
government. It can also increase the government's responsivenes s to the 
demands of disadvantaged groups.14 
3.3  Most European countries sti pulate that candidates for nati onal general 
elections must be at least 18 years old. However, some countrie s, including 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Es tonia, Ireland, Latvia, Poland,  and Slovakia, 
have higher age requirements, ma ndating that candidates be at l east 21 years 
old. In Romania, candidates must be 23 years old, while in Cypr us, Greece, 
Italy, and Lithuania, candidates must be 25 years old. For regi onal elections, 
many countries require candidates to be at least 18 years old. When it comes to 
elections for the European Parlia ment, 15 Member States permit candidates 
who are at least 18 years old to participate.15 
3.4  In the year 2010, the Inter national Parliamentary Union (I PU) passed an 
important resolution regarding the involvement of youth in the democratic 
process. To lead this initiative, the IPU established a Forum o f Young 
Parliamentarians in 2013. Since its inception, the Forum has su ccessfully 
organized four global conferences for young MPs in Switzerland,  Japan, 
Zambia, and Canada. The primary  objective of these conferences is to foster 
inclusivity in politics, empower young parliamentarians, and en rich 
parliamentary work with young people's perspectives, thereby en couraging 
active and diverse participation in the democratic process. 
3.5  On April 14, 2022, in the third meeting of World Bank Glob al Young 
MP Initiative, the World Bank Vice President of External and Co rporate 
Relations, Sheila Redzepi, high lighted that young parliamentari ans have a 
unique advantage in understanding the perspectives of the young er generation 
who are disproportionately aff ected by many of today's challeng es. These 
                                                            
14Stockemer, D., & Sundström, A. (2018). Age representation in parliaments: Can institutions pave the way for 
the young? European Political Science Review, 10(3), 467‐490. 
15 Standing as a candidate:  The right to stand as a candidate is restricted to adults in all Member States, with 
no exceptions.http://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2017/mapping‐minimum‐age‐requirements‐concerning‐
rights‐child‐eu/standing‐candidate 
43

   
representatives not only give vulnerable demographics a voice i n parliaments, 
but they also bring fresh ideas and technological expertise to debates.16 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK IN INDIA 
3.6 As per the present legal ma ndate to contest in Lok Sabha or  Assembly 
elections, candidates must be at least 25 years old, ensuring t hat they possess 
the necessary maturity, experi ence, and understanding of their responsibilities. 
Article 84 of the Constitution of India outlines the qualificat ions for Members 
of Parliament, requiring a person to be at least 30 years old t o hold a seat in the 
Council of States and at least 25 years old to hold a seat in t he House of the 
People. These minimum age criteria for aspiring public official s ensure that 
only capable and responsible individuals can serve the people. 
Article 84 of the Constitution of India 1949 
84. Qualification for membership of  Parliament A person shall not be 
qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he 
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person 
authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or 
affirmation according to the form se t out for the purpose in the Third 
Schedule; 
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty 
years of age and, in the case of a seat  in the House of the People, not less 
than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf 
by or under any law made by Parliament 
Article 173 of the Constitution Of India 1949 
                                                            
16Young Parliamentarians at the Forefront of Innovation to Advance Learning Outcomes, World Bank News, 
April 14, 2022. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/04/27/young‐parliamentarians‐at‐the‐
forefront‐of‐innovation‐to‐advance‐learning‐outcomes 
44

   
173. Qualification for membership of the State Legislature A person shall 
not be qualified to be c hosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a State 
unless he 
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person 
authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or 
affirmation according to the form se t out for the purpose in the Third 
Schedule; 
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than 
twenty five years of age and in the case of a seat in the Legislative 
Council, not less than thirty years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf 
by or under any law made by Parliament 
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 
Section 36 2(a) 
“[(a)7[that on the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations the 
candidate] either is not qualified or is disqualified for being chosen to fill 
the seat under any of the following provisions that may be applicable, 
namely:— Articles 84, 102, 173 and 191, 8***.9 
[Part II of this Act and sections 4 and 14 of the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)] 10***;” 
YOUTH IN INDIAN PARLIAMENT  
3.7  It is concerning to note that there is a lack of represent ation of India's 
youth population in the political  arena, despite a growing numb er of young 
voters. The report by PRS Legislative Research revealed that in  2019, 47% of 
Lok Sabha MPs are over the age of 55. This trend is particularl y disconcerting, 
given that India's median age is only 27.9 years. 
3.8  Further, only 2.2% of Lok Sabha MPs are under the age of 3 0, while less 
than 1.7% of MPs worldwide fall within this age bracket. This i s despite the 
45

 
fact
falls
Uni
Parl
3.9 
16 a
Sab
the 
Ove
und
con
Sour
3.10
havi
imp
         
17 Wh
https
faces
18http
19 Cha
20Prof
newly
t that a sign
s within t h
on.17In t h
liament bet
 A c c o r di
and 30 ar e
ha, it's cle
situation, 
er the last 
dergone a s
sistently in
rce: PRS20 
0 It is w o
ing MPs 
provement.
                       
hy Lok Sabha n
://economictim
/articleshow/6
ps://sansad.in/
akshu Roy, "Hig
file of the new
y‐elected‐17th
nificant po
he 20-39 
he 17th L o
tween the 
ing to the 
e classified
ar that onl
we consid
six deca d
significant 
ncreased ov
orth notin g
below th e
 It is ther e
                       
eeds more you
mes.indiatimes
68597530.cms
/ls/members 
gh hopes,low r
wly elected 17th
h‐lok‐sabha 
ortion of th
year age 
ok Sabha, 
ages of 30
draft Natio
d as youth.
ly a few m
der MPs b e
des, the a g
change. H
ver the yea
g that Indi
e a g e  o f  
efore imp o
     
ung faces, Read
s.com/news/el
?utm_source=
returns" , The P
h Lok Sabha, h
e global vo
range, ac c
there are 
 and 40.18 
onal Youth
 However
members be
etween the 
ge distrib u
However, th
ars.19 
a ranks 1 9
3 0 ,  b u t  th
ortant to t a
d more at: 
lections/lok‐sa
contentofinter
Pioneer, Oct 13
ttps://prsindia
oting age p
cording to 
currently 
h Policy, i n
, when w e
elong to th
ages of 2
ution of L
he age of L
9th among 
here is st
ake defini t
abha/india/why
rest&utm_med
3, 2013 
a.org/parliame
population 
the Inte r-
34 Sittin g
ndividuals
e look at t h
is age grou
5 and 40 a
Lok Sabha 
Lok Sabha
98 countr i
ill signifi c
te actions 
y‐lok‐sabha‐ne
dium=text&utm
nttrack/vital‐st
- almost h
-Parliamen
g M e m b er
s aged bet w
he current 
up. To ana
as young M
members
a members
 
ies in ter m
cant roo m
towards b
eeds‐more‐you
m_campaign=c
tats/profile‐of‐
 
half - 
ntary 
rs of 
ween 
Lok 
alyze 
MPs. 
 h a s  
s has 
ms of 
m f o r  
better 
ung‐
cppst 
‐the‐
46

   
representation of young people to accurately depict the country 's 
demographics. 
INPUTS RECEIVED FROM THE ELECTION COMMISSION  
3.11 According to the Election Commission of India, unless comp elling 
reasons exist to alter a provision of the Constitution, it shou ld remain 
unchanged. The Commissi on believes that this principle falls un der the age 
requirement for eligibility to jo i n  L o k  S a b h a ,  R ajya Sabha, Leg islative 
Assemblies, and Legislative Councils. The Commission has alread y considered 
the issue of aligning the minimum age for voting and contesting  e le c tions to  
Parliament, State Legislature, and local bodies and has found t hat it is 
unrealistic to expect 18-year-old s to possess the necessary exp erience and 
maturity for these responsibilities. Therefore, the minimum age  for voting and 
contesting elections is appropriate. The Commission does not fa vour reducing 
the age requirement for membership of Parliament and State Legi slatures and 
still maintains this view. 
AGE OF CANDIDACY- A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE  
3.12 Different nations with diver se democratic systems have var ying 
regulations governing the minimum age required for citizens to vote and run in 
elections. Exploring the unique rules of each country, such as those in India, 
can provide us with valuable insights into their electoral processes. 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
3.13 The minimum voting age for federal elections in the United  States is 18 
years. However, when it comes to contesting elections, there ar e additional age 
requirements. To run for the U.S. House of Representatives, asp iring 
candidates must be at least 25 years old, while for the U.S. Se nate, the 
minimum age requirement is 30 years. These criteria ensure that  individuals 
seeking to hold positions of significant legislative power poss ess a certain level 
of life experience and maturity. 
“No Person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the 
Age of twenty five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the United 
47

   
States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State in 
which he shall be chosen.[U.S. Constitu tion, Article I, Section 2, Clause 
2] 
No Person shall be a Senator who sha ll not have attained to the Age of 
thirty Years and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and who 
shall not, when elected, be  an Inhabitant of that State for which he shall 
be chosen. [U.S. Constitution, Article I, section 3, clause 3]”21 
THE UNITED KINGDOM 
3.14 To participate in electi ons for all parliaments, assemblie s, and councils 
at the devolved or local level in the United Kingdom, an indivi dual must be 18 
years or older. The same age requirement applies to any elected  public office, 
including that of an elected mayor for London or a local author ity. No other 
higher age requirements are necessary for specific public offic e positions. 
Candidates must be 18 years old on both the day of nomination a nd the day of 
the poll, a reduction from the previous age requirement of 21, as stated in the 
Electoral Administration Act 2006.22 
CANADA 
3.15 As per the Charter of Right s and Freedoms in Canada, every  citizen can 
vote in the House of Commons or legislative assembly elections and qualify for 
membership therein. To be eligib le as a candidate, a Canadian c itizen of at 
least 18 years of age on the polling day, who is qualified as a n elector, must 
have established residency somewhere in Canada but not necessarily within the 
constituency of their election campaign. Additionally, a candid ate can seek 
election in only one electoral district.23 
AUSTRALIA  
3.16 An individual must fulfill certain criteria to qualify for  a nomination for 
either the Senate or the House of Representatives in Australia.  Firstly, they 
                                                            
21U.S. Constitution, https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution 
22The Electoral Administration Act 2006, Section 17. https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/22/part/5 
23Canada Elections Act, Section 65.https://laws‐lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/E‐2.01/page‐7.html#h‐204314 
48

   
must have attained the age of 18 years or above. Secondly, they  must be an 
Australian citizen. Lastly, they must be eligible to vote in a House of 
Representatives election or have the potential to become qualif ied voters. 
These are the mandatory requirements to be met before one can b e considered 
for a nomination.24 
FRANCE  
3.17 The minimum age to run for assembly elections in France is  18 years 
old, as stated in Article L44 of t he French Electoral Code, whi ch reads: "Any 
French citizen who has the status of an elector is eligible to run for and be 
elected unless otherwise prohibited by law due to incapacity or ineligibility."25 
JAPAN 
3.18 In Japan, the minimum votin g age is 18 years for national elections, 
enabling young adults to have their say in shaping the country' s future. 
However, the minimum age for contesting assembly elections vari es depending 
on the specific election. To qualify as a member of the House o f 
Representatives in Japan, an indi vidual must be at least 25 yea rs old, as 
stipulated by Article 10of the Public Offices Election Act, 201 9. Similarly, for 
the House of Councilors, the mini mum age requirement is 30 year s old. 
However, if an individual is 25 years or older and has the righ t to vote, they 
c a n  b e c o m e  a  m e m b e r  o f  t h e  l e g i s l a t u r e s  o f  t h r e e  p r e f e c t u r e s .  Additionally, 
those who are 25 years or older and have the right to vote are eligible to 
become members of the councils of five municipalities.26 
SOUTH AFRICA 
3.19 The South African Constitution specifies that individuals must be at least 
18 years old to participate in Assembly Elections. Section 47(1 ) states that any 
citizen eligible to vote for the National Assembly is also elig ible to become a 
                                                            
24https://www.aec.gov.au/elections/candidates/qualification.htm 
25Electoral Code: Chapter III: Conditions of eligibility and ineligibility ... (Articles L44 to L45‐1); 
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/codes/section_lc/LEGITEXT000006070239/LEGISCTA000006148456/#LEGISCT
A000006148456 
26Public Offices Election Law (Law No. 100 of 1950); https://elaws.e‐
gov.go.jp/document?lawid=325AC1000000100 
49

   
member, except for those who are disqualified by law at the tim e of election or 
appointment.27 
SUGGESTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
3.20 The Committee observes that reducing the minimum age 
requirement for candidacy in elections would give young individ uals equal 
opportunities to engage in democr acy. This viewpoint is reinfor ced by a 
vast amount of evidence, such as  global practices, the increasi ng political 
consciousness among young peop le, and the advantages of youth 
representation. 
3.21 After examining various countries' practices, such as Cana da, the 
United Kingdom, and Australia, the Committee observes that the 
minimum age for candidacy in national elections needs to be 18 years. 
These nations' examples demonstrate that young individuals can be 
reliable and responsible political participants. 
3.22 The Committee also observes that surveys indicate that you th 
globally have significant political awareness and knowledge. Th is is 
evident through youth-led moveme nts such as Fridays for Future and 
March for Our Lives, highlighting their capacity to rally and c hampion 
critical social and political concerns. 
3.23 The Committee, therefore, suggests reducing the minimum ag e 
requirement for candidacy in Assembly Elections. The Committee believes 
that this measure can promote a wider range of viewpoints in po licy 
deliberations and results. Additi onally, younger candidates can  h e l p  
connect different generations, facilitating discussions and coo peration. 
This can boost the credibility and faith in the political process. 
3.24 The Committee suggests that both the Election Commission a nd the 
Government should prioritize providing comprehensive civic educ ation 
programs to equip young people with the knowledge and skills ne cessary 
                                                            
27 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (Ch. 5); https://www.gov.za/documents/constitution‐republic‐
south‐africa‐1996‐chapter‐4‐parliament#47 
50

   
for political engagement. They can consider successful models f rom other 
countries, like Finland's citizens hip education, and adapt them  
accordingly. 
3.25 The Committee urges Governments, political parties, and yo uth 
organisations to work together towards enabling greater youth 
participation in decision-making processes. This can be achieve d through 
collaborations between governme nts and youth organisations and by 
promoting youth-led initiatives such as candidate training prog rams and 
mentorship schemes. By embracin g the potential of its youth and  creating 
an inclusive democratic process, India can foster a dynamic and  diverse 
political arena that empowers young individuals to contribute t owards the 
country's development.         
      
     ************* 
51

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
STATUS OF COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 
1. The Committee while extending its appreciation to the Election 
Commission of India for their diligent efforts in conducting fr ee and fair 
elections in the country recommends that citizens should have g reater 
transparency when it comes to the Common Electoral Roll and the  
integration of Aadhaar with EPIC . However, Committee emphasised  that 
linking Aadhaar with Voter ID is voluntary and not obligatory. ( Para 
1.48) 
 
2. During discussions, some members of the Committee raised doubts  about 
the linking of Aadhaar with EPIC of non-citizens, which led the Committee 
to suggest that the ECI should es tablish a legal provision or a n alternative 
mechanism to ensure that non-citizens with Aadhaar are not incl uded in 
the Common Electoral Roll. Additionally, citizens who have not yet linked 
their Aadhaar should be assured that they can still exercise their legal right 
to vote. The Committee emphasized the importance of these clari fications 
in addressing concerns related to the implementation of a Commo n 
Electoral Roll ( Para 1.49) 
 
3. The Committee recommends that the ECI may develop a comprehensi ve 
plan that considers all the factors involved in implementing a Common 
Electoral Roll before making any changes to the current regulations.  
( Para 1.50) 
 
4. To ensure a fair and effective implementation, the Committee re commends 
that extensive consultations be held with the Legislative Depar tment and 
the Election Commission of India,  along with the various States  and 
Political Parties, including those who use their own electoral rolls for local 
body elections. By conducting these consultations, final propos al on 
Common Electoral Roll can be developed taking into consideratio n the 
different viewpoints and concerns of all parties involved. (Para 1.51) 
 
52

 
 
5. The Committee points out two important issues in implementing C ommon 
Electoral Roll, namely the current legal framework and Constitu tional 
regulations that guide the creation of electoral rolls by the E CI, and the 
process for conducting local bod y polls. The Committee expresse d concern 
about the potential impact on State powers, mentioned under Cha pter IX 
and IX A of the Constitution of India.  The Committee therefore suggests 
that the ECI before taking up the responsibility of preparing t he Common 
Electoral Roll may give due consideration to the constitutional  provisions 
and powers of the States. The ECI may also keep in mind the pri nciples of 
federalism enshrined under the con stitution and the powers rese rved for 
the State Election Commissions under List II Entry 5.   ( Para 1.52) 
 
6. The Committee observes that impl ementing a Common Electoral Rol l, as 
proposed by the Central Governme nt and ECI, is presently outsid e the 
scope of Article 325 of the Constitution. This article stipulates that separate 
electoral rolls must be used for elections to Parliament and th e State 
Legislatures. To ensure that all actions are in line with the C onstitution, 
the Committee suggests consensus shall be made in line with Art icle 325. 
The Committee advises the government to proceed with caution, a dhere to 
the principles of federalism enshrined in the Constitution, and  carefully 
assess the potential consequences before taking any actions. ( Para 1.53) 
 
7. The Committee suggests that the Election Commission should be c areful 
and avoid overstepping its boundaries into the State's domain. Instead, the 
Commission should aim to propose a solution that benefits all t he parties 
involved. (Para 1.54)  
 
8. The Committee recommends that th e Legislative Department and th e 
Election Commission collaborate to examine the effects of the d elimitation 
process, especially in challenging terrains.  The Election Commission lacks 
the authority to direct State Election Commissions or appraise the 
performance of State Election Commissioners.  The Committee draws the 
attention of ECI to the fact that treating all regions in India  as identical 
can pose a significant risk. It is therefore imperative to reco gnize this 
reality and take appropriate measures to address it. (Para 1.55) 
53

 
 
 
9. The Committee has taken note of the potential benefits that cou ld be 
derived from the creation of a C ommon Electoral Roll through th e 
collaborative participation of officials who serve in both the Election 
Commission of India and State Election Commissions . However, it stresses 
the importance of proper constitu tional and statutory authoriza tion before 
the Election Commission takes charge of creating or managing el ectoral 
rolls for State Election Commissions. The Committee suggests th at States 
may continue the practice of utilizing the electoral roll of th e Election 
Commission, calling claims and objections until necessary legal  changes 
are made. Furthermore, the Commi ttee strongly recommends that t he 
Election Commission of India and the Legislative Department col laborate 
to preserve the rights of both State Election Commissions and S tate 
Governments when preparing the Common Electoral Roll. (Para 1.56) 
 
10. The Committee suggests that the Election Commission and Legisla tive 
Department collaborate to encourage States to utilize the Elect ion 
Commission's electoral roll when creating their own until there  is a change 
in constitutional and statutory p rovisions. The Committee stron gly 
emphasizes the significance of preserving the rights of State E lection 
Commissions and State Governments while taking action. (Para 1.57) 
 
FALSE DECLARATIONS DURING FILING OF NOMINATION FOR 
ELECTIONS 
 
11. For elections to be truly free and fair, it is crucial to ensur e that accurate 
information is provided to voters. The Supreme Court recognizes  this 
importance and this Committee also emphasizes the need to defin e what is 
considered a False Declaration/affidavit and when penalties, cr iminal 
action, or disqualification are warranted. It's important to no te that minor 
factual errors should not be treated as significant enough to r equire 
penalization.(Para 2.28) 
 
12. The Committee believes this is essential to uphold the integrit y of the 
democratic processes in accorda nce with the Constitutional mand ate. The 
54

 
 
Committee recommends that the government sets up a verification  process 
for affidavits and promptly informs the Election Commission of any false 
data to ensure adherence to regulations. (Para 2.29) 
 
13. The Committee observes that it is important to involve stakehol ders in the 
process of creating fair regulations for defining reasonable de clarations in 
election affidavits. This is crucial to protect innocent indivi duals and 
distinguish fraudulent declarations from unintentional mistakes. To ensure 
fair and effective elections, it is necessary to address the ch allenges faced 
by political parties and candidates. (Para 2.30) 
 
14. The Committee strongly recommends that the RP Act of 1951 needs  t o  
have a clear definition of what constitute a false declaration/affidavit which 
is presently mentioned under Section 123(4) that covers corrupt  practices, 
and concealment of information specified under Section 125A whi ch 
specifies penalties for filing false affidavits respectively, s o as to establish 
fair practices in election process. (Para 2.31) 
 
15. The Committee also recommends that the penalties associated wit h these 
actions should be based on their severity of the act committed and be 
included as a  separate provision in addition to or in place of  the existing 
Section 125A that deals with penalties for false declarations.(Para 2.32) 
 
16. The Committee suggests that the Election Commission should bear  t h e  
primary responsibility of tak ing legal action against false 
declarations/affidavits instead of placing the burden on the ge neral 
public.(Para 2.33) 
 
17. The Committee also recommends that if a candidate is found to h ave 
provided false information, under the updated/new provision pro posed by 
the Committee, they should be deemed ineligible for any benefit s resulting 
from such election. This measure is aimed at ensuring a level p laying field 
for all candidates and upholding the integrity of the election process. (Para 
2.34) 
 
55

 
 
18. The Committee observes that the current punishment, which is on ly six 
months under Section 125A, is insufficient and should be increa sed. The 
severity of punishment should be based on the severity of the o ffence 
committed. The Committee suggests that if someone files a false  affidavit, 
their offence level should be ta ken into account and may be add ed to the 
list of offences under Section 8(1) that lead to disqualification.(Para 2.35) 
 
19. The Committee suggests that in o rder to ensure fair elections a nd to 
protect citizens' rights according to Article 19(1)(a), punishm ent under 
Section 125A should be increased to a maximum of two years 
imprisonment and a fine. However,  this penalty should only be a pplied in 
exceptional cases, and not for minor errors or unintentional mi stakes. 
Under the new provision, submitting a false affidavit should be  considered 
a violation of constitutional pr ovisions, and an election may b e invalidated 
under sub-Section 1(d)(iv) of Section 100 of the Act. (Para 2.36) 
 
20. Further, the Committee proposes  that intentionally disregarding  other 
requirements, such as the furnishing of information outlined in  Section 
33A of the RP Act, 1951, as listed in Section 125A, should be c onsidered a 
"Corrupt Practice" under Sectio n 123 of the RP Act, 1951, for t he ease of 
filing election petitions. (Para 2.37) 
 
21. The Committee also recommends the removal of the phrase 'with the intent 
to be elected in an election ' from the Section 125A as it creates legal 
ambiguity in finalizing the penalty.  (Para 2.38) 
 
22. The Committee also recommends empowering the Election Commissio n of 
India with the authority to review and make a verdict on the falsification of 
affidavits based on a referral f rom the Returning Officer. The Committee 
also suggests expediting the resolution of disqualification cas es, as 
prolonged litigation undermines  the intended purpose of the leg al 
provisions. (Para 2.39) 
 
56

 
 
ESTABLISHING PARITY BETWEEN THE MINIMUM AGE OF VOTING 
AND CONTESTING ELECTIONS TO PARLIAMENT/STATE 
LEGISLATURES/LOCAL BODIES 
 
23.  The Committee observes that re ducing the minimum age requireme nt for 
candidacy in elections would give young individuals equal oppor tunities to 
engage in democracy. This viewpoint is reinforced by a vast amo unt of 
evidence, such as global practi ces, the increasing political co nsciousness 
among young people, and the adva ntages of youth representation.  ( P a r a  
3.20) 
 
24.  After examining various countries' practices, such as Canada, the United 
Kingdom, and Australia, the Committee observes that the minimum  age 
for candidacy in national elections needs to be 18 years. These  nations' 
examples demonstrate that young individuals can be reliable and  
responsible political participants. (Para 3.21) 
 
25.  The Committee also observes tha t surveys indicate that youth g lobally 
have significant political awareness and knowledge. This is evident through 
youth-led movements such as Fridays for Future and March for Our Lives, 
highlighting their capacity to rally and champion critical soci al and 
political concerns. (Para 3.22) 
 
26.  The Committee, therefore, suggests reducing the minimum age 
requirement for candidacy in Assembly Elections. The Committee believes 
that this measure can promote a wider range of viewpoints in po licy 
deliberations and results. Additi onally, younger candidates can  h e l p  
connect different generations, facilitating discussions and cooperation. This 
can boost the credibility and faith in the political process. (Para 3.23) 
 
27.  The Committee suggests that both the Election Commission and t he 
Government should prioritize providing comprehensive civic educ ation 
programs to equip young people with the knowledge and skills ne cessary 
for political engagement. They can consider successful models f rom other 
57

 
 
countries, like Finland's citize nship education, and adapt them  
accordingly. (Para 3.24) 
 
28.  The Committee urges Governments , political parties, and youth 
organisations to work together towards enabling greater youth 
participation in decision-making processes. This can be achieve d through 
collaborations between governments and youth organisations and by 
promoting youth-led initiatives s uch as candidate training prog rams and 
mentorship schemes. By embracin g the potential of its youth and  creating 
an inclusive democratic process, India can foster a dynamic and  diverse 
political arena that empowers young individuals to contribute t owards the 
country's development. ( P a r a  3 . 2 5 )      
     ******* 
  
58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  
59

 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Per sonnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 04.30 PM on the 21 st December, 2021 
in Room No. 63, Parliament House,  New Delhi – 110001.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
(ii) Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
(iii) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
(iv) Shri P.Wilson 
(v) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
(vi) Shri Pradan Baruah 
(vii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(viii) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(ix) Shri Suresh Pujari 
(x) Shri A. Raja 
(xi) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xii) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xiii) Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
(xiv) Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
 Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
         Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Mohd. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 
60

 
 
WITNESSES 
 
I. LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
 
(i) Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Secretary; and 
(ii) Shri Diwakar Singh, Joint Secretary. 
 
II. ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
(i) Shri Sudeep Jain, Sr. Deputy Election Commissioner; and 
(ii) Shri Vijay Kumar Pandey, Director . 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman we lc om e d the  Mem bers to the  m ee ting of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda for the meeting i.e. presentation of 
the Secretary, Legislative Department and representatives of Election Commission 
of India on the subject "Status of Common Electoral Roll for co nducting elections 
in the Country".   
 
3. On arrival of the witnesses, t he Chairman welcomed the Secre tary, 
Legislative Department and offi cers of the Election Commission of India (ECI), 
and thereafter, asked them to apprise the Committee of their vi ews on the subject. 
The witnesses were also requested to apprise the Committee abou t various legal 
provisions which were proposed to be amended; States/UTs not us ing Common 
Electoral Rolls for legislative/local bodies' elections, and ef forts made by the ECI 
in this regard.  
4. The Secretary, Legislative De partment submitted that for Par liamentary and 
Assembly constituencies’ electora l rolls are prepared by the EC I, whereas the 
local bodies electoral roll is p repared by the State Election C ommission (SEC) 
under Article 243K and 243ZA. While making her presentation, sh e apprised the 
Committee that the Union Cabinet had approved amendment to Sect ion 14(b) of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (RP Act, 1950) so th at four qualifying 
dates be provided in the RP Ac t, 1950 for making revision of th e common 
electoral roll, and the same has been passed by the Parliament on 20.12.2021. She 
also added that it will help States to adopt the common elector al roll for local 
bodies prepared by the Election Co mmission of India, thereby, s aving time and 
61

 
 
financial resources of the Government. She also apprised that 2 6 States have 
agreed to use electoral data prepared by the ECI for local body elections. 
5. Sr. Deputy Election Commissi oner made a detailed PowerPoint Presentation 
on various aspects of common electoral roll and briefed the Com mittee about the 
broader legal aspects involved  in the matter. The ECI submitted  that by sharing 
electoral data with State Elec tion Commissions (SECs), the ECI only acts as 
facilitator and it does not inter fere with the working of SECs.  He also informed 
that for local body elections, many States are using electoral roll prepared by the 
ECI after inviting claims, objections, necessary additions/ del etions, etc. He added 
that some States like Maharashtra and Goa are treating electora l roll prepared by 
ECI as final and using it for local body elections, whereas Sta tes like Arunachal 
Pradesh, Nagaland, Utta rakhand and Uttar Prade sh are currently not using ECI 
data for local body elections. He informed that with the recent  amendment in the 
RP Act, 1950, the cut-off dates for revision of electoral roll will be done every 
quarter. 
6. Chairman and Members of the Committee then raised queries wi th regard to 
Constitutional validity and implications of common electoral ro ll on powers of 
State Governments; link between  common electoral roll and propo sal of 
simultaneous elections; implications of linking Aadhar with Electronic 
Electoral Photo Identity Card and its implications  in case of data divergence; 
control and supervision of State El ection Commissions by the ECI; Study 
conducted on merits/demerits of common electoral roll; pendency of common 
electoral roll for more than 20 years;  impact of common electoral roll on 
delimitation process, instances of meeting/s of ECI with the Prime Minister; etc. 
7. Sr. Deputy Election Commissi oner replied to some queries and thereafter for 
queries which were not replied to, the Chairman asked them to f urnish written 
submission to the Committee expeditiously so that the Committee  can hold 
another meeting on this subject, soon.    
8. A verbatim record of the proc eedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.      The meeting adjourned at 05.35 PM.  
 
NEW DELHI                                                        VINAY SHANKAR SINGH 
62

 
 
29thDECEMBER, 2021                                                                  DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
  
63

 
 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justi ce met at 12.30 PM on Monday, t he 9 th 
January, 2023 in Committee Room No. - 3, Block - 'A', First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati  Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh  Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala  Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shri Sanjay Raut 
(vi) Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
(vii) Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
(viii) Shri P. Wilson 
 
Lok Sabha 
(ix) Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
(x) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(xi) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(xii) Shri Jasbir Singh  Gill 
(xiii) Shri Raghu  Rama Krishna  Raju Kanumuru 
(xiv) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xv) Shrimati  Sandhya Ray 
(xvi) Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma
64

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director  
 Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary  
 Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary  
 
WITNESSES 
 
ELECTION  COMMISSION  OF INDIA 
 
(1) Shri Dharmendra  Sharma, Sr.  Dy. Election Commissioner  
(2) Shri Nitesh Vyas, Sr. Dy. Election Commissioner  
(3) Dr. Ranbir Singh, Special Officer  
(4) Shri R.K. Gupta, Dy. Election Commissioner  
(5) Shri Hirdesh Kumar, Dy. Election Commissioner  
(6) Dr. Neeta Verma, Director General  
 
LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT  
 
 Shri  Diwakar Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative  Counsel  
2.    At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Comm ittee 
and apprised them about the agend a of the meeting. He informed the Members 
that the representatives of Legi slative Department and Election  Commission of 
India have been invited for taking their oral evidence on the s ubject 'Specific 
aspects of Election Process and their reform'. 
 
(on arrival of witnesses) 
3.     The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Legislative 
Department and Election Commission of India and asked them to b rief the 
Committee on the following topics, namely, Status of Common Ele ctoral Roll 
for conducting elections in the Country; False declarations dur ing filing of 
65

 
 
nomination for elections; and Es tablishing parity between the m inimum age of 
voting and contesting elections to Parliament/State Legislatures/local  bodies. 
H e  f u r t h e r  a s k e d  t h e m  t o  a p p r i s e  the Committee about the presen t status of 
Remote voting and Linking of Aadhar with Electoral Photo Identi ty Card. He 
requested the representatives to  enlighten the Committee about the 
implications of these reforms, legal provisions that may have t o be amended in 
case of their implementation, vi ews of states, UTs and other st akeholders and  
the  efforts made by ECI to e ffect these reforms so  far.  
 
4.    Speaking on Remote Voting, the representative of the Election 
Commission said that it will boost the voter turnout by increas ing the 
participation of domestic migrants. He said that ECI is examinin g the 
technological, administrative an d legal challenges involved in 
operationalization of remote voting. He further said that the R eport of the 
Committee of officers, on Domestic Migrants constituted by ECI in 2016, in 
the context of a petition in H on'ble Supreme Court is under act ive 
consideration. ECI also held consultation with academicians, sc ientists 
from reputed organizations and PSU manufacturers.  
 
5.   The Committee was apprised that ECI developed  a prototype  o f   
Remote voting machine. The Committee was told  that  operationalization  of  
remote voting  necessitates  amendments  to  the  Representation  of  
Peoples Act, the conduct of Elections Rules b esides consensus  among all 
stakeholders   involved. 
6.    Speaking on Common Electoral Roll, the representative of ECI  said that 
having Common Electoral Rolls for  Parliamentary, Assembly and l ocal bodies 
elections would reduce wastage of expenditure and unnecessary d uplication of 
work. 
7.  Regarding Aadhar- Electoral Photo Identity Card , the representative said 
that the purpose of the linkage is to establish the identity of  electors, authenticate 
entries in electoral rolls and also to identify registration of  name of the same 
person in more than one constituency or more than once in the same constituency. 
 
66

 
 
8. Thereafter, the representatives of ECI spoke at length about th e legal 
provisions governing false declar ations during filing of nomina tion for 
e l e c t i o n s  a n d  E s t a b l i s h i n g  p a r i t y  b e t w e e n  t h e  m i n i m u m  a g e  o f  v oting and 
contesting elections to Parliament/State Legislatures/local bod ies, relevant 
Supreme Court judgments and views of the Commission. 
 
9. Then, Members raised queries and  sought clarifications on issue s such 
as Right of the private citizen to file a complaint against fal se affidavits , 
challenges  involved  in  opera tionalization  of  remote  votin g, technological 
barriers in the voting process, free and fair ele ctions, consultation with 
political parties among others. The representatives of ECI resp onded to some 
of the queries and assured to send written replies to unanswere d queries in due 
course. 
 
(witnesses  then withdrew) 
 
10. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 2.50 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                        P.NARAYANAN            
9th January, 2023                                                                           DIRECTOR
    
  
67

 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on  Monday, 
31.07.2023, in Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri A. Raja 
(xiv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xvi) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xvii) Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
(xviii) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
68

 
 
3. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to  the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them about  the agenda of the meeting i.e . Consideration 
and adoption of the draft 131 st Report on the subject "Review of functioning of 
Recruitment Organizations of Government of India "; draft 132 nd Report on the 
subject "Specific Aspects of Election Process and their Reforms "; and  draft 133rd 
Report on the subject " Judicial Processes and their Reforms". 
3.        The Committee discussed the draf t Reports in detail. Some membe rs 
suggested minor modifications in the draft Reports which were a greed to. The 
Committee, thereafter, adopted the  draft Reports unanimously an d authorized its 
Chairman to carry out the corrections as suggested by Members a nd other patent 
errors in the Reports. 
4.      Thereafter, the Committee decided to present these Repo rts to Both the 
Houses of the Parliament. The Committee also authorised the Cha irman to finalise 
the exact dates of presentation of the Reports in both the Hous es and to nominate 
the Members for presenting the Reports. 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.00 PM. 
  
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
31st July, 2023                                                                                      DIRECTOR   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
70

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Aam Aadmi Party
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
From : secretary@aamaadmiparty.org
Subject : Specific aspects of Election Process and
their reforms - regarding !
To : Committee Section PPG <rs-
cpers@sansad.nic.in>
Email Committee Section PPG
Specific aspects of Election Process and their reforms - regarding !
Thu, Jul 20, 2023 12:01 PM
1 attachment
 Date: 20.07.2023 
To
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi
(Chairman)
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice
Parliament of India
Sir,
We are in receipt of your letter LAFEAS-PP19/7/2022-PPG-RSS dated 04.07.2023, whereby you
have sought the views of the Aam Aadmi Party on ‘Specific Aspects of Election
Process and their reforms’  for perusal by the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, and Law & Justice (“Committee”).
2. We are pleased to share below the views of our party on the specific aspects as listed in
your letter.
i. Status of Common Electoral Roll for conducting elections in the
country
3. The issue of Common Electoral Roll appears to have merit, but it needs to be
operationalised in a manner that it does not compromise the federal nature of our country and the
power of states to administer municipal-level elections in spirit of the 73rd and 74th amendments
to the Constitution.
4. At present, a single voter list is used for elections conducted by the Election Commission
of India (“ ECI”), while states prepare the electoral rolls for local body elections as per their
specific municipal/panchayat governance statutes. As per Article 243K and 243ZA and the relevant
State laws, the State Election Commission supervises, directs, and controls the preparation and
revision of electoral rolls for elections to the local bodies.
5. Even at present, some states do borrow and use the electoral roll prepared by the Election
Commission of India in entirety, and some utilise it as the basis for preparing and revising their
own rolls. On the other hand, some states conduct their own independent exercise to prepare the
rolls. As per Article 243K and 243ZA of the Constitution, this is the sole prerogative of the States.
6. A common electoral roll will certainly save effort and expenditure, however, there should
not be a blanket obligation on State Election Commissions to use only the electoral rolls prepared
by the ECI. State Commissions should have the power to use the ECI list as the base and amend it
as per the timelines of their own local elections. Many states, in their municipal/panchayati
election laws, entitle the citizens to vote if they are 18 years or above, at least 15 days before the
conduct of elections, whereas as per the Electoral Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021, the ECI updates
its rolls only four times a year. The right of the citizens to vote should not be taken away by
71

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
imposition of an unamendable common electoral roll. The quarterly updation by ECI may not
reflect the actual list of voting adults as on 15 days before the conduct of elections. In such cases,
the State Commissions should have the power to amend the ECI electoral rolls as per the timeline
of their local body elections. This will also be an efficient mechanism for the ECI for updating its
list of voters, as the amendments made by the State Election Commissions would provide a more
recent and accurate picture of the voters in a ward or constituency. The ECI must be obligated to
include the amendments made by the State Commissions to the electoral roll every time it updates
the list as per the prevailing law. This synergy of the election authorities at both levels can be
beneficial for the voters to exercise their constitutional right to vote.
7. Further, municipal and panchayati wards very often do not coincide with the parliamentary
and state legislature constituencies. A common electoral roll should not encroach on the power of
state election commissions to conduct their own delimitation exercise.
8. We note that the 255th Law Commission report has advocated for Common Electoral Roll.
However, the Commission’s recommendations must be read in light of the concerns indicated
above.
ii. Feasibility of introducing ‘Remote Voting’ in India
9. We wholeheartedly believe in the objective of ‘No Voter Left Behind’, but we also believe
that electoral reforms must be planned to the detail, and executed with the larger principles of
democracy and democratic politics in mind. While remote voting will be a significant step towards
enfranchising migrant citizens, we feel that the mechanisms and machines proposed thus far fail to
address multiple issues/queries/concerns associated with such a humongous task before
undertaking the technical part of the whole exercise.
10. The ECI had conducted a discussion on 16th January 2023 with political parties regarding
improving participation of domestic migrants using remote voting. It was indicated in the
presentation that the country has been able to achieve around 67% of voting till last general
elections, i.e. 2019 and ECI aims to bring the remaining 33 percent to vote too. It was indicated
that most of these 33% consisted of youth, urban voters and migrant voters. However, in the
presentation notes of ECI itself it was indicated that most of the issues (non-technical) have not
been resolved or even discussed yet.
11. In the context of identification of migrant voters, AAP had expressed the following views
to the ECI, which are worth noting for the Committee as well:
● No study has been conducted so far to substantiate the claim that 33% of voters who
do not vote are from youth, urban and migratory voters only. Even the definition of
'migrant worker’ has not been culled out by either ECI or the Committee. There is an
urgent need for a comprehensive survey of voters, particularly interviewing them in respect
of what challenges they face in casting their votes.
●
There does not seem to be any study to arrive at an approximate percentage of
migratory voters within these 33%. Rather the ECI has itself indicated that “ There is no
central database available for migration within the country for the
purpose as required for the matter under discussion .” Thus, the proposal is
lacking in the most crucial aspect, and is akin to putting the horse before the cart.
●
It has been observed in many local elections that the voting percentage is much higher.
Large voter turnouts in such elections can be attributed to multiple reasons including
efforts of candidates in bringing these voters to the polling booth. This would mean that a
detailed study needs to be undertaken to understand the reasons for 33% of voters not
coming to the polls and not attribute it to mostly migrant workers.
●
It must also be noted that migration in India is predominantly intra-state, forming 88%,
while inter-state migration accounts for only 12% (Census, 2011). Very often, intra-state
migrants also do not have the wherewithal, or leaves, to travel to their home constituency.
This will be particularly clear with an illustration: a person may have migrated from any of
the districts of Vidarbha to Mumbai for employment. In such situations, it has not been
clarified whether the remote voting facility will be available even within the state where the
election is being conducted.
72

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
● There has been no discussion yet on how such migrant voters across the country would
come to know about the elections in their constituency and how would they enrol assuming
that most of these migratory workers would find it extremely challenging to enrol for such
a process. Improper, discriminatory, insensitive and lackadaisical approach of authorities
can result in non-granting of the enfranchisement which is the whole purpose of this
reform.
●
It has not been clarified how and when would political parties/candidates come to know
of such voters. This is crucial for candidates to be able to ascertain how they should
channel their efforts in order to reach out to the maximum number of voters casting votes
in their constituency of candidature.
12. We had also highlighted issues that will arise in the process of registering the migrant
voters:
● Flowing from the above set of issues is the consideration of the number and location of
remote voting machines that will be set up. If there is any threshold requirement
introduced by ECI later, with regards to the minimum number of voters to be present for
the remote voting facility to be provided, it will be legally and ethically suspect.
●
With regards to the pre-registration and verification of voters, we believe it is one of the
most critical steps in this entire reform, as it lays the foundation for who gets to vote, and
who is excluded. Unfortunately, migrant workers face several challenges in routine
engagement with the bureaucracy. In the absence of a clear standard operating procedure,
there is enough reason to be sceptical about how the process will roll out.
13. The other major issue we have noticed in this proposal is with regards to the campaigning
required by political parties and their candidates. We believe that the ECI’s remote voting proposal
would not provide a level playing field for the regional parties and/or independent candidates in
relation to national parties. It is lopsided, and advantageous for large political parties with
immense resources at their disposal.
●
The proposal will require candidates of the regional parties or independent candidates
to reach out to their voters across the country in the limited time and resources available
for the elections, even as the proposal will make it imperative for them to do so in order to
compete with national parties! As it is, electoral funding remains an opaque system in
India, with the majority of funds going to the current ruling party at the centre. The system
will make an already unequal system further entrenched.
●
With no clarity on feasible criteria to put up remote booths, it is not clear as to how the
political parties/candidates would plan the presence of polling agents across the country.
●
The new system will make it increasingly difficult for agents, if set up at these remote
booths, to be able to identify the voters, particularly in the absence of credible data
regarding the location of migrant workers.
●
It has not been clarified as to how the Model Code of Conduct will be implemented in
these remote locations and how it would be ensured that parties/candidates with heavy
purses or muscle power are not influencing these voters.
●
Whereas on one side it is the demand of the time that election expenditure is reduced
as much as possible, this particular mechanism will throw the budget haywire of each and
every candidate if they have to campaign across the country and have polling agents in an
unplanned number of booths outside their constituency.
14. Therefore, before considering the proposal for remote voting, first and foremost, we need
to gather credible data with regards to the state of origin and destination locations of the migrant
workers, for us to comment on the feasibility and practicability of this proposal. Secondly, detailed
deliberations must be conducted with state governments, organisations representing migrant
workers etc. to devise a feasible framework for achieving more voting rather than straightaway
arriving at a technical solution which would create more issues and open up multiple avenues of
distrusting the election results rather than resolving them.
15. Needless to say, the proposal for remote voting involves immensely high stakes. Thus,
administrative and execution issues must be resolved at the outset, since they will – in substance
– determine the right of citizens to vote and for candidates to contest elections. While ECI did
attempt to demonstrate the working of the remote voting machines, technical prowess can only be
73

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
an assistance in addressing the aforementioned issues. It cannot be the end goal of reform, while
leaving legal and administrative issues unresolved.
16. To conclude, the Aam Aadmi party is of the opinion that the ECI’s proposal for remote
voting in its current form suffers from serious drawbacks of lack of information and non-
consideration of critical logistical issues. Any proposal for remote voting should be backed by a
study of the on-ground circumstances, including numeration, identification, registration of voters
etc., and a careful and nuanced study of logistical arrangements to ensure that the proposal is a
success. We have attached a copy of AAP’s response to the ECI submitted in February 2023 on its
proposal for remote voting for your kind perusal.
iii.
False declarations during filing of nomination for elections
17. The Aam Aadmi Party strongly supports reforms that are intended towards making
elections transparent, making the electorate better-informed, and making politics corruption-free.
There should be every possible incentive for election candidates to provide correct information in
their election affidavits, which will help the citizens learn about their antecedents and accordingly
make an informed choice.
18. However, we note that the Committee has not provided any concrete proposals in this
respect. There are several questions that the Committee needs to address before eliciting views on
this subject:
●
What is the nature of reform that the Committee envisages to discourage candidates
from giving false information in election affidavits?
●
Does the Committee advocate disqualification of candidates for providing false
declarations in filing of nominations?
●
Is the Committee considering increasing the duration of imprisonment for providing
false declarations in filing of nominations?
●
What are the safeguards to prevent misuse of such a provision for disqualification of
candidates on flimsy and frivolous grounds?
●
What are the safeguards to ensure that a strict penal action is taken only on wilful
misrepresentation?
●
How does the Committee seek to ensure that only major and substantive
misrepresentations are penalised?
19. The Committee would appreciate that provisions relating to information provided in filing
of election nominations can be subject to misuse, and therefore, careful consideration must be
spared before making any proposal so that unintended outcomes are avoided and the amendment
is able to realise the spirit of the reform.
20. Thus, we would require a substantive proposal, possibly in the form of a Consultation
Paper, to be able to comment on this matter.
iv. Establishing parity between the minimum age of voting and
contesting elections to Parliament/ State Legislatures/ local bodies
21. The Aam Aadmi Party wholeheartedly supports the view that the minimum age for
contesting elections to Parliament/ State Legislatures/ local bodies should be reduced. It may be
reduced to 21, or even 18, for the lower house and to 25 for the upper house.
22. It is true that at the time of drafting of the Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar had advocated for
the age limits for contesting elections as they stand. But that was because he was of the view that
only people with some degree of higher qualification and a certain amount of knowledge and
practical experience in the affairs of the world should serve the legislature. As far as Rajya Sabha
is concerned, it was envisaged as the house of ‘seniors’ and was originally intended to
accommodate people of high reputation similar to House of Lords in UK. Thus, the Rajya Sabha
brings in these highly skilled people through indirect elections. This was the rationale for keeping
the minimum age of members as 30.
23. However, with rise in education levels and opportunities, the youth of our country have
also shown tremendous promise of skill, leadership and vision. They exhibit maturity at a much
younger age, and are immensely politically aware. The proportion of urban youngsters showing
74

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
interest in politics is constantly increasing. Today’s India is not marked by the same turmoil, low
literacy levels, and critical shortage of skilled workforce in the political sphere as it was during the
time of independence.
24. By the sixty-first amendment to the Constitution in 1988, the voting age in elections to Lok
Sabha and Vidhan Sabha was reduced from 21 to 18. This was a highly progressive step, and it is
our responsibility to further this progressive agenda that the Parliament once embarked upon.
25. India’s demographic dividend lies in its large young population. India is perhaps the
youngest country in the world but the average age of an MP stood at 63 in 2020. More than half
our population is under the age of 30. The United Nations Population Fund has stated that the
youngsters of India could be a source of innovation, new thinking and lasting solutions. While
there are obvious limitations in extending electoral entitlements below the age of 18, at least the
people in the age group of 18-25 should have the avenue to enter electoral politics. We must
acknowledge that today, education and employment for the youth has become a far more complex
field, along with emerging issues such as mental health, substance abuse, application of artificial
intelligence in all walks of life etc. Lowering the age for contesting elections will give a scope of
representation to these young people, on critical views that affect them and the future of our
country, who will be able to speak for themselves at the highest tables of the country.
26. If young people, below the age of 25, do win elections, it will be only because they would
have the will of the people behind them. The people of a constituency may see promise in these
young candidates, and may decide to throw their weight behind them. All democratic institutions
must respect this popular will. In fact, the young people can be significant game-changers in local
body elections, where candidates need to be connected with the grassroot issues. Needless to say,
this will be a watershed moment in India’s decentralisation drive, and will drastically improve the
condition of our institutions of local self governance.
27. The idealism and hope of the younger population should be capitalised to weed out
corruption, and to infuse new energy in our dilapidated system of governance. This will also
encourage older politicians to grapple with the new age challenges of technology, climate change,
gender justice with more vigour and nuance. The lowering of the age barrier will also be pivotal in
increasing the trust between young people and politicians, and in preventing the latter from
becoming complacent. It will enable the youth to appreciate the merits of democratic governance
and our Constitution from a very young age. Our youth is essential for making a mature
democracy, where democratic ideals and spirit percolate down the age groups, into varied aspects
of life. This will be a model of true enfranchisement, and will turn Dr. Ambedkar’s idea of
constitutional morality into a reality.
28. It may be noted that save USA, most major democracies such as France, UK, Germany
and Australia already allow candidates as young as 18 to contest elections. The UK reduced it from
21 to 18 in 2006. France has a minimum age bar of 18 for the lower house and 24 for the upper
house. In Israel and Indonesia, this age is 21 for the lower house, still lesser than the benchmark
of 25 that we observe. In France and Iran, one can even become the President at 18 and 21
respectively. Scotland even allows 16 year olds to vote.
29. We note that the ECI has stated that the age of 18 is too young for contesting elections
and that there cannot be parity in the voting age and the age of contesting elections, and that at
25, a person has the maturity to understand intricacies of politics and law-making. This is a highly
patronising and pedantic approach. On the contrary, youngsters today have shown unprecedented
maturity and several of them have become successful at a very young age.
30. To conclude, the Aam Aadmi wholeheartedly supports the view that the lower age limit for
contesting elections to the Parliament, State Assembly, and Local Bodies should be reduced so that
our youth is provided with greater scope and avenue for political participation.
* * *
31. We believe that the Committee would take up our views in earnest and give them due
consideration before making any recommendations to the Parliament.
Your sincerely,
75

9/4/23, 5:44 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=165620&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1
Pankaj Kr Gupta
National secretary
Aam Aadmi Party
Note: We are also attaching the previous response sent to ECI - with respect to "  Improving voter
participation of domestic migrants"
Aam Aadmi Party Mail - Improving voter participation of domestic
migrants - regarding !.pdf
169 KB 
76

77

78