Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
 
REPORT NO. 
55
FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
The Registration of Births and Deaths
(Amendment) Bill, 2012


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

43
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
The Registration of Births and Deaths
(Amendment) Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-109

ACRONYMS
AIR – All India Radio
NRI – Non Resident Indian
CRC – Civil Registration Code
IGR – Integrated Genomics Resources
UT – Union Territory
SC – Supreme Court

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—9
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 10—11
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 13—20
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 21 —42
I. The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012 ......................... 23—34
II. Lists of Acts Enacted by State/UT Governments for Compulsory Registration
of Marriage ................................................................................................................... 3 5
III. List of Rules framed by States/UT Governments for Compulsory Registration
of Marriage ................................................................................................................... 3 6
IV . Comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions contained
in Memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the provisions
of the Bill ..................................................................................................................... 37—42

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
*1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
@9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Arun Yadav
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri S. Semmalai
15. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
16. Shri Lalu Prasad
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
19. Shrimati Deepa Dashmunsi
20. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
21. Shri P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
22. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
23. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
24. Shri Pinaki Misra
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
28. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
29. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Nominated to be Chairman of the Committee w.e.f.  4 th May, 2012 vice  resignation by Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi.
@ Nominated to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.  4 th May, 2012.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Jesudas Seelam
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
9. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
10. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Shri S. Semmalai
19. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
23. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
24. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
@25. Vacant
26. Vacant
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal,  Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo,  Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
@ Vacancy caused due to induction of Shrimati Chandresh Kumari in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 28 th October, 2011.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do
hereby present the Fifty Fifth Report on the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill,
2012 (Annexure – I). The Bill seeks to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
the 7 th May, 2012 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 9 th May, 2012 for examination and
report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communiqué was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations/individuals/
experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 21
st June, 2012. The Committee
also heard the views of State Government of Goa and non-official witnesses in its meeting held on
12
th October, 2012. The Committee had interaction with Governments of Goa and Kerala at Panaji and
Kochi on 3 rd and 5 th January, 2013 respectively and with Government of Odisha and Andaman and
Nicobar Islands at Bhubaneswar and Port Blair on 16 th and 18 th February, 2013 respectively. The
Chairperson, Goa State Commission for Women and Members of Bar Association of Maharashtra and
Goa, Kerala, Odisha and Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands also appeared before the
Committee.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Legislative Department thereon;
(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
organisations/institutions/individuals such as Shri Gurdip Singh, Shri R.K. Bhatia and
Dr. K.L. Madhok and representatives of the Department of Law, State Government of
Goa in its meeting held on 12
th October, 2012; and
(iv) 211 Report of Law Commission of India on Laws on Registration of Marriage and
Divorce – A proposal for Consolidation and Reform (October, 2008).
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 49638) dated the 10 th May, 2012.

6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 22 nd February, 2013.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 22, 2013 Committee on Personnel
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 7 th May, 2012. It was referred by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on
9
th May, 2012 for examination and report.
2. The Bill seeks to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 in order to make
registration of marriage of all citizens compulsory. The amendment proposed to the Registration of
Births and Deaths Act, 1969 was in pursuance to judgement of Supreme Court pronounced in the case
of Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar on 14
th February, 2006.
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill inter-alia reads as under:–
“The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks to amend the Registration
of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969) so as to provide for registration of marriages
irrespective of religion professed and practiced by the parties to the marriage. At present the
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 provides only for the regulation of registration
of births and deaths and for matters connected therewith.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar (AIR 2006 SC 1158) in its judgment
dated 14-02-2006 has directed the Government that marriages of all persons who are citizens
of India belonging to various religious denominations should be made compulsorily registerable
in their respective States where such marriages are solemnised and, inter-alia, directed that as
and when the Central Government enacts a comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed
before that Court for scrutiny.
The Committee on Empowerment of Women (2006-2007) in its Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) on Plight of Indian Women Deserted by Non Resident Indian (NRI) Husbands presented
to Lok Sabha on the 13th August, 2007, has, inter-alia, expressed the view that all marriages,
irrespective of religion should be compulsorily registered and desired that the Government to
make registration of all marriages mandatory, making the procedure simpler, affordable and
accessible.
The 18th Law Commission of India in its 205th Report titled “Proposal to Amend the
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 and other Allied Laws”, inter-alia, recommended that
“registration of marriages within a stipulated period, of all the communities, viz. Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, etc., should be made mandatory by the Government”. Further, the 18th Law
Commission in its 211th Report titled “Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce —A
proposal for Consolidation and Reform”, has recommended for Parliamentary legislation on
compulsory registration of marriages which will bring country-wide uniformity in the substantive
law relating to registration and will be helpful in achieving the desired goal.
The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969, inter-alia, provides for Registration
establishments consisting of Registrar-General, Chief Registrar and registration division, District
Registrars and Registrars. It also provides procedures for registration of births and deaths and
for maintenance of records and statistics. Further, by virtue of the powers conferred under
section 30 of the aforesaid Act, rules for compulsory registration of births and deaths have
been framed by the State Governments and Union territory Administrations. Therefore, it is
proposed to amend the aforesaid Act suitably to include registration of marriages as well within
its scope so that the existing administrative machinery would also be able to carry out

2
registration of marriages in accordance with the specified procedures and be able to maintain
necessary records and statistics for registration of marriages also.
Having regard to the aforesaid directions of the Supreme Court, report of the Committee on
Empowerment of Women and recommendations of the Law Commission referred to in the
foregoing paragraphs, it is proposed to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969
to provide for compulsory registration of marriages without affecting in any manner the State
law making provisions for compulsory registration of marriages in their respective States. For
this purpose, suitable provisions are incorporated in the Bill to avoid any duplication of
registration of marriages under the proposed Central law and the State law. It is also proposed
to provide in the Bill that the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (after the enactment
of proposed amendments) shall not apply to any person who has registered his marriage under
any other law for the time being in force including a State Act providing for registration of
marriages or with any other authority under that law and nothing contained in this Act shall
affect the validity of the marriages registered under that law. Further, the parties to the
marriage, whose marriage has been registered under this Act shall not be required to get their
marriage registered under the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or any other law for the time being
in force. Moreover, the registration of marriages thereunder shall not affect any right recognised
or acquired by any party to marriage under any law, custom or usage.
The proposed Bill will provide for registration of marriages of all persons who are citizens of
India belonging to various religious denominations and be beneficial to women, as the
registration certificate would provide evidentiary value in matrimonial and maintenance cases
and prevent unnecessary harassment meted out to them. It will also provide evidentiary value
in the matters of age of parties, custody of children and the right of children born out of such
marriages.
4. Clause 6 of the Bill which seeks to amend Section 2 of the Registration of Births and Deaths
Act, 1969 defines the term “marriage” as follows:–
“marriage” means and includes a marriage solemnized between a male and female belonging
to any caste or religion or tribe under any law for the time being in force and includes
marriages solemnized under any custom or usage in any form or manner recognized by law or
the marriage registered under any law for the time being in force and also includes remarriage” .
As per the provisions of the Bill, the parties to the marriage who intend to get their marriage
registered may send the requisite document and fee to the Registrar for the purpose of registration
within the time prescribed. Clause 8 of the Bill casts responsibility upon the following persons to
transmit information of marriage solemnised by them or occurring in the area of which that person
is the incharge, to the Registrar of marriage:–
(a) Head of the house in respect of marriage solemnised in that house;
(b) Religious Priest, Trustee or Incharge of the religions place which includes temple,
church, mosque, synagogue in case marriage solemnised in the religious place;
(c) Person incharge of choultry, chattram, hotel, etc. where marriages are solemnised; and
(d) Head man of village or office Incharge of local Police Station in case marriage is
solemnised in open field.
Under the Bill the aforesaid persons could be held liable to a fine up to Rs. 50/- for their failure
to transmit information and requisite documents to the appropriate authority for registration of marriage
of parties willing for the registration. The Bill, however, in Clause 10 provides for registration of
marriage after the expiry of prescribed time period on payment of late fees.

3
5. The Secretary, Legislative Department in his deposition before the Committee on 21 st June,
2012 mentioned that on the basis of  direction/observations of Supreme Court, the Reports of the Law
Commission and Report of the Committee on Empowerment of Women, the Legislative Department
is of the view that the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 may be amended to provide for:–
(i) Compulsory registration of marriage without affecting the State Laws providing for
compulsory registration of marriage in their respective States;
(ii) Avoid duplication of registration of marriages both under the proposed Central Legislation
and State Laws;
(iii) The registration of marriages under the proposed Bill not to effect any rights recognised
or acquired by any party to marriage under any law, custom or usage; and
(iv) Registration of marriage to provide evidentiary value in the matters of custody of
children, right of children born from the wedlock of the two persons whose marriage
is registered and also as regards the age of the parties to the marriage.
5.1 Elaborating further on the Bill, the Secretary, Legislative Department stated that in the Bill, it
is proposed that the parties to the marriage whose marriage has been registered under this Act after
its enactment shall not be required to get their marriage registered under any other law in force
including the State Act or Rules. Furthermore, provisions of this Act shall not apply to any person
who has already registered his or her marriage under any extant law including a State Act providing
for registration of marriages with any other authority under that law. The Secretary, Legislative
Department mentioned that compulsory registration of marriage is a measure to save women being
victims of bigamy/polygamy relationship, desertion, matrimonial dispute, property disputes, etc. It
would also empower a woman to secure her maintenance rights during the subsistence of marriage
and even after its dissolution. The registration of marriage will also help in checking the child
marriages and forced marriages or marriages without consent. It would also prevent exploitation and
trafficking of women by NRI husbands and foreigners under the guise of marriage. It would also
provide evidentiary value in the matter of custody of children and age of parties to marriage.
5.2 The Committee was further informed that the validity of marriage registered under any other
law will not be affected by the enactment of the proposed legislation. The registration of marriages
under the proposed law shall not affect any right recognised or acquired by any party to marriages
under any law, custom or usage. The provision of registration of marriage under the proposed
legislation was in addition to, not derogation of any other law for time being in force.
5.3 The Committee was also informed that the existing establishments consisting of Registrar-
General of India, Chief Registrar, District Registrars and other Registrars at local level in States under
the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 would be given additional responsibility of registration
of marriage in addition to registration of births and deaths.
Solemnisation and Registration of Marriage under Different Personal Laws
6.0 Marriages are generally solemnised under the personal laws of either of both parties or one of
the parties to the marriage. Marriage being under the Entry 5 of List III of Seventh Schedule of
Constitution is under concurrent jurisdiction of Union and State Governments. There is multiplicity of
personal laws in our country. Solemnisations of marriage between parties to the marriage who are
Hindus are governed by Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Marriage where one of the parties belong to
Christian community is governed by the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872. Parsies are governed by
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936. Marriages of Muslim and Jews are solemnised under their
classical religious laws. The vast population of tribals solemnise their marriage in accordance with their
unwritten customary law. Besides personal laws, there are general laws which are secular in nature,

4
namely, Special Marriage Act, 1954 and Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 under which any party belonging
to any religion or sect can solemnise and register their marriage. There are local laws in the different
States which govern marriages in addition to aforesaid personal and general laws. State of Goa, Union
Territory of Daman and Diu and renocants (those who opted for the local Franco-Indian Law at the
time of assimilation of the territory into Union of India in 1954) of Union Territory of Puducherry are
governed by distinct matrimonial legislation in view of their association with Portuguese and French,
respectively, in the past.
7.0 The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 governs marriage between two Hindus (including Buddhists,
Sikhs and Jains). It does not apply to Hindus in the State of Goa, Union Territory of Daman and Diu
and renocants of Union Territory of Puducherry. It does not extend to State of Jammu and Kashmir.
That State has enacted its own Hindu Marriage Act almost on the pattern of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955.
7.1 Section 7 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 prescribes for solemnisation of marriages between
Hindus through the religious rites of Saptpadi. Section 8 of the said Act enables the State Government
to make rules for registration of marriage. If the State Government make rules for compulsory
registration of marriage, violation thereof would attract nominal punishment with a fine of Rs. 25/-.
However, non-registration of marriage in that case will not affect validity of that marriage.
8. The Anand Marriage Act, 1909 governs marriages between Sikhs solemnised through their
religious rites ( Anand Karaj ). The Arya Marriage Validation Act, 1937 governs inter-caste, inter-sect
marriages among Hindus. Marriages under both Acts can be registered under Section 8 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955.
9. Registration of marriage is compulsory under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872. Part IV
of the Act (Sections 27-37) provides for registration of marriage solemnised by officiating Priest of
the Church. Part V of the Sub-Section (Sections 38-59) provides for solemnisation cum registration
of marriage directly by Marriage Registrar appointed under the said Act. The Parsi Marriage and
Divorce Act, 1936, (Section 6) also provides for compulsory registration of marriage.
10. The marriage in Muslim Personal Law is a contract and registration of marriage is private in
nature. The Muslim Marriage and Divorce Registration Act enacted by States (West Bengal, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Assam, Odisha, Meghalaya) provides for registration of Marriage which is voluntary in
nature. Under the Kazis Act, 1880 State Governments have appointed Kazis who used to solemnise
marriages ( Nikah) between Muslims and issue marriage certificate ( Nikahnama) which is signed by
the Kazi, parties to the marriage and two witnesses. The registration of marriage with the Kazi is
private in nature but is admissible as evidence for all legal purposes.
11. The marriages amongst Jews in India are solemnised by the Jew Priest known as Rabbis who
issues certificate of marriage to the parties to the marriage.
12. The Supreme Court in the case of Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar (2006) directed Government that
marriages of all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various religious domination should be
made compulsorily registerable in their respective States where such marriages are solemnised. Since
2006, most of the State Governments have framed Rules under different general and personal laws
governing marriage to make marriages registerable compulsorily. As per information made available to
the Committee by the Legislative Department of Government of India, ten States have enacted
legislation for compulsory registration of marriage. These States are Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Mizoram, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttarakhand ( Annexure-III).
As per information made available to the Committee by the said Department, fourteen State Governments/
Union Territories have framed rules for compulsory registration of marriage. These States are
Arunanchal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan,
Lakshadweep, Kerala, Puducherry, Dadra and Nager Haveli, Assam and Tripura ( Annexure-IV). The

5
Union Government in order to bring uniformity in the registration of marriage has introduced the
Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in Parliament to make registration of
marriage compulsory for all citizens of India irrespective of religion, practiced and professed.
13. Recommendation of the Law Commission of India
The issue of registration of marriages came up for consideration before the Law Commission
of India also. The Eighteenth Law Commission of  India in its 205th Report on “Proposal to Amend
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 and Other allied Laws” vide paragraph (iv) of the
recommendations has inter-alia recommended that ‘registration of marriages within a stipulated period,
of all the communities, viz. Hindu, Muslim, Christians, etc. should be made mandatory by the
Government’.  The Law Commission in its 211
th report, on “Laws on Registration of Marriage and
Divorce – a proposal for consolidation and Reform” vide paragraph (i) of the recommendations has
inter-alia recommended that a ‘Marriage and Divorce Registration Act’ should be enacted by Parliament
to be made applicable in the whole of India and to all citizens irrespective of their religion and personal
laws and without any exceptions or exemptions”.
14. The Law Commission of India in its 211
th Report (October, 2008) mentions that the Births,
Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 which precedes the Births and Deaths Registration
Act, 1969, still remains in force. Section 29 of the Act of 1969 mentions that no provision of the
said Act shall be in derogation to the provisions of the Act of 1886. The old Act (1886) requires the
Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages appointed under the Act to keep proper record of
marriage registers received by him/her from officials working under the provisions of the following
three Acts:–
(i) The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872;
(ii) The Special Marriage Act,1954; and
(iii) The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 .
Marriage certificate of parties married under the aforesaid law have to be transmitted to the
Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages of that State. In this context, it is relevant to note
that Section 48 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and Section 9 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act, 1936 prescribe the procedure for transmission of certificate of marriage to the Registrar-General
of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
Registration of Marriage in the State of Goa
15.0 Marriages in the State of Goa are compulsorily registerable irrespective of religion of parties
to the marriage without which the spouse is not eligible to inherit fifty percent share of income and
property of his/her better half. All marriages solemnised in the State of Goa need to be registered with
the Appropriate Authority of the State Government. The process of registration of marriage with the
State Government is initiated before its solemnisation under religious rites and ceremonies of the parties
to the marriage. The position of registration of marriage in the State of Goa is progressive in view
of the fact that it is governed under Civil Registration Code of 1914 which is mostly based on the
Portuguese Code of 1867. The Civil Registration Code has been allowed by the Union Government to
be in operation in that State after liberation of Goa (the then Union Territory of Goa, Daman, Diu)
by virtue of the Goa, Daman and Diu, Regulations of 1962 and 1963. Personal Laws enacted by the
Union Government have not been extended to the State of Goa and Union Territory of Daman and
Diu.
15.1 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the Law Secretary and State Registrar of
Goa in Delhi as well as at Panaji. They have explained to the Committee that registration of marriage

6
in the State of Goa is being done on secular basis. Even marriage of Roman Catholics solemnised
under canonical law need to be routed through the Civil Registration Office. Marriage of Christian
community could only to be solemnised by the Priest of the Church when No Objection Certificate
from the Sub-Registrar Office is produced before him. It was pointed out to the Committee that
application of provisions of the proposed legislation might entail following consequences for which the
application of this Act might not to be extended to the State of Goa:–
(i) Two marriage authorities may create overlapping and conflict in practical operation; and
(ii) Interference with protection given to Goa Personal Law at the time of liberation of Goa.
Registration of Marriage in the Union Territory of Puducherry .
16. The Committee was informed by the Government of Puducherry in their written submission
that in the Union territory of Puducherry, marriages of various communities are being registered either
with the Local Bodies Authorities under Municipal/Commune Panchayat limits under the provisions of
the Registration of Marriages by “Decret” dated 24.04.1880 or under the Hindu Marriage Act or the
Special Marriage Act by the Sub-Registrars of the Registration Department. Therefore, there will not
be any added advantage of introducing the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
Previously, the French Civil Code was used for registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages in the
Local Bodies of the Union territory of Puducherry. The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969
was implemented in March 1979 for registration of births and deaths and the Registration of Marriages
is still under the said French Civil Code.
Registration of marriages in the State of Kerala
17. In the status note submitted to the Committee, the State Government of Kerala mentioned that
Kerala Registration of Marriages (Common) Rules, 2008 stipulate compulsory registration of marriage
solemnised in that State, irrespective of the religion of the parties. The Rules were framed in
compliance of direction of Supreme Court pronounced on 14.2.2006 in the case of Seema Vs. Ashwani
Kumar. The Rules are now being implemented through the Director of Panchayat, who is Chief
Registrar of marriage.
Registration of marriages in the State of Odisha
18. The Committee was informed by the Government of Odisha in their written submission that
in Odisha, the registration of marriages were regulated under various Acts and Rules; namely,
(i) Odisha Mohammedan Marriages and Divorces Registration Act, 1949 and Rules, 1976 for Muslim
Community (Section-8 and Rule 2A) (ii) Odisha Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960 (Rules-4, 4A
and 4B) (iii) Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (Sections-6 and 9) and (iv) Special Marriage
Act, 1954 (Section-3). Pursuant to the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Seema- Vs-Ashwani
Kumar, the Odisha Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960 and the Odisha Mohammedan Marriages
& Divorces Registration Rules, 1976 were amended in the year 2006 and registration of marriages to
parties of Hindu and Muslim religions are compulsory since then.
18.1 The Committee was further informed that in order to facilitate registration of marriages among
Hindus, Additional Block Development Officers and in their absence Gram Panchayat Extension
Officers of the concerned Block, Deputy Commissioners of all Municipal Corporations and in their
absence the Establishment officers of the concerned Municipal Corporations and Executive officers of
all Municipalities and Notified Area Councils were appointed as Registrar under Rule 3 of the Odisha
Hindu Marriages Registration Rules, 1960. Also, under Section 3 of the Special Marriage Act, the Sub-
Registrar of the District and the Sub-Registrar of the sub-district were empowered to discharge the
functions of the Marriage Officers under the Act. Marriage Registrars appointed under the Christian

7
law and Mohammedan law, shall register the marriages solemnized at their level, being the licensing
authorities appointed by the State Government and submit the same information to the IGR, Odisha
who is the controlling and supervising authority of the registration of marriages pertaining to the Indian
Christian and Mohammedan.
18.2 The representatives of the State Government held the view that single and one setup should
be provided for registration of marriages irrespective of the religion to which the parties belong, in
order to avoid duplication through different set up of registering establishments and that there must
be one system to make compulsory registration of marriages.
Registration of marriages in the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands
19. In the written note submitted to the Committee, the UT of Anadaman and Nicobar Islands
stated that registration of marriages is being done under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and that in
Nicobar Islands, marriage officers were appointed under provisions of Indian Christian Marriage
Act, 1872. The Andaman and Nicobar Registration of Birth & Death Rules, 1982 have been framed
under the provisions of Registration of Birth and Death Act, 1969 and it provides for compulsory
registration of birth and death.
19.1 The Committee was informed that the Apex Court direction in Seema-vs-Ashwani Kumar has
been communicated to all Marriage Registration Officers and that nature, and scope, procedure
involved, conditionality applicable were varied in respect of registration of birth and death and
registration of marriage. In their opinion, a separate legislation and establishment for compulsory
registration of marriage was necessary.
Views of Non-Official Witnesses
20. The non-official witnesses appreciated the endeavour of Union Government to make registration
of marriage compulsory throughout the country. Some of them however stated that onus of registration
should be exclusively on the parties to marriage rather than the officiating Priest of religious places
who solemnise the marriage. The Committee during its study visit to Goa and Kochi during 3rd to
5th January, 2013 interacted with religious leaders of Hindu, Muslim, and Christian communities. The
non-official witnesses in Goa while explaining the system of registration of marriage in Goa pleaded
that extant legal law may not be disturbed as hundred percent registration of marriage is taking place
under Civil Registration Court in Goa.
20.1 Some non-official witnesses, particularly, from the Muslim Community objected to Clauses 8
and 14 of the Bill wherein officiating Priest of the religious places such as temple, mosque, church,
etc. would be forced to transmit information, document and requisite fee for registration of marriage
which has been solemnised under their supervision. The failure on the part of the officiating Priest
of the religious places has been made punishable with a fine which may extent to Rs. 50/-. They
suggested that imposition of fine on the officiating Priest of religious places was unjust and the liability
may be fixed upon the parties to marriage and not upon the officiating Priest of religious places.
20.2 Some Members of the Committee raised objections on the provisions of Clause 14 of the Bill,
which provide for imposition of fine on the priest, etc., or the religious institution on account of their
failure to transmit documents of marriage of the intending parties to the Registrar of marriage. They,
accordingly, desired that Government should review the provisions of Clauses 8 and 14 of the Bill.
Observation of the Supreme Court in Statement of Objects and Reasons
21. The Committee took note of following observations of Supreme Court Seema Vs. Aswani
Kumar also included in the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill:–

8
“xxxxx as and when the Central Government enacts a comprehensive statute, the same shall be
placed before the Supreme Court for scrutiny.”
Members raised serious objection to the above as they felt that the observations of the
Supreme Court were against the spirit of the Constitution and amounted to encroachment upon the
legislative powers of the Parliament. The Secretary, Legislative Department, while responding to this
during the course of his deposition before the Committee on 21st June, 2012 stated as follows:-
“
Jh oh-ds- Hklhu %  lj] eSa ;g  submit djuk pkg¡wxk fd ,slh dksbZ çFkk ugha FkhA bls
Statement of Objects and Reasons esa dsoy blfy,  mention fd;k x;k] rkfd ,d  transparency
gks vkSj eSa vkWujscy ysftLyspj dks ;g produce djuk pkg jgk Fkk fd lqçhe dksVZ us mlds
ckjs esa ;g dgk gS ”
The Committee, in that context, desired to have the opinion of Attorney General of India
on the issue. The Learned Attorney General of India in his note dated 26 th July, 2012 stated as
follows :–
“xxxx if it is felt that the legislation should not be placed before the Court then either an
Interim Application or an Application for Review should be filed stating out objection in this
behalf”.
The Committee pointed that the Government instead of challenging interference of Judiciary in
law making power of Parliament has brought to the notice of legislature such aberration. The
Government could have filed review application as suggested by the learned Attorney General of India
in the first instance.
21.1 The Committee notes that as per the Scheme of the Constitution, there are three
organs of the Government i.e., the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary and each of
these three organs are suppose to function within their demarcated sphere under the Constitution.
The Judiciary is well within its rights to examine the constitutionality of an enactment under
its power of ‘Judicial Review’ but only when it is questioned in judicial proceedings. The
approach of the Supreme Court in the case of Seema Vs. Ashwini Kumar seems to be an
interference in the sphere of activity of Legislature. The Committee takes note of the
observations of the learned Attorney General of India and recommends that the Government
should take appropriate legal action in consultation with the Attorney General of India for a
review of the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and the straightening of the
records.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
22. The Committee lauds the noble objectives that underline the proposed legislation. It
hopes that the Bill would act as a milestone to protect women in matters of maintenance and
property rights in addition to putting an effective check on bigamist relationships.
23. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill confers an obligation on every
person to get his marriage registered. But, at the same time, the Bill does not provide for any
significant consequences on account of non-registration of a marriage. As per the Bill, the non-
registration of marriage would not affect its validity. The Bill also does not provide for any
punishment to the parties to the marriage for non-registration of their marriage after
solemnization. The Bill in its Clause 10 provides for delayed registration of marriages on
payment of fine. The Bill also vide its Clause 8 makes it obligatory and also punishable with
a fine to the extent of Rs. 50/- on persons specified in Clauses (a) to (e) of sub-Section (1)
of Section 8A, on a request made by the parties to the marriage in order to get their marriage

9
registered under the Act, if they fail to give the necessary information and documents relating
to the marriage to the Registrar within the specified period.
24. The Committee is in agreement with the Scheme of the things that have been put in
place to the proposed Bill. While the Bill makes registration of marriages compulsory for all,
the consequences of non-registration of marriages do not affect the validity of the marriage.
The Bill further takes care that parties who are desirous of getting their marriage registered
are facilitated and a fine up to Rs. 50/- has been prescribed only in cases where the relevant
persons fail to give the necessary information/documents to the Registrar in time. The Bill also
put in place a mechanism whereby information about marriages solemnized at all usual places
would reach the Registrar Office. The Committee hopes that the Office of the Registrar which
is proposed to be entrusted with the work of registration of marriages would be getting
necessary details about all the marriages that might take place and the parties which are
desirous of having a certificate might obtain the same as well on making a request.
25. Registration of marriage under certain personal laws is voluntary whereas under certain
other personal laws it is mandatory but private. The officiating priest of religious places
maintains the records of marriage solemnised by them and issue certificate of marriage to the
parties to the marriage which has evidentiary value in the Court of Law. The Parsi Personal
Law in particular has the provision of transmission of certificate of marriage/register of
marriage to the State registry. The Committee understands that all religious institutions where
marriages are solemnised need to transmit the certificate of marriage to the State registry
under the existing dispensation. In case it is so, the Committee recommends that special
efforts may be taken by Government in order to put in place a system where the records gets
transferred from the various places of marriage/religious institutions to the Office of the
Registrar ideally electronically, or in a hassle free manner so that the parties to the marriage
as well as the institutions engaged in the solemnization of marriage are not burdened with
avoidable procedures.
26. The Committee in particular takes note of the fact that the provisions of the Bill are
not going to affect in any manner the laws/rules in operation at present in different States in
the country for the purpose of registration of marriages and that the proposed legislation is
in addition to, and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force. This, in
Committee’s view, should be sufficient to dispel apprehension in the minds of the States/Union
Territories regarding replacement of existing set up with the one under the proposed Bill.
27. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after addressing the concerns
raised by the Committee.

10
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee notes that as per the Scheme of the Constitution, there are three
organs of the Government i.e., the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary and each of
these three organs are suppose to function within their demarcated sphere under the Constitution.
The Judiciary is well within its rights to examine the constitutionality of an enactment under
its power of ‘Judicial Review’ but only when it is questioned in judicial proceedings. The
approach of the Supreme Court in the case of Seema Vs. Ashwini Kumar seems to be an
interference in the sphere of activity of Legislature. The Committee takes note of the
observations of the learned Attorney General of India and recommends that the Government
should take appropriate legal action in consultation with the Attorney General of India for a
review of the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and the straightening of the
records. [Para 21.1]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
2. The Committee lauds the noble objectives that underline the proposed legislation. It
hopes that the Bill would act as a milestone to protect women in matters of maintenance and
property rights in addition to putting an effective check on bigamist relationships. [Para 22]
3. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill confers an obligation on every
person to get his marriage registered. But, at the same time, the Bill does not provide for any
significant consequences on account of non-registration of a marriage. As per the Bill, the non-
registration of marriage would not affect its validity. The Bill also does not provide for any
punishment to the parties to the marriage for non-registration of their marriage after
solemnization. The Bill in its Clause 10 provides for delayed registration of marriages on
payment of fine. The Bill also vide its Clause 8 makes it obligatory and also punishable with
a fine to the extent of Rs. 50/- on persons specified in Clauses (a) to (e) of sub-Section (1)
of Section 8A, on a request made by the parties to the marriage in order to get their marriage
registered under the Act, if they fail to give the necessary information and documents relating
to the marriage to the Registrar within the specified period. [Para 23]
4. The Committee is in agreement with the Scheme of the things that have been put
in place to the proposed Bill. While the Bill makes registration of marriages compulsory for
all, the consequences of non-registration of marriages do not affect the validity of the
marriage. The Bill further takes care that parties who are desirous of getting their marriage
registered are facilitated and a fine up to Rs. 50/- has been prescribed only in cases where
the relevant persons fail to give the necessary information/documents to the Registrar in
time. The Bill also put in place a mechanism whereby information about marriages solemnized
at all usual places would reach the Registrar Office. The Committee hopes that the Office
of the Registrar which is proposed to be entrusted with the work of registration of marriages
would be getting necessary details about all the marriages that might take place and the
parties which are desirous of having a certificate might obtain the same as well on making
a request. [Para 24]
5. Registration of marriage under certain personal laws is voluntary whereas under certain
other personal laws it is mandatory but private. The officiating priest of religious places
maintains the records of marriage solemnised by them and issue certificate of marriage to the
10

11
parties to the marriage which has evidentiary value in the Court of Law. The Parsi Personal
Law in particular has the provision of transmission of certificate of marriage/register of
marriage to the State registry. The Committee understands that all religious institutions where
marriages are solemnised need to transmit the certificate of marriage to the State registry
under the existing dispensation. In case it is so, the Committee recommends that special
efforts may be taken by Government in order to put in place a system where the records gets
transferred from the various places of marriage/religious institutions to the Office of the
Registrar ideally electronically, or in a hassle free manner so that the parties to the marriage
as well as the institutions engaged in the solemnization of marriage are not burdened with
avoidable procedures. [Para 25]
6. The Committee in particular takes note of the fact that the provisions of the Bill are
not going to affect in any manner the laws/rules in operation at present in different States in
the country for the purpose of registration of marriages and that the proposed legislation is
in addition to, and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force. This, in
Committee’s view, should be sufficient to dispel apprehension in the minds of the States/Union
Territories regarding replacement of existing set up with the one under the proposed Bill.
[Para 26]
7. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after addressing the concerns
raised by the Committee. [Para 27]

MINUTES

15
XXVI
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21 st June, 2012 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Parimal Nathwani
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri S. Semmalai
9. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
13. Shri P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
14. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary
2. Shri V .S. Rao, Assistant Legislative Counsel
3. Shri R.S. Jayakrishnan, Assistant Legislative Counsel

16
2. * * *
3. The Committee welcomed the Secretary, Legislative Department who had been invited to make
a presentation before the Committee on the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
Having scrutinized the background papers on the Bill including the power point presentation of the
Secretary, the Members appreciated the objectives which necessitated the introduction of the said Bill.
In his presentation, the Secretary, Legislative Department apprised the Committee that the Bill seeks
to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 so as to provide for registration of marriages
compulsory irrespective of religion professed and practiced by the parties to the marriage. The
Secretary also indicated that an elaborate infrastructure set up already exists under the Registration of
Births and Deaths Act, 1969 which can be utilized to take care of registration of marriages as well.
4. Some of the Members referred to the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill
mentioning the observation of the Supreme Court that “as and when the Central Government enacts
the comprehensive statute the same shall be placed before the Supreme Court for scrutiny” and felt
that observation of Supreme Court is against the spirit of Constitution and it amounts to an
encroachment on legislative powers of the Parliament. Accordingly, the Committee desired to know the
action taken by the Government through Attorney General of India in this matter.
5. Having heard the presentation of the Secretary. Members asked some clarifications which were
replied to by the Secretary. The Committee then decided to look into this aspect while finalizing its
Report on the said Bill.
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

17
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 12 th October, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
6. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
7. Shri Pinaki Misra
8. Shri S. Semmalai
9. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
I. Official Witnesses
Representatives of Government of Goa
1. Shri Pramod Kamat, Secretary, Department of Law; and
2. Shri P.S.S. Bodke, State Registrar.
17

18
II. Non-official Witnesses
1. Shri Gurdip Singh, President, Residents and Shopkeepers Welfare Society (Regd.),
New Delhi;
2. Shri R.K. Bhatia, New Delhi; and
3. Dr. K.L. Madhok, Gurgaon.
III. Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government
of India
1. Dr. G. Narayan Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
2. Shri K.R. Saji Kumar, Additional Legislative Counsel;
3. Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri R.S. Jayakrishnan, Assistant Legislative Counsel.
B. ** *
2. The Chairman extended a hearty welcome to the Members of the Committee on their being
renominated/nominated to the Committee and expressed hope that the Committee would be immensely
benefited from their wide experience while transacting its business during its current tenure. He then
welcomed all of them to the first sitting of the newly constituted Committee. Thereafter, he appraised
the Members of the Subjects/Bills pending with the Committee and briefly recapitulated the progress
made on those Subjects and Bills by the previous Committee.
Deposition of official witnesses on the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012.
3.0 The Chairman welcomed the Law Secretary of Government of Goa and his colleague to the
meeting of the Committee and requested them to make presentation inter-alia clarifying the position
on compulsory registration of marriage in the State of Goa with specific reference to general and
personal law applicable to that State.
3.1 Initiating his presentation on the Bill, the Law Secretary, Government of Goa submitted that
all marriages were compulsorily registerable in the State of Goa irrespective of the religion practised
or professed by the parties to the marriage. The extant Family Law in the State of Goa is based on
Portuguese Civil Code, 1867 which has been allowed to remain in force by the Government of India
within the framework of Constitution of India after liberation of Goa, Daman and Diu on 19.12.1961.
He added that since marriages were already compulsorily registerable, the application of provisions of
the Bill might entail following consequences:–
(i) two marriage authorities may create overlapping and conflict in practical operation; and
(ii) interference with protection given under Goa Personal Law at the time of liberation of
Goa.
He mentioned that a Select Committee of Goa Legislative Assembly has been examining issues
connected with recasting of Goa Personal Family Laws and might come out with suitable suggestions
for the Government of Goa. He was of the opinion that the proposed legislation should not be
extended to the State of Goa as local laws in operation have already achieved the desired objective
of the proposed legislation.
3.2 The State Registrar of Goa supplemented the Law Secretary by adding that registration of
marriage in the State has been done on a secular basis. Even marriage of Roman Catholic solemnised
*** Relates to some other matter.

19
under canonical law in Church needed to be routed through the Civil Registration Office. He added
that, even marriages amongst Hindu and Muslim Communities are registerable and without that,
marriage is not recognised for any other legal purpose including inheritance right. He further added
that State of Goa is contemplating e-registration of marriages and reduction of notice period for
registration of marriage to encourage marriage tourism to boost the economy of State.
3.3 Queries were raised by a Member as to how Muslim Personal Law has not been extended to
the Muslim community living in the State of Goa. In response thereto the Law Secretary submitted
that Muslims in the State of Goa for generation have been comfortably following the Goa Civil Code
and have never objected to that Law, so far. The Law Secretary also invited the Committee to visit
the State of Goa to interact with residents of Goa and Priests of Church to appreciate better the
uniform law followed in that State for registration of marriage.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
4.0 The Committee moved to the non-official witnesses on the said Bill. The non- official
witnesses appreciated the endeavour of the Government to make registration of marriage compulsory.
In their presentation, it was, inter-alia, suggested that proof of age should not be asked for while
making registration of marriage compulsory and the onus of registration of marriage must be on the
parties to the marriage.
4.1 One of the Members, however, clarified that age restriction of parties to marriage should be
necessary to check the problem of child marriage in the country.
(Witnesses then withdrew and meeting adjourned for tea.)
5.0 * * *
5.1 * * *
5.2 * * *
5.3 * * *
6. The Committee then reviewed the pending subjects/Bills. The Committee then decided to
undertake a visit to Hyderabad, Goa and Kochi from 14
th to 19 th November, 2012 in connection with
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) R egistration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
The Committee, accordingly, authorised the Chairman to seek necessary permission of Hon’ble
Chairman for undertaking the said study visit.
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussion was kept.
8 The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.30 A.M. on Friday, the 22 nd February, 2013, in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Jesudasu Seelam — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
6. Shri S. Semmalai
7. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
8. Shrimati Meena Singh
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Jesudasu Seelam was voted to the meeting. He then gave
to the Members the basic outline of the draft Report as well as recommendations of the Committee
on the proposed legislation which aimed to make registration of marriage compulsory for parties to
the marriage irrespective of religion, practised or professed by them. Thereafter, he invited the
Members to give their suggestions, if any, on the draft Report. The Committee adopted the draft
Report with minor modifications relating to imposition of fine upon officiating priests of religious
institution which solemnise marriages for non-transmitting information of marriage of intending parties
to the State Registrar.
3. The Committee decided to present its Report on Wednesday, the 27
th February, 2013. The
Committee authorised Shri Jesudasu Seelam, and in his absence, Shri Bhupender Yadav to present the
Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar, and in his absence, Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh to
lay the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on that day.
4. The Committee adjourned at 10.45 
A.M.
20

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
07 May, 2012
Bill No. XXII of 2012
THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTH AND DEATHS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Births and
Deaths (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the
words “Births and Deaths”, the words “Births, Marriages and
Deaths” shall be substituted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the
words “Births and Deaths”, the words “Births, Marriages and
Deaths” shall be substituted.
23
Short title and
and commence-
ment.
18 of 1969. Amendment of
long title.
Amendment of
section 1.

24
4. Throughout the principal Act (except sections 8, 9, 10, and
20), for the words “births and deaths”, “births or deaths”, “every birth
and of every death” wherever they occur, the words “births, marriages
and deaths”, “births or marriages or deaths” and “every birth, every
marriage and of every death”, as the case may be, shall respectively
be substituted; and such other consequential amendments as the rules
of grammar may require shall also be made.
5. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“1A. ( 1) Every person shall get his marriage registered
under this Act or the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or under any
other law for the time being in force (including State Act).
(2) The parties to the marriage, whose marriage has been
registered under this Act, shall not be required to get their
marriage registered under the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or any
other law for the time being in force (including State Act).
(3) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any
person who has registered his marriage under any other law for
the time being in force including a State Act providing for
registration of marriages or with any other authority under that
law and nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of
the marriages registered under that law.”.
6. In section, 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “marriage” means and includes a marriage solemnized
between a male and a female belonging to any caste or religion
or tribe under any law for the time being in force and includes
marriages solemnized under any custom or usage in any form
or manner recognised by law or the marriage registered under
any law for the time being in force and also includes remarriage;’.
7. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —
“(2A) Every Registrar shall, on payment of prescribed
fees, enter in the register maintained for the purpose, all
information given to him under section 8 or section 8A or
section 9 and shall also take steps to inform himself carefully
of every marriage which takes place in his jurisdiction and to
ascertain and register the particulars required to be registered.”.
8. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“8A. ( 1) For the purposes of facilitating the proof of
marriages, the parties to the marriages, who intend to get their
marriage registered under this Act shall, either themselves, or
from the persons specified below, give or cause to be given,
Substitution
of reference
to certain
expressions
by certain
other
expressions.
Insertion of
new section
1A.
Application
of provisions
relating to
registration of
marriages
under this
Act.
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 7.
Insertion of new
sections 8A and
8B.
Persons required
to register
marriages.
7 of 1909.
7 of 1909.

25
either orally or in writing, according to the best of their
knowledge and belief, within such time as may be prescribed,
information and requisite documents and fees to the Registrar of
the several particulars required to be entered in the forms
prescribed by the State Government under sub-section ( 1) of
section 16, —
(a) in respect of marriage in a house, whether
residential or non-residential, not being any place referred
to in clauses ( b) and ( c), the head of the house, and in
the absence of any such person, the oldest adult male
person present therein during the said period;
(b) in respect of marriage in a temple, church,
mosque, synagogue or such other religious place, the
priest or such other person, by whatever name called,
officiating such marriage or the trustee or any other
person in charge thereof;
(c) in respect of marriage in a place specifically
used for conducting marriages, including marriage halls,
choultry, chattram, hotels or such other place, the person
in charge thereof;
(d) in respect of marriage in an open place or field
or ground, the headman or other corresponding officer in
the case of a village and the officer in charge of the local
police station elsewhere;
(e) in any other place, such person as may be
prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
the State Government, having regard to the conditions obtaining in
a registration division, may, by order, require that for such period
as may be specified in the order, any person specified by the
State Government by designation in this behalf, shall give or cause to
be given information regarding marriages in a house referred to in
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) instead of the persons specified in that
clause.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act,
the State Government may make rules providing that the parties to
a marriage may have particulars relating to their marriage entered
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
8B. The Registrar shall not refuse to register any marriage for
which a duly filled up and signed form has been received by him
except on such grounds as may be prescribed:
Provided that different grounds may be specified by rules for
different class or classes of persons to marriage.”.
Refusal to
register
marriage.

26
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Upon the request made by parties to the marriage
who intend to get their marriage registered under this Act, it
shall be the duty of the persons referred to in clauses ( a) to ( e)
of sub section ( 1) of section 8A to give necessary information
and documents relating to such marriage to the Registrar within
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In any area, the State Government, having regard to
the facilities available therein in this behalf, may require that a
certificate as to marriage shall be obtained by the Registrar from
such person and in such form as may be prescribed.”.
10. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“13. (1) Any birth or marriage or death, as the case may
be, of which information is given to the Registrar after the
expiry of the period specified therefor, but within thirty days of
its occurrence, shall be registered on payment of such late fee
as may be prescribed.
(2) Any birth or marriage or death, as the case may be,
of which delayed information is given to the Registrar after
thirty days but within one year of its occurrence shall be
registered only with the written permission of the prescribed
authority and on payment of the prescribed fee and the production
of an affidavit made before a notary public or any other officer
authorised in this behalf by the State Government.
(3) Any birth or marriage or death, as the case may be,
which has not been registered within one year of its occurrence,
shall be registered only on an order made by a Magistrate of the
first class after verifying the correctness of the birth or marriage
or death and on payment of the prescribed fee.
(4) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice
to any action that may be taken against a person for failure on
his part to register any birth or marriage or death within the
time specified therefor and any such birth or marriage or death,
as the case may be, may be registered during the pendency of
any such action.”.
11. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —
“15. If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Registrar
that any entry of a birth or marriage or death in any register
kept by him under this Act is erroneous in form or substance,
or has been fraudulently or improperly made, he may, subject to
such rules as may be made by the State Government with
Duty of certain
persons to
inform
marriages.
Substitution of
new section for
section 13.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Delayed
registration of
births, Marriages
or deaths.
Substitution of
new section for
section 15.
Correction or
cancellation of
entry in the
register of births
or marriages or
deaths.

27
respect to the conditions on which and the circumstances in
which such entries may be corrected or cancelled, correct the
error or cancel the entry by suitable entry in the margin,
without any alteration of the original entry, and shall sign the
marginal entry and add thereto the date of the correction or
cancellation.”.
12. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —
“17. ( 1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the
State Government, including rules relating to the payment of
fees and postal charges, any person may —
(a) cause a search to be made by the Registrar for
any entry in a register of births, marriages and deaths;
and
(b) obtain an extract from such register relating to
any birth or marriage or death:
Provided that no extract relating to any death, issued to
any person, shall disclose the particulars regarding the cause of
death as entered in the register.
(2) All extracts given under this section shall be certified
by the Registrar or any other officer authorised by the State
Government to give such extracts as provided in section 76 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and shall be admissible in evidence
for the purpose of proving the birth or marriage or death to
which the entry relates.”.
13. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —
“21. The Registrar may either orally or in writing require
any person to furnish any information within his knowledge in
connection with a birth or marriage or death in the locality
within which such person resides and that person shall be
bound to comply with such requisition.”.
14. In section 23 of the principal Act, —
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the word
and figures “sections 8 and 9”, the words, figure and letter
“section 8 or section 8A or section 9” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) Any person who contravenes the provisions
of sub-section ( 1) of section 10A, shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.”.
1 of 1872.
Substitution of
new section for
section 17.
Search of births,
marriages and
deaths register.
Substitution of
new section for
section 21.
Power of
Registrar to
obtain
information
regarding birth
or marriage or
death.
Amendment of
section 23.

28
15. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section
shall inserted, namely:—
“29A. The provisions of this Act relating to registration of
marriage shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force and the registration of
marriages of the parties under this Act shall not be deemed to
affect any right recognised or acquired by any such party under
any law, custom or usage.
16. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause ( a), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:-—
(aa) the fees under sub-section ( 2A) of section 7;
(ii) after clause ( b), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ba) the period within which information should
be given to the Registrar under sub-section ( 1) of section
8 A;
(bb) the persons under clause ( e) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 8 A;
(bc) the manner and the conditions under sub-
section ( 3) of section 8A;
(bd) the grounds under section 8B;”;
(iii) after clause ( c), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ca) the time and the manner for giving information
under sub-section ( 1) of section 10A;
(cb) the persons from whom and the form in
which certificate shall be obtained.”.
17. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“30A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make such provisions for implementation of
the provisions of this Act and for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that any of the provisions of this Act
specified in the notification—
(a) shall not apply to any marriages solemnised
under any Act for the time being in force or any customs
or usage recognised in law;
Insertion of new
section 29A.
Registration of
marriages not to
affect rights of
parties to
marriage.
Amendment of
section 30.
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Power of Central
Government to
make rules.

29
(b) shall apply to any marriages solemnised under
any Act for the time being in force or any customs or
usage recognised in law,
with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be
specified in the notification.”.
18. In section 31 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall
apply to any matter or law relating to marriages including the
Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or any State law or to any rules or
notification or order making provisions for registration of
marriages in any State.”.
7 of 1909.
Amendment of
section 31.

30
30
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012
seeks to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (18
of 1969) so as to provide for registration of marriages irrespective of
religion professed and practiced by the parties to the marriage. At
present the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 provides only
for the regulation of registration of births and deaths and for matters
connected therewith.
2. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar
(AIR 2006 SC 1158) in its judgment dated 14-02-2006 has directed the
Government that marriages of all persons who are citizens of India
belonging to various religious denominations should be made
compulsorily registrable in their respective States where such marriages
are solemnised and, inter alia, directed that as and when the Central
Government enacts a comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed
before that Court for scrutiny.
3. The Committee on Empowerment of Women (2006-2007) in
its Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Plight of Indian Women
Deserted by Non Resident Indian (NRI) Husbands presented to Lok
Sabha on the 13th August, 2007, has, inter alia, expressed the view
that all marriages, irrespective of religion should be compulsorily
registered and desired that the Government to make registration of all
marriages mandatory, making the procedure simpler, affordable and
accessible.
4. The 18th Law Commission of India in its 205th Report titled
“Proposal to Amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 and
other Allied Laws”, inter alia, recommended that “registration of
marriages within a stipulated period, of all the communities, viz. Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, etc., should be made mandatory by the Government”.
Further, the 18th Law Commission in its 211th Report titled “Laws on
Registration of Marriage and Divorce — A proposal for Consolidation
and Reform”, has recommended for Parliamentary legislation on
compulsory registration of marriages which will bring country-wide
uniformity in the substantive law relating to registration and will be
helpful in achieving the desired goal.
5. The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969, inter alia,
provides for Registration establishments consisting of Registrar-General,
Chief Registrar and registration division, District Registrars and
Registrars. It also provides procedures for registration of births and
deaths and for maintenance of records and statistics. Further, by
virtue of the powers conferred under section 30 of the aforesaid Act,
rules for compulsory registration of births and deaths have been
framed by the State Governments and Union territory Administrations.

31
Therefore, it is proposed to amend the aforesaid Act suitably to
include registration of marriages as well within its scope so that the
existing administrative machinery would also be able to carry out
registration of marriages in accordance with the specified procedures
and be able to maintain necessary records and statistics for registration
of marriages also.
6. Having regard to the aforesaid directions of the Supreme
Court, report of the Committee on Empowerment of Women and
recommendations of the Law Commission referred to in the foregoing
paragraphs, it is proposed to amend the Registration of Births and
Deaths Act, 1969 to provide for compulsory registration of marriages
without affecting in any manner the State law making provisions for
compulsory registration of marriages in their respective States. For
this purpose, suitable provisions are incorporated in the Bill to avoid
any duplication of registration of marriages under the proposed Central
law and the State law. It is also proposed to provide in the Bill that
the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (after the enactment
of proposed amendments) shall not apply to any person who has
registered his marriage under any other law for the time being in force
including a State Act providing for registration of marriages or with
any other authority under that law and nothing contained in this Act
shall affect the validity of the marriages registered under that law.
Further, the parties to the marriage, whose marriage has been registered
under this Act shall not be required to get their marriage registered
under the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or any other law for the time
being in force. Moreover, the registration of marriages thereunder shall
not affect any right recognised or acquired by any party to marriage
under any law, custom or usage.
7. The proposed Bill will provide for registration of marriages of
all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various religious
denominations and be beneficial to women, as the registration certificate
would provide evidentiary value in matrimonial and maintenance cases
and prevent unnecessary harassment meted out to them. It will also
provide evidentiary value in the matters of age of parties, custody of
children and the right of children born out of such marriages.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; SALMAN KHURSHID
The 26th April, 2012.

32
32
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE R EGISTRATION OF B IRTHS AND D EATHS A CT, 1969
(18 OF 1969)
* *** *
An Act to provide for the regulation of registration of births
and deaths and for matters connected therewith.
* *** *
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Births and
Deaths Act, 1969.
* *** *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* *** *
13. (1) Any birth or death of which information is given to
the Registrar after the expiry of the period specified therefor, but
within thirty days of its occurrence, shall be registered on payment
of such late fee as may be prescribed.
(2) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given
to the Registrar after thirty days but within one year of its
occurrence shall be registered only with the written permission of
the prescribed authority and on payment of the prescribed fee and
the production of an affidavit made before a notary public or any
other officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government.
(3) Any birth or death which has not been registered within
one year of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order
made by a magistrate of the first class or a Presidency Magistrate
after verifying the correctness of the birth or death and on payment
of the prescribed fee.
(4) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice
to any action that may be taken against a person for failure on his
part to register any birth or death within the time specified therefor
and any such birth or death may be registered during the pendency
of any such action.
* *** *
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Delayed
registration of
births and
deaths.

33
15. If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Registrar that any
entry of a birth or death in any register kept by him under this Act
is erroneous in form or substance, or has been fraudulently or
improperly made, he may, subject to such rules as may be made by
the State Government with respect to the conditions on which and
the circumstances in which such entries may be corrected or
cancelled, correct the error or cancel the entry by suitable entry in
the margin, without any alteration of the original entry, and shall
sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of the correction
of cancellation.
* *** *
17. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the State
Government, including rules relating to the payment of fees and
postal charges, any person may—
(a) cause a search to be made by the Registrar for any
entry in a register of births and deaths; and
(b) obtain an extract from such register relating to any
birth or death:
Provided that no extract relating to any death, issued to any
person, shall disclose the particulars regarding the cause of death as
entered in the register.
(2) All extracts given under this section shall be certified by the
Registrar or any other officer authorised by the State Government to
give such extracts as provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, and shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of
proving the birth or death to which the entry relates.
* *** *
21. The Registrar may either orally or in writing require any
person to furnish any information within his knowledge in connection
with a birth or death in the locality within which such person resides
and that person shall be bound to comply with such requisition.
* *** *
23. (1) Any person who—
(a) fails without reasonable cause to give any information
which it is his duty to give under any of the provisions of
sections 8 and 9; or
* *** *
Correction or
cancellation of
entry in the
register of births
and deaths.
Search of births
and deaths
register.
Power of
Registrar to
obtain
information
regarding births
or deaths.
Penalties.
1 of 1872.

34
34
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of Law and Justice )

35
ANNEXURE-II
List of Acts Enacted by State/UT Governments for
Compulsory Registration of Marriage
1. The Andhra Pradesh Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2002.
2. The Gujarat Registration of Marriages Act, 2006;
3. The Haryana Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2008;
4. The Himachal Pradesh Registration of Marriages Act, 1996;
5. The Karnataka Marriages (Registration and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2006;
6. The Mizoram Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2007;
7. The Maharashtra Regulation of Marriage Bureaus and Registration of Marriages Act, 1998;
8. The Rajasthan Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2009;
9. The Tripura Recording of Marriage Act, 2003; and
10. The Uttarakhand Compulsory Registration of Marriage Act, 2010.
35

36
ANNEXURE-III
List of Rules Framed by State/UT Governments for
Compulsory Registration of Marriage
1. (i) The Arunachal Pradesh Marriages Rules, 2007.
(ii) The Arunachal Pradesh Recording of Marriages Rules, 2009.
2. The Bihar Marriage Registration Rules, 2006;
3. The Chhattisgarh Compulsory Registration of Marriages Rules, 2006;
4. The Madhya Pradesh Compulsory Registration of Marriages Rules, 2006;
5. The Meghalaya Special Marriage Rules, 2006;
6. The Odisha Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960;
7. The Tamil Nadu Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960;
8. The Lakshadweep Marriage Registration Rules, 1960;
9. The Kerala Registration of Marriages Common Rules, 2008;
10. The Puducherry Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960;
11. The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Compulsory Registration of Marriages Rules, 2007;
12. The Hindu Marriage (Assam Amendment) Rules, 2008 and
13. The Tripura Recording of Marriage Rules, 2005.
36

37
ANNEXURE-IV
PART – 1: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Clause No.
Memo Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Governemnt
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Shri Fr. Savio
Fernandes, Chancellor,
Archdiocese of
Bombay, Arch Bishop’s
House, 21 Nathalal
Parekh Marg, Mumbai
- 400 001.
Shri R.K. Bhatia,
D-2/3I Janakpuri,
New Delhi-110058.
Suggested that the marriage solemnised under the “Indian
Christian Marriage Act, 1872 should be included in the
said Bill.
1. Make suitable amendment in section (3) which would
give more teeth to the Registrar General of India for
meaningful implementation of the Act instead of mere
advising and supervision.
2. Section 8 A. (a): The word ‘male’ occurring at 11
th
place be deleted as it's presence smacks of male
chauvinism and offence to women who enjoy equal
status with men in all walks of life;
3. In (da) the definition of marriage, the term ‘marriage’
itself is used. This appears quite inappropriate. The
marriage could be defined “Nuptial union between
persons of opposite sexes belonging to any caste or
religion or tribe under any law for the time being in
force which recognises conjugal rights and grants
the status of spouse, both man and the woman.
The provisions of the proposed Bill relating
to registration of marriage shall be in addition
to and not in derogation of any other law
for the time being in force. As such, the
proposed Bill will not affect rights of parties
under their personal laws including the Indian
Christian Marriage Act, 1872 which provides
for compulsory registration of marriage
among the Christians.
The suggestions are not acceptable as the
same are outside the scope of the Bill
Keeping in view of the societal and ground
realities, no changes are proposed to be
made in section 8A (a) as suggested.
The word ‘marriage’ is the most common
and well understood term.
1.
3.

38
4. Section 8A and 8B:- In proposed section 8A the
words ‘who intend’ (2 nd and 3 rd word in second line
be replaced with 'who are required' as the word
'intend does not put weight on compulsive nature of
registration as envisaged in the proposed enactment)
5. Section 8A (1) (a):- The proposed sub-section may
be amended to put the onus of registration on the
married couples as they are fully adult and have
taken conscious decision to marry each other. There
does not seem any need to involve other participants
or inmates of the house.
Welcomes the Bill and makes following suggestions-
(a) First of all, Graduate Prohit/Pundit is required to be
registered compulsorily.
(b) Date of Birth of both parties should be verified for
marriageable age.
(c) Affidavit/compromise letter should be provided after
acceptance of all requirements of marriage ceremony
by both parties.
(d) During marriage, photography should be recognised
as evidence.
(e) Gift/Stridhan and expenditure should be provided as
evidence by both parties.
(f) After marriage, joint property right should be provided
within thirty days.
Under the provisions of the proposed Bill, it
is not obligatory for the partiers to the
marriage to register their marriage there
under.
Section 8A of the Bill which provides for
persons required to register marriages
includes the parties to the marriage.
The suggestion is not acceptable, as the
issue relating to division of matrimonial
property is outside the scope and purview
of the present Bill.
12 3 4
4. Shri Harish Chandra
Dhaulakhandi, 57-C,
Pocket-C, Mayur-
Vihar Phase-2, Delhi-
110091.

39
Dr. K.L. Madhok,
D-122, Ridgewood
Estate, DLF City
Phase-IV , Near
Galleria Market,
Gurgaon-122 009.
(Haryana)
5. Makes the following suggestions:-
1. The Title of the Bill may he read as “Births, Marriages,
Remarriages Divorces and Deaths”.
2. To null over the aspects of the following marriages:
(a) Inter-caste and intra-caste,
(b) Inter-state and intra-state and
(c) Inter-religion and intra-religion.
Prima facie, in so far as intra-caste, intra-state and
intra-religion marriages are concerned there would
not be any problem.
3. The mention of “Remarriages” is thought expedient
as very generally the remarriages are definitely
performed, but at a low profile. As such, there is
every likelihood that remarriage get skipped from
reporting angle. However, such an aspect can be
very well discussed for a consensus.
The legislative intent of the proposed Bill is
to provide for registration of marriages of
all persons who are citizens of India. As the
said Bill does not deal with divorce etc., the
suggestions are outside the scope of the
Bill.
The provisions of the proposed Bill relating
to registration of marriage shall be in addition
to and not in derogation of any other law
for the time being in force. The proposed
Bill shall not affect the right of the parties
under any other law, custom or usage.
Supports the Bill and hence, no comments
are required.
As remarriage is also a marriage, such
marriages can be registered under the
provisions of the proposed Bill, No change
is called for.

40
PART – II: OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL
Memo Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Governemnt
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Shri Gurdip Singh,
President,
Residents and
Shopkeepers Welfare
Society,
5147, Krishna Market,
Paharganj, New Delhi.
Shri R.K. Bhatia,
D-2/31 Janakpuri,
New Delhi-110058.
Supports the Bill and makes following suggestions-
1. Local Registration Offices should be in localities wise/
ward wise;
2. Government Agencies should be transparent to obtain
marriage certificate for any purpose;
3. Issue of all certificates should be in single window
system.
4. The applicant’s faces malafide intentions from the
authorities for amendment which do not filled properly
by the agencies such as Hospital, Nursing Homes
and MCD staff etc.
1. Make suitable amendment in section (3) which would
give more teeth to the Registrar General of India for
meaningful implementation of the Act instead of mere
advising and supervision
2. Section 13:- There should be special provision to
register' the birth of street child and adopted child
for which the verification procedure mentioned herein
may not be possible in the absence of the information
about the place of birth and date of birth to facilitate
the registration.
The suggestions are outside the scope of
the Bill.
The suggestion is outside the scope of the
Bill.
The suggestion is outside the scope of the
Bill.
2.
3.

41
3. Section 14:- There is a provision for registration of
name of child by giving oral information to the
registrar. Registration of name of child by giving oral
information to the Registrar often results in mistakes
of spellings/mis-judgement of names and create
complications/problem in future.
4. The provision of oral information to the Registrar be
done away with by making necessary amendment.
5. Statement of Objects and Reasons:- A reference to
‘citizens of India’ appears in paragraph 2 and 7. To
the best of my knowledge, the registration of births
and deaths is compulsory for all births and deaths
taking place in India irrespective of the citizenship of
the informants. It has been de-facto a prescribed
procedure for the residents in India except those
foreigners employed in foreign missions. The Registrar
of Births and Deaths does not possess any mechanism
to determine the citizenship of the informant/registrant.
This ground reality and its future implication may be
kept under consideration.
Welcomes the Bill and makes following suggestions
(a) First of all, Graduate Purohit/Pundit is required to be
registered compulsorily.
(b) Date of Birth of both parties should be verified for
marriageable age.
(c) Affidavit/compromise letter should be provided after
acceptance of all requirements of marriage ceremony
by both parties.
The suggestion is outside the scope of the
Bill
The suggestion is outside the scope of the
Bill.
No comments called for as the suggestions
relate to the Statement of Objects and
Reasons and not the provisions of the Bill.
The suggestions are outside the purview and
scope of the present amendments and hence,
no comments are required
Shri Harish Chandra
Dhaulakhandi, 57-C,
Pocket-C, Mayur
Vihar Phase-2, Delhi-
110091.
4.

42
12 3 4
Dr. K.L. Madhok,
D-122, Ridgewood
Estate, DLF City
Phase-IV , Near
Galleria Market,
Gurgaon-122009
(Haryana)
5.
(d) During marriage, photography should be recognised
as evidence.
(e) Gift/Stridhan and expenditure should be provided as
evidence by both parties.
(f) After marriage, joint property right should be provided
within thirty days.
Makes the following suggestions:
1. How about the marriage between an Indian citizen
and Foreign national? This aspect may also received
due consideration, so that the proposed Bill becomes
a comprehensive one.
2. There should be separate legislation or in-built
mechanism for putting a heavy hand in KHAP
interventions.
3. For national integration and achieving the goal of
“Indianness”, we should encourage inter-caste, inter-
state and inter-religion marriages.
The proposed Bill will provide for registration
of marriages of all persons who are citizens
of India and the suggestions made are outside
the scope of the Bill.
The suggestions are outside the scope and
purview of the Bill and hence no comments
are required.
The Special marriage Act, 1954 caters to
the demand made. The provisions of the
proposed Bill merely provide for registration
of marriage and shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.