 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
   
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT 
ON 
Pensioner’s Grievances-Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralized 
Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
REPORT NO. 
110 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P & L) - --- 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                            December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT 
ON 
Pensioner’s Grievances-Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralized 
Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 

C O N T E N T S 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)  
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) - (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS    (iv)-(v) 
4. REPORT 1 - 53 
 CHAPTER 1 
 INTRODUCTION 1-5 
 CHAPTER 2  
 Effectiveness of CPENGRAMS and Pension Adalats-Way Forward 6-18  
 CHAPTER 3 
 Grievances pertaining to Pension policy, Pension structure  19-35 
 and other retirement benefits 
 CHAPTER 4 
 Grievances pertaining to authorization, sanction and processing of Pension 36-46 
 CHAPTER 5 
 Grievances pertaining to disbursement of Pension 47-53 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                                        54-62                  
6.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                       63-65 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
3. Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Deputy Director  
6. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred 
Tenth Report on the Subject ‘Pensioner’s Grievances-Impact of Pension Adalats 
and Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPENGRAMS)'. 
2.  The Committee identified the subject ‘Pensioner’s Grievances-Impact of 
Pension Adalats and Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System (CPENGRAMS)’ to examine the pension grievance redressal machinery 
of the Government of India and to id entify the shortcomings therein and to 
suggest measures so as to facilitate effective and efficient redressal of 
pensioner’s grievances. The subject was inter -alia notified in Parliamentary 
Bulletin Part-II No.60314, dated 10th December, 2020. 
3.  The Comm ittee heard the Secretary, Department of Pensions and 
Pensioners’ Welfare during the first meeting held on 9th December 2020 and the 
Secretary, Central Government Pensioners’ Welfare Association , Secretary 
Department of Pensions and Pensioner’s Welfare  and Controller General of 
Accounts, Ministry of Finance on 4th January, 2021. 
4.  While considering the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information: 
(i) Background notes, power point presentations of  Department of pension  and 
Pensioner’s welfare;  
(ii) Replies furnished by  Department of pension and Pensioner’s welfare and 
Central Pension Accounting Office to the questionnaires furnished by the 
Secretariat;  
(ii) 
 

(iii)Representations received from various Pensioner’s associations  
(iv) News articles, editorials and material from the internet.  
5.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Secretary, 
Department of pension and Pensioner’s Welfare; Secretary, Central 
Government Pensioners Welfare Association and the Controller General of 
Accounts, Ministry of Finance and others for furnishing necessary information/ 
documents and rendering valu able assistance to the Committee in its 
deliberations. 
6.   For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 8th December, 2021 . 
 
   
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
8th December, 2021.                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
AIS    All India Services 
 
ASI    Archaeological Survey of India 
 
BSF    Border Security force 
 
BPL    Below Poverty Line 
 
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
   CAPF  Central Armed Police Forces 
 
CCS   Central Civil Services 
 
CGA  Controller General of Account 
 
CGDA  Controller General of Defence Accounts 
CGHS  Central Government Health Scheme 
 
CGEGIS  Central Government Employees' Group Insurance Scheme 
 
CGWB  Central Ground Water Board 
 
CISF  Central Industrial Security Force 
 
CPAO  Central Pension Accounting Office 
 
CPC   Central Pay Commission  
 
CPPC  Centralised Pension Processing Centres 
CPGRAMS Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
 
CPENGRAMS Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
 
CRPF  Central Reserve Police Force 
CS(MA)               Central Services Medical Attendant 
CWC  Central Warehousing Corporation 
DDO  Drawing And Disbursing Officer 
DLC  Digital Life Certificate 
DoPPW  Department of Pensions and Pensioners' Welfare 
(iv) 

DoPT  Department of Personnel and Training 
EPS   Employees’ Pension Scheme 
EPFO  Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
FMA  Fixed Medical Allowances 
GPF   General Provident Fund 
GSI   Geological Survey of India 
HOD  Head of Department 
ITBP  Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force 
JKGAD  Jammu and Kashmir General Administrative Department 
IPPB  India Post Payments Bank 
   MACP  Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme 
   MeitY  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIB   Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
NPCI  National Payment Corporation of India 
NSSO  National Sample Survey Office 
OPD  Out Patient Department 
PAO  Pay and Accounts Office 
PPO   Pension Payment Order 
PSB   Public Sector Banks 
PSU   Public Sector Undertakings 
RBI   Reserve Bank of India 
SMS  Short Message Service` 
SSB   Sashastra Seema Bal 
UIDAI  Unique Identification Authority of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.0      The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice has taken up the subject ‘Pensioner’s 
Grievances- Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralized Pensioners Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) ’ for detailed examination . The 
Committee attaches paramount importance to the concerns of the elderly. The 
Committee acknowledges the contribution of retired personnel to nation building 
and holds them in high esteem. 
1.1       The Committee observes that retirees are made to run from pillar to post for 
redressal of their pension related grievances. Hence, the Committee has embarked 
on a mission to identify core grievance prone areas and suggest reforms. The 
Committee held a series of meetings with the Secretary of Department of Pension 
and Pensioners’ Welfare, Controller General of Accounts and representatives of 
Pensioners’ Associations and deliberated intensely on pensioners’ Grievances. 
1.2          ‘Pension’ is an essential component of the social safety net. It is a means 
to smoothen life sustenance and maintain standard of living after retirement. 
Traditionally, old age income security in India has been provided by the joint 
family system, which was ingrained i n the Indian ethos. However, the joint family 
system has been gradually disintegrating due to urbanization, occupational 
diversification and emergence of nuclear families and this, in turn, is increasing the 
dependency of the elderly on pension. 
1.3     Pension systems have been reformed in many countries around the world 
during the last three decades to make them fiscally sustainable and to expand 
coverage across occupational groups and income spectrum. India has also made a 
shift to defined contribution funded pension system called National Pension system 
(NPS) in 2004. 

2 
 
1.4     The present Indian pension landscape, by and large, comprises such 
pensions as Civil Service Pension Schemes for the  Central and state government 
employees who joined the service b efore 2004; Employee’s pension scheme 
administered by Employees’ Provident Fund Organization for the notified 
establishments both in public and private sector employing 20 or more employees; 
Occupational Pension Schemes run  by public sector enterprises; N ational Pension 
Scheme applicable to central government employees (except for the armed forces) 
joining service on or after January 1, 2004 among others. 
1.5.       Department of Pensions and Pensioners' Welfare (DoPPW), Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Griev ances and Pensions is the nodal Department for 
formulation of policy and coordination of matters relating to retirement benefits to 
Central Government Employees including pensions. The Acts and 
Rules/Regulations administered by the Department include Central Civil Services 
(Pension) Rules, 1972; Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 
1981; Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1939; General 
Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960; Contributory Provident Fund 
(India) Rules, 1962; and  Payment of Arrears of Pension (Nomination) Rules, 
1983. 
1.6.      The ‘Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972’ regulate pensionary 
benefits of civil Government servants (including defence civilians). Under the 
‘Central Civil Servi ces (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981’, a pensioner can 
commute not more than 40 percent of his pension for a lump sum amount. The 
pensionary benefits on death or disability of civil Government servants during the 
performance of duty and attributable to  Government service, are governed by the 
‘Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1939.’ 
1.7.     As the pension process is decentralised in India, various 
Ministries/Departments are involved in the management and disbursement of 
pensions. The details in this regard are as under:- 

3 
 
(i) Civil Pensioners belonging to Central Civil Services are governed by 
CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 framed and notified by Department of 
Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare.  Pensioners belonging to All India 
Services (i.e. Ind ian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and 
Indian Forest Service) are governed by AIS (Death -cum Retirement 
Benefits) Rules, 1958 framed and notified by Department of Personnel 
& Training. Civil pensioners of all Ministries/Departments come unde r 
the Accounting jurisdiction of Controller General of Account s (CGA), 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). The responsibility 
for maintaining the data and accounts of expenditure on pension/family 
pension in respect of such pensioners (excludi ng Postal and Telecom 
pensioners) vests with the Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO), 
under the CGA. The pensioners belonging to all the CAPFs ( viz. BSF, 
CRPF, Assam Rifles, SSB, CISF and ITBP) under MHA are included 
in this category. 
(ii) Defence Pensioners (other than Defence Civilian Pensioners) are 
governed by the Pension Rules and Regulations framed by Ministry of 
Defence and respective Armed Forces Organisations. Defence Civilian 
pensioners are, however, covered under CCS (Pension) Rules 1972 
framed and notified by Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare. 
The data and accounts, of all Defence pensioners (including defence 
civilian pensioners) are maintained by Controller General of Defence 
Accounts (CGDA) / Principal Controller of Defence A ccounts 
(Pension) under Ministry of Defence. 
(iii) Railway Pensioners are governed by the Pension Rules framed, notified 
and administered by Ministry of Railways. The data and accounts of 
these pensioners are also maintained by Ministry of Railways. 
(iv) Telecom Pens ioners are governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules 1972 
framed and notified by Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare.  

4 
 
However, the data and accounts of these pensioners are maintained by 
Department of Telecommunications (and not by CPAO). 
(v) Postal Pension ers are governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules 1972 
framed and notified by Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare. 
However, the data and accounts of these pensioners are maintained by 
Department of Posts (and not by CPAO).  
1.8. Apart from the above, there are various others types of Pensions which are 
handled/ monitored by the different Ministries/departments. The details are as 
follows: 
(i) President of India – Presidents’ Secretariat; 
(ii) Vice President of India – Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs; 
(iii) Pension for Hon’ble Judges of Supreme Court & High Court of India– 
Department of Justice; 
(iv) Pension for Hon’ble Member of Parliament of India - Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs; 
(v) Atal Pension Yojana– Department of Financial Services; 
(vi) Employees’ Pension Scheme (EPS), 1995/EPF – Ministry of Labour/ 
EPFO; 
(vii) Pension for Freedom Fighters – Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(viii) Pension to State Government Employees – Respective State 
Governments; 
(ix) Pension under National Social Assistance Programme, i.e. Old age 
Pension, widow pension, disability pension, family pension for BPL – 
Ministry of Rural Development; and 
(x) Pension to the employees of PSUs/Autonomous Bodies –Concerned 
Administrative Ministry/Department/PSU/Autonomous Body. 
1.9. The approximate number of Central Government Pensioners (including 
family pensioners) as on 31.03.2020 is as follows: 
Category of Central Government 
pensioners 
No. of Pensioners as on March 
31,2020 
Civil 10,95,352 

5 
 
Defence 32,77,742 
Postal 3,31,358 
Railways 15,30,268 
Telecom 4,38,898 
Total 66,73,421 
 
1.10 As per the data furnished by Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO), 
the total number of civil pensioners under the old pension scheme as on 01.12.2020 
is 10,35, 228.The break -up of the number of the pensioners categorized by age 
group & Category is as under: 
             (As on 01.12.2020) 
 
A - Superannuation Pension; I Invalid Pension 
B Family Pension J Pension/FP for High Court Judge 
C Pension/FP for High Court Judge M IDA Pension 
D Pension for Supreme Court Judge N IDA Family Pension 
E Family Pension for Supreme Court Judge O Others 
F Pension to Ex MP’s P Pro-rata Pension (PSU Absorbee) 
G Pension/FP to Freedom Fighters V Voluntary Retirement 
H Benefits to Ex/Deceased President   
 


6 
 
CHAPTER 2 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CPENGRAMS AND PENSION ADALATS- 
WAY FORWARD 
 
2.1 CPENGRAMS and Pension Adalats are two major avenues for the redressal 
of Pensioners’ Grievances under the Department of Pension and Pensioners’ 
Welfare. CPENGRAMS is a Centralized Web -enabled Pension Grievance Redress 
and Monitoring System  whereas Pension Adalat is a platform to provide on -the-
spot resolution of unresolved grievances in CPENGRAMS. 
2.2 In addition, pension -related grievances can also be lodged in Centralized 
Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) portal of 
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Grievance 
Redressal portal of Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO).   
2.3 The Committee held its first meeting on 9 th December, 2020 and heard the 
Secretary, Department of Pensions and Pens ioners’ Welfare. During the meeting, 
the Committee deliberated on the effectiveness of CPENGRAMS and Pension 
Adalats in redressing pensioners’ grievances. The observations and 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard are delineated in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
CPENGRAMS(Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System) 
2.4 CPENGRAMS is a Centralized Web -enabled Pension Grievance Redress and 
Monitoring System for speedy redressal and effective monitoring of pension -related 
grievances of pensioners. Pensioners can submit their grievances online or through 
Pensioner Associations or send it through postal dak. Recently, a toll -free number 
has been installed for retired government officials to submit their grievances on 
phone and enquire the status of any pending complaints. Any Central government 
pensioner can register a complaint and the same is monitored by DoPPW till its final 
resolution and closure by the pension settling Department/Ministry. 

7 
 
 
2.5 CPENGRAMS portal has the following facilities:- 
 24X7 online registration of pension grievances; 
 Forwarding of reminders to the conc erned Ministries/Departments   
for redressal of grievances; 
 Enquiry on status of redressal of registered grievance; and 
 Online disposal of grievances by the authority. 
2.6 DoPPW digitally forwards the Pensioners ’ grievance to the concerned 
Ministry/Department for its resolution and monitors the same as the concerned 
Ministries/Departments are themselves the Pension processing/sanctioning 
authorities. After the grievance is resolved, the concerned Ministry/Departme nt 
closes the grievance. DoPPW also conducts inter -ministerial follow -up meetings 
with the Nodal officers of each Ministry for resolution of cases pending beyond 
stipulated time. DoPPW also re -registers cases where the concerned 
Ministry/Department closed the matter pre -maturely or if the petitioner is not 
satisfied with the resolution provided by the concerned Ministry/Department. 
2.7         The details of number of grievances redressed through CPENGRAMS 
portal over the past five years are as follows:                                                                 
( #upto 26.01.2021) 
Year Number of 
grievances 
received 
during the 
year 
 (N) 
Total number of grievances redressed 
during the year 
Percentage of 
grievance 
disposal 
Grievances 
received during 
the year and 
redressed 
during the 
year(G) 
Grievances carried 
forward from previous 
years and redressed 
during the year 
 
(G /N) X100 
2020-2021# 39975 35409 3456 88.57 
2019-2020 39685 36281 3239 91.42 
2018-2019 41592 38308 2686 92.10 
2017-2018 34447 31662 2320 91.92 
2016-2017 31005 27772 2271 89.57 
 

8 
 
2.8      The details of number of Grievances which have been redressed within the 
prescribed time limit of 60 days during the preceding five years are as follows: 
(FINANCIAL YEAR-WISE) 
# upto 26.01.2021 
S. No 
 
Year B/F as 
from 
preceding 
year 
Received 
During the 
Period 
Total 
Receipts 
Disposal 
as on 31st 
 March 
Pending 
As on 31st 
 March 
Pendency 
As on 
31st 
 March/ 
More 
Than 
1 Year 
Disposal 
within 60 
days 
1 2020-
2021# 
3617 39975 43592 38885 
(89.2%) 
4707 117 
(2.5%) 
(33615) 
(86.4%) 
2 2019-
2020 
3452 39685 43137 39520 
(91.6%) 
3617 182 
(5%) 
(33791) 
(78.3%) 
3 2018-
2019 
2854 41592 44446 40994 
(92.2%) 
3452 145 
(4.3%) 
(35763) 
(87.2%) 
4 2017-
2018 
2389 34447 36836 33982 
(92.3%) 
2854 43 
(1.6%) 
(29500) 
(86.8%) 
5 2016-
2017 
2329 31005 33334 30043 
(90.1%) 
3291 28 
(0.9%) 
(25125) 
(83.6%) 
 
2.9    The details of major Ministries/Departments (year -wise) wherein the 
timeline of 60 days was breached in 75% and above received grievances is as 
follows: 
Year2018-19 
Organization Name No ofgrievances 
received 
(includingB/F) 
No of 
Grievances 
Disposed 
No of 
Grievances 
Disposed of 
within 60 
days out of 
total 
disposed 
Grievances 
Disposal within 60 days 
in% 
Legislative Department 3 3 0 0.0 
Cabinet Secretariat, Secretary(R) 73 48 2 4.2 
National Human Rights Commission 6 6 1 16.7 
Department of Rural Development 41 32 7 21.9 
Department of Legal Affairs 46 35 8 22.9 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 17 0 0 0 
National Commission for Scheduled Caste 8 0 0 0 
Election Commission of India 7 0 0 0 
Vice President’s Secretariat 5 0 0 0 
Department of J and K Affairs 5 0 0 0 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 4 0 0 0 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 2 0 0 0 

9 
 
President’s Secretariat 2 0 0 0 
Department of AIDS Control 1 0 0 0 
Financial Services - Banking & Insurance 
Divisions 
1 0 0 0 
 
Year2019-20 
Organization Name No ofgrievances 
received 
(includingB/F) 
No of 
Grievances 
Disposed 
No of 
Grievances 
Disposed of 
within 60 
days out of 
total 
disposed 
Grievances 
Disposal within 60 days 
in% 
Cabinet Secretariat,Secretary(R) 65 1 0 0.00 
Central Vigilance Commission 9 9 0 0.00 
Vice President’s Secretariat 6 1 0 0.00 
National Human Rights Commission 4 2 0 0.00 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region 
1 1 0 0.00 
Cabinet Secretariat(Rashtrapati Bhavan) 63 62 7 11.29 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 26 17 3 17.65 
National Commission for Scheduled Caste 14 0 0 0 
Election Commission of India 13 0 0 0 
Department of J and K Affairs 13 0 0 0 
President’s Secretariat 3 0 0 0 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 2 0 0 0 
Department of AIDS Control 1 0 0 0 
Financial Services - Banking & Insurance 
Divisions 
1 0 0 0 
 
Year 2020-21 
Organization Name No of grievances 
received 
(including B/F) 
No of 
Grievances 
Disposed 
No  of 
Grievances 
Disposed of 
within 60 days 
out of total 
disposed 
Grievances 
Disposal within 60 days 
in% 
Department of J and K Affairs 20  0 0.00 
Election Commission of India 20 1 0 0.00 
Vice President’s Secretariat 6 1 0 0.00 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 2 1 0 0.00 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 2 2 0 0.00 
Cabinet Secretariat, Secretary(R) 86 78 9 11.54 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 13 12 3 25.00 
National Commission for Scheduled Caste 17 0 0 0 
President’s Secretariat 4 0 0 0 
Financial Services - Banking & Insurance 
Divisions 
1 0 0 0 
 

10 
 
2.10 The Committee is concerned to note that, on an average 20% of 
grievances are not being disposed of within the stipulated time limit of 60 days. 
The Committee recommends the Department to instruct the 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government to constitu te social audit 
panels to identify core grievance prone areas and streamline their systems 
accordingly. The Committee further recommends DoPPW to take up the 
matter with higher authorities of the concerned Ministries/Departments and 
impress upon them to resolve the grievances within the prescribed time limit. 
2.11    The details of core grievance prone areas which account for a large 
number of grievances/complaints lodged with the Department of Pension and 
Pensioners’ Welfare through CPENGRAMS and other modes are as follows: 
a.    Delay in initiation of pension 
b.    Incorrect sanction of pension 
c.    Delay in payment of other retirement benefits 
d.    Non-payment of arrears of pension 
e.    Non-Revision of pension payment order (PPO) 
f.    Non-payment of Dearness Relief & related  issues 
g.    Non-payment of Fixed Medical Allowances (FMA) 
h.    Life Certificate related issues 
i.    Discontinuation of Pension 
j.    Change in pension disbursing Bank/Branch 
k.    Delay in initiation of disability Pension (applicable in case of 
    Military/Para-military personnel). 
 
2.12      The Committee notes the fact that the Department has identified 
core grievance prone areas which account for a large number of 
complaints lodged on CPENGRAMS portal. It appears to the Committee 
that majority of grievances lodged on CPENGRAMS portal are related to 
Delay or incorrect sanction of pension/family pension and other 

11 
 
retirement benefits, Non -payment of arrears of pension, Revision of 
pension/family pension/pension payment Order, Issues related to medical 
facilities and Other service -related issues such as fixation of pay, MACP. 
The Committee recommends the Department to rope in Quality Council of 
India and enable the agencies involved in Pension authorization, 
sanctioning, processing and disbursement to streamline their systems so as 
to mitigate the volume of grievances and also to ensure citizen satisfaction.  
2.13       There is a provision for submitting feedback in CPENGRAMS portal 
by the pensioners/citizens after their grievance is disposed of.  This is opti onal 
and at the discretion of the pensioners/citizens. For the ease of senior citizens 
and those not very well conversant with information technology, any 
pensioner/citizen can  also  contact this Department through call centre at  toll 
free number  1800111960 which has been operationalised we.f   20.6.2019 
besides post and email  expressing dissatisfaction on resolution provided 
by concerned organisation.  Based on the request of the pensioners/citizens, the 
DoPPW   re -registers the cases where the grievance lodged by the citizen vide 
CPENGRAMS are being summarily disposed of by the Ministries/Departments 
to their dissatisfaction and the quality of disposal is not appropriate.    Such re-
registered cases are forwarded to the con cerned 
Ministry/Department/Organisation for re -examination and expeditious 
resolution as per rules in vogue. Such cases are also being taken up with the 
concerned organisation through portal, letters by senior  officers, inter -
ministerial meetings including Pension Adalats.  
 
2.14 Year-wise number of re-registered grievances is as under: 
Year 2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020 2020-2021 
 
Number of re-registered cases 
 
12 
 
55 
 
389 
 
566* 
*as on 28.1.2021 
  
2.15 The statistical details of the feedback (5 level grading from excellent to 
poor) submitted by pensioners/citizens available  in the portal w.e.f  Financial 
Year 2017-18 to 2020-2021( as on January 28, 2021) is as under:   
 

12 
 
Year 
Rating (5 level grading from excellent to poor) No of 
Grievances 
Excellent Very 
Good Good Average Poor 
2017-2018 
3402 
(44.30%) 
453 
(5.90%) 
495 
(6.45%) 
574 
(7.47%) 
2756 
(35.89%) 
 
7680 
2018-2019 
3271 
(43.10%) 
472 
(6.22%) 
512 
(6.75%) 
585 
(7.71%) 
2749 
(36.22%) 7589 
2019-2020 
2463 
(41.42%) 
357 
(6.00%) 
409 
(6.88%) 
465 
(7.82%) 
2253 
(37.88%) 5947 
2020-2021 
2754 
(45.48%) 
332 
(5.48%) 
370 
(6.11%) 
399 
(6.59%) 
2201 
(36.34%) 6056 
 
2.16 The Committee notes that there is a steep increase in the number of 
re-registered grievances over the years. This, coupled with the feedback 
given by the aggrieved, drives home the point that the quality of grievance 
redressal is not satisfactory. The Department may put an accountability 
mechanism in place and explore the feasibility of holding the grievance 
redressal authorities concerned answ erable for summarily disposing of 
grievances without appropriate qualitative action.   
2.17 The Department in its written replies stated that CPENGRAMS has 
achieved its major objectives in terms of filing of grievance, its reaching the 
concerned Ministry/Department as well as resolution and feedback as well as 
monitoring of such grievances by nodal officers of different 
Ministries/Department, a seamless exercise. Without CPENGRAMS, such MIS 
reports as provided for betterment of grievance experienc e would not have been 
possible. 
2.18. Some Pensioners’ bodies have claimed that CPENGRAMS functions in a 
mechanical manner – just forwarding and passing back the feedback and there is 
no system of back reference or review by Higher Authority. They have add ed 
that a large number of cases are closed without speaking order. 
2.19. Pensioners’ Associations have also mentioned that the pensioners do get 
reply promptly but in cases where request made in CPENGRAMS is not 
acceded to by the addressee and no reason or  rule/ Govt order rejecting the 

13 
 
request is stated. They have added that Hon’ble Apex Court has repeatedly 
directed that whenever a request is rejected, there must be reasoned order. 
2.20. The Department in its written reply has given following explanation:- 
(i) CPENGRAMS has a facility to re -register those cases wherein the 
Pensioner is not satisfied with the resolution and a back reference is 
made to the concerned Ministry/Department. 
(ii) DoPPW is separately monitoring such type of grievances with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments. 
(iii) CPENGRAMS has a facility wherein the concerned 
Ministry/Department can upload a speaking order which can be 
viewed by the Petitioner in CPENGRAMS. 
(iv) Provision for Appeal by Pensioner/Family pensioner would also be 
incorporated in the CPENGRAMS module. 
(v) This department has already advised all Ministries/Departments to 
resolve the grievances within the stipulated time frame and in case 
the demand is rejected a speaking order should be passed and also 
posted in the portal. 
2.21 The Committee acknowledges the consistent efforts being made by 
the Department to improve the effectiveness of grievance redressal 
machinery. The Committee in its 100 th Report recommended the 
Department to strengthen the Grievance Redressal mechanism and ma ke it 
more citizen friendly. The Committee desired that there should be a nodal 
authority in the department to whom complaints against the 
orders/decisions of individual Ministries/Departments can be made. The 
Committee hopes that the appellate mechanism s hall be operationalized at 
the earliest. The Department may apprise the Committee about the status 
of appellate mechanism in its Action Taken Replies. 
 

14 
 
Pension Adalat  
2.22.      With a view to strengthen the grievance redressal mechanism, DoPPW 
has started organizing Pension Adalats. The objective is to provide on -the-spot 
resolution of unresolved grievances in CPENGRAMS. In the Adalat, the 
concerned Ministry/Department, the PAO, the concerned Bank and 
representative of the Pensioner are called on a single platform for resolution of 
the grievances across the table.  However, the decision/award of these Pension 
Adalats does not have any judicial/quasi -judicial sanctity, as it is a 
forum/platform where the pensioner or his representative can meet all the  
stakeholders and resolve the issue. 
2.23      In 2017, Pension Adalat was started on experimental basis and 
Department of Pension & Pensioners Welfare held it on September 20, 2017. A 
total of  29 grievances, which were old or where the pensioners have ex pressed 
his/her dissatisfaction over the disposal by the concerned authorities, were 
selected from the unresolved grievances in CPENGRAMS. Out of the 29 
selected cases, 26 cases were resolved in the Adalat itself and suitable 
instructions were given to the concerned Departments in the remaining cases. 
2.24     The 2nd Pension Adalat was held on September 18, 2018,  which was a 
Nationwide Pension Adalat. Department of Pension & Pensioner’s Welfare took 
up 36 grievances (including 4 cases which could not be r esolved in the last 
Pension Adalat) where the pensioners has expressed his/her dissatisfaction over 
the disposal by the concerned authorities, were selected from the unresolved 
grievances in CPENGRAMS. Out of these, 22 cases were settled on -the-spot in 
the Adalat. Suitable instructions/directions were given in the remaining cases to 
the concerned Departments/PAO/CPAO/Banks to resolve the grievances. 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations were asked to hold their own Pension 
Adalats where all the stake -holders viz. the Heads of the Department, the PAO 
office and the concerned Bank, can come together on one table along with the 
pensioner or his representative and provide on -the-spot resolution within the 

15 
 
extant rule. From the reports received from them, 13112 cases were taken up for 
redressal in these Pension Adalats. 9582 (73%) pending grievances relating to 
Central Govt. Ministries/Departments/Organisations wereresolved in one single 
day.  
2.25     The 3 rd Pension Adalat was held on August 23, 2019 which was 
Nationwide Pension Adalat. Department of Pension & Pensioner’s Welfare took 
up 42 grievances (28 fresh unresolved grievances in CPENGRAMS along with 
14 unresolved cases/grievances of the last Pension Adalat) were taken up in the 
Pension Adalat. Out of these,  29 cases were settled on -the-spot in the Adalat. 
Suitable instructions/directions were given in the remaining cases to the 
concerned Departments/PAO/CPAO/Banks to resolve the grievances. 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations also held their Pension Adalat.  From the 
reports received from Ministries/Departments, 5277 cases were taken up for 
redressal in these Pension Adalats. 3573 (67.7%) pending grievances relating to 
Central Govt. Ministries/Departments/Organisations were resolved in one single 
day.  
2.26    The 4 th Pension Adalat was held for the first time, outside Delhi, at 
Jammu on February 29, 2020. 342 cases, pertaining to Central government 
pensioners of various Departments and Ministries viz. Textiles, Defence, 
Forests, ASI, GSI, CGWB, CWC, C&AG, NSS O, DGDD, BSF, SSB, CISF, 
CRPF, ITBP, MIB and JKGAD were discussed. Out of which, 319 such cases 
were settled. In 23 cases the concerned Departments were advised to resolve the 
pending cases as per extant rules and send a report to DoP&PW. 
2.27    As regards the 5th Pension Adalat, due to spread of Covid-19 Pandemic, 
Ministry/Department/Organization/Field formation  were asked to conduct 
Nation-wide Pension Adalat in the last week of December, 2020 and First week 
of January, 2021,  leveraging digital technology to conduct the Adalat through 
Video Conferencing. While holding these Adalats, each Ministry was asked to 
ensure the presence of all concerned stake -holders viz. HoD, DDO, PAO and 

16 
 
officials of concerned Banks, at the Pension Adalat from their respective 
locations on Video Conferencing. The objective of the Adalat was prompt 
resolution of pensioners' grievances ( grievances relating to family pensioners 
and super senior citizens ), within the framework of extant policy guidelines . 
Cases were taken up   from ‘Bhavishya Portal’ where PPO was not issued in 
cases of Superannuation/VRS/Family Pension not granted after death of 
deceased employee and family pension cases of grievances from CPENGRAMS 
were also added. 
2.28.    Some Pension ers’ Associations have remarked that the system of 
Pension Adalat has degenerated into a mere ritual and the name itself is 
misnomer as  Pension Adalats do not have any judicial/quasi -judicial status. No 
pleaders and presenters are permitted. On the pretext of disposing of the cases at 
the Adalat, cases continue to be neglected. Besides, the Notification for Pension 
Adalat is not properly circulated nor are cases uploaded on Pensioners Portal.  
2.29  The department in its written replies has submitted that most of the 
Associations in their letters have commended the efficacy of the system of 
Pension Adalats. Some have also confirmed participation. The department has 
added that the Adalats do not have any judicial/quasi -judicial powers for which 
already there are Courts and Centra l Administrative Tribunal. The D epartment 
has further added that since Pensioners had to spend years fighting cases in 
courts, this system was evolved to deliver speedy justice.  
2.30.  The Committee is pleased to note that Pension Ad alat has emerged 
as an effective platform for the redressal of pension grievances. The 
Committee recommends the Department to harness video conferencing 
technology and hold Virtual All India Pension Adalats on a half -yearly 
basis so that the grievances whi ch could not be resolved through 
CPENGRAMS during the six -month period and beyond can be redressed 
at once. The Committee urges the Department to ensure that pension 
Adalats cover all Ministries/Departments having long pending grievances 

17 
 
on a rotational ba sis so that no Ministry/ Department is left out. Further, 
the Committee impresses upon individual Ministries/Departments to 
ensure that pension adalats should be presided over by officers of 
appropriate level and reasonable seniority having sufficient know ledge of 
current as well as past rules and procedures. 
Alternative Dispute Resolution  
2.31 DoPPW has informed that presently there are approximately 310 cases 
relating to pension matters which are pending in various Courts/Tribunals and 
which are being contested by the concerned Administrative 
Ministries/Departments as per the laid down guidelines.  On being asked, the 
Department has apprised the Committee that no Guidelines/Instructions have 
been issued by DoPPW to Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to 
resolve the grievances of Pensioners’ through Alternative Dispute Resolution 
methods such as conciliation at pre-litigation stage as of now. 
2.32 The petitions on pension related grievances generally relate to non -
payment/delayed/less payment of pension and other retirement benefits, non -
revision of pension as per the orders issued in implementation of the 
recommendations of the Pay Commission, etc. It is primarily the responsibility 
of the Administrative Ministry/Department, where the employee  last served, to 
contest the cases pertaining to the pensioners belonging to their Department, to 
keep a track of the progress of the case, to ensure timely action as per the Court 
directives and to adopt a unified stand in the Court on behalf of Governmen t of 
India. However, in cases where the issue raised in the petition involves 
rules/policy of DoPPW, necessary advice/inputs are provided by this 
Department to the concerned Ministry/Department for preparing their reply in 
the court case. If, in a case the re are multiple petitioners belonging to more than 
one  Ministry/Department and the issue raised in the petition involves 
rules/policy of this Department,  such a case is contested in the Court/Tribunal 

18 
 
by Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare. There are 6 such cases which 
are being contested by Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare. 
2.33 The Committee believes that denial of timely justice amounts to 
denial of justice itself. The Committee is of the considered view that the 
elderly should not b e forced to approach Courts to claim their rightful 
entitlements. The Committee accordingly recommends the Department to 
explore the feasibility of institutionalizing an alternative dispute resolution 
mechanism such as pre -litigation conciliation to resolv e the grievances of 
pensioners at pre-litigation stage itself. 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
Grievances pertaining to Pension Policy, Pension Structure and other 
Retirement Benefits 
 
3.0 The Committee held its second meeting on 4 th January, 2021 during which it 
heard the Secretary, Central Government Pensioners’ Welfare Association followed 
by the Secretary, Department of Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare and Controller 
General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance. During the meeting, the  Committee 
discussed specific grievances relating to pension policy, pension structure and 
pension procedure among others. 
 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES' GROUP INSURANCE SCHEME (CGEGIS) 
3.1. The Central Government Employees' Group Insurance Scheme (CGEGIS) , a 
group insurance scheme, exclusively meant for the Central Government Employees 
came into force w.e.f. 01 st January, 1982. It is a self -financing and self -supporting 
Scheme without any financial assistance from the Government. The scheme was 
launched with the twin objectives of providing insurance cover to their families in 
the event of death in service and providing lumpsum payment to augment their 
resources on retirement. The subscription paid by members towards the Scheme is 
recovered every month from  their salary and bifurcated into 2 funds, namely - 
'Savings Fund' and an 'Insurance Fund' in the ratio 70:30.   
3.2. The Committee was informed that the rate of subscription per unit is fixed at 
Rs. 15/- per month since 01.01.1990. A Group 'C' employee has to subscribe for two 
units, a Group 'B' employee for four units and a Group 'A' employee for eight units. 
The amount of insurance cover is Rs. 15,000/- for each unit of subscription of Rs. 15 
per month. It will be paid to families of those 'employees' wh o unfortunately die due 
to any cause while in service. Thus, the maximum insurance cover for Group 'A' 
employees stands at Rs.1,20,000; for Group 'B' at Rs. 60,000 and for Group 'C' at 
Rs. 30,000. Ministry of Finance publishes 'Table of Benefits' and the t otal amount is 
worked out using the same depending upon when the employee joined the Scheme 

20 
 
and the year/ month of cessation of membership. Upon employee's exit from the 
Scheme, only the Savings amount, as applicable on the concerned date, is payable. 
In case of demise of the employee, the Savings amount applicable on the date plus 
the insured amount is payable.  
3.3. The Committee is of the view that the benefits provided by social security 
systems should improve quality of life, support independence and compensate 
for the loss of income after retirement. As regards CGEGIS, the Committee 
notes that the monthly deductio n as well as the insurance amount have 
remained unchanged since 1990. In the present context, the insurance cover 
provided by CGEGIS seems to be too meagre to be commensurate with the 
elevated cost of living.  Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government 
to implement the recommendations of Seventh Central Pay Commission and 
increase the Insurance amount to Rs. 50,00,000, Rs. 25,00,000 and Rs.15,00,000 
for Group 'A', 'B' and C officers/ staff respectively with commensurate 
enhancement in monthly contri bution of Rs. 5000, Rs. 2500 and Rs. 1500 for 
respective Groups of officers/ staff.  
3.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that India has been undergoing 
rapid demographic changes over the last three decades. The mortality and 
morbidity rates have also changed remarkably. The Committee also notes that 
the 'Table of Benefits' published by the Ministry of Finance is based on the 
mortality rate of 3.75 per thousand per annum upto 31.12.1987 and 3.60 per 
thousand per annum thereafter. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that 
there is a need to review the current mortality rate and accordingly revise the 
apportionment between the Savings and Insurance funds. The Committee 
agrees with the observation made by the Seventh Central Pay Commission in 
this regard and recommends that the ratio of Savings Fund to Insurance Fund 
be modified from the present 70:30 to 75:25 at the earliest. 
 

21 
 
GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND (GPF) 
3.5. General Provident Fund (GPF) Scheme came into effect from 01 st April, 
1960 and is applicable to Government servants who were appointed before 1st 
January, 2004 and are covered by the Defined Benefit Pension Scheme (Central 
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972). The Government servants appointed on 
or after 1 st January, 2004 are covered by the Nat ional Pension System and are 
not eligible to subscribe to the GPF.As per the rules, all temporary/permanent 
Government servants appointed before 1.1.2004 and not contributing to any 
other Provident Fund (e.g. Contributory Provident Fund) have to compulsori ly 
subscribe to the General Provident Fund.  
3.6 The GPF Scheme was introduced mainly to foster the habit of savings 
amongst the Government employees and to provide them financial help in times 
of need. Under this Scheme, monthly subscription is fixed by t he subscriber 
himself subject to the condition that it will not be less than 6% of his basic pay 
and not more than his basic pay. Central Government credits annual interest in 
the account of subscriber each year as per the rate of interest decided in that 
financial year. When a subscriber retires or quits the service, the amount 
standing to his credit in the Fund becomes payable to him. 
3.7. The Committee notes that GP Fund is one of the most popular and 
reliable savings funds amongst Government employees for it can be relied upon 
in times of need while in service or after retirement. This also ensures that the 
Government employee has a substantial amount in his bank account to meet any 
unforeseen expenditure after his/ her retirement. 
3.8  The Committee was  informed that the major grievances with respect to 
GPF from Pensioners' are inaccurate and delayed GPF settlement, along with 
interest on their retirement, due to frequent instances of missing credits in their 
GPF accounts reported mostly by subscribers, who during their service moved 
from one establishment to another or were assigned foreign deputation and also 

22 
 
by Officers of All India Services, who proceed on deputation outside their 
cadres. The Department informed that the situation of missing credit ar ises 
mainly in cases where the GPF account is maintained by an establishment 
different from that generating their salary bills and deducting their GPF 
subscription. The Committee was further informed that to avoid such 
grievances, the Department of Pension s and Pensioners' Welfare vide OM No. 
3/7/2020-P&AO dated 17 th July, 2020 has issued instructions making it 
mandatory for all offices maintaining GPF accounts to intimate the particulars 
of missing credits, once in every financial year, to the authority re sponsible for 
deducting the GPF subscription, under intimation to the concerned subscriber. 
Further, a complete statement of all credits, debits and interest since inception 
of the GPF account is to be provided to every subscriber, mandatorily two years 
before the date of retirement and seek representation, if any, within 60 days 
from the receipt of such a statement.  
3.9. Since the amount deposited in GPF Account is mainly the monthly 
contribution made by a Government employee while in service, it is expec ted 
that they should be paid the deposited amount along with interest in one sum on 
the day of exit from the Fund consequent to retirement/ resignation.  The 
Committee notes that despite having integrated structure of GP Fund Account, 
All India Services Officers and other Officials in transferable establishments are 
subjected to opening of separate GP Fund account at each place of posting in 
course of their service which leads to creation of multiple GPF accounts for the 
same person over a period of time or  when the borrowing organization fails to 
send the monthly GPF contribution deducted from the subscriber to his/ her 
parent office where GPF account is maintained subsequently give rise to the 
issue of missing credit. The existence of multiple GPF accounts  or absence of 
transfer of deposit to the establishment where GPF account of a subscriber is 
maintained often poses problems in need-based withdrawal from the Fund while 
in service or after exit from GPF Scheme consequent to the retirement.  

23 
 
3.10. The Committee is appreciative of the remedial action taken by the 
Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare to resolve GPF related 
grievances of pensioners vide their OM dated 17 th July, 2020 and expects 
that the same would help in the regular updation  of GPF account and in 
addressing the issue of missing credit. The Committee further observes that 
in this era of digitization and online banking, Government accounting 
system operates as an integrated unit. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the extant practice of opening multiple GPF accounts by 
an employee in transferable establishment should be done away with and 
that only single GPF account should be in operation throughout the 
duration of his/ her service. Further, if a Government servant is posted in 
an Establishment where GPF Rules are not applicable, the monthly deposit 
in the Fund should be made from the salary of the subscriber and 
transferred by the borrowing organization to his/ her parent department 
where his/her GPF account is maintai ned through electronic mode under 
intimation to the subscriber. 
Provisional Pension 
3.11. There are the following two rules in the Central Civil Services (Pension) 
Rules, 1972 for sanction of provisional pension to a retired Government 
servant: 
(i) Rule 64: In  cases where, in spite of following the procedure, the 
Head of Office is not able to forward the pension papers to the 
Accounts Officer within the specified period or the pension papers 
are returned by the Accounts Officer to the Head of Office for 
eliciting further information and the Government servant is likely to 
retire before authorization of pension, the Head of Office is required 
to issue a sanction letter  authorizing 100% of pension and gratuity 
as provisional pension and provisional gratuity, with holding 10% 
gratuity for unassessed Government dues.  

24 
 
(ii) The above instructions further provide that the provisional pension 
and provisional gratuity may be sanctioned in those cases also, 
where retiring Government servant is unable to submit the pension 
claim Forms for any reason. These instructions are also applicable in 
cases where the Government servant retires otherwise than on 
superannuation, i.e. voluntary retirement, retirement under FR 56, 
etc. 
(iii) Rule 69 read with Rule 9(4): In cases where any depar tmental or 
judicial proceedings are pending against a Government servant at the 
time of retirement, a provisional pension, equal to maximum pension 
which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service 
up to the date of retirement of the Government servant, is required to 
be sanctioned by the Accounts Officer. The provisional pension is 
payable till the issue of final orders after the conclusion of the 
departmental or judicial proceedings. No gratuity is payable till the 
conclusion of the depa rtmental or judicial proceedings and issue of 
final orders thereon.  
(iv) Rule 80 -A provides for sanction of provisional family pension in 
case of death of a Government servant while in service. Under this 
rule, after the family pension case has been sent by the Head of 
Office to the Accounts Officer, the Head of Office is required to 
issue a sanction letter authorizing the provisional pension not 
exceeding maximum family pension and provisional gratuity equal 
to 100% of the amount of death gratuity admissible . In order to 
avoid any hardship to the family of the deceased Government 
servant, Department of Pension & PW has issued instructions vide 
OM No. 1/11/2020 -P&PW(E) dated 29 th July, 2020 relaxing the 
provisions of rule 80 -A of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 to the 
extent that if a claim for family pension in Form 14 along with death 

25 
 
certificate and bank account details of the claimant has been 
received and the Head of Office is satisfied about the bonafide of 
that claim, he shall sanction provisional family pension immediately. 
The Head of Office shall not wait for forwarding of the family 
pension case to Pay & Accounts Office before sanctioning the 
provisional family pension. 
3.12.  The Committee desires that retirees should not be regarded as 
recipients of welfare dole but as the claimants of their rightful entitlements. 
As per the extant instructions laid down under Rule 64 of the CCS 
(Pension) Rules,1972, the payment of provisional pension will initially 
continue for a period not exceeding six months from the date of retirement. 
The period of provisional pension may be further extended, in exceptional 
cases, with the concurrence of PAO and after approval by  the Head of 
Department. However, the total period of provisional pension shall, in no 
case, be more than one year from the date of retirement. The Committee 
believes that every retiree should have a basic right to get “provisional” 
pension till their regular Pension Payment Order (PPO) is issued and other 
procedural formalities are completed. The Committee recommends that 
the Government may consider payment of “Provisional Pension” until the 
final pension is sanctioned to the retired Government servant. 
3.13 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that ongoing pandemic 
has further caused delay in disbursal of pensionary benefits to employees 
who got retired during this pandemic as they faced difficulties in 
submitting their Pension Forms to the Head o f Office or furnishing the 
hard copy of Claim Form along with Service Book to the concerned Pay 
and Accounts Office in time. The retiree belonging to Central Armed 
Police Forces (CAPFs) who usually are posted at different locations and 
whose Heads of Offices sit in offices of cities different from where their Pay 
and Accounts Office is located, faced more diffic ulties during this period. 

26 
 
The Department should intervene in the matter and come up with a viable 
solution and apprise the Committee in this regard. 
Grievances relating to Medical Facilities 
3.14.  Pensioners’ associations have brought certain grievances pertaining to 
the medical facilities to the notice of the Committee, the details of which are 
furnished below :- 
(i) The Apex Court has given decision in a number of cases that all the 
expenditure incurred by a beneficiary of Central Government 
Health Scheme on his or her treatment in non -empanelled Private 
Hospitals should be reimbursed to the beneficiary. However, the 
Government has not issued any general instructions in this regard 
with the result all such pensioners/beneficiaries have to approach 
the Court of law for justice by spending a lot of money and time.  
(ii) The medical facilities and attention to the critically i ll pensioners 
require urgent attention of the authorities. CGHS confines its 
operations to Delhi/NCR, state capitals and a few large urban 
centres. There are a large number of nodal points where many 
central government staff work and settle down after reti rement. 
Establishment of CGHS Wellness centres at more district locations 
will go a long way in catering to such pensioners. The monitoring 
of medical attention to the pensioners may also be included in ambit 
of the CPENGRAMS. At par medical facilities in all Central Govt. 
health schemes for pensioners needs to be ensured. 
(iii) Fixed Medical Allowance may be enhanced from Rs 1000 to Rs 
3000 per month since most pensioners are suffering from different 
diseases at old age and are unable to manage with meagre pensi on 
as CGHS hospital is not available in every town. 

27 
 
(iv) Pensioners having pension accounts in some Banks like SBI face 
difficulty in surrendering Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) and 
getting FMA Surrender Certificate to avail CGHS indoor & outdoor 
(OPD) facilitie s, due to their insisting on directions from CPAO 
which is very cumbersome and long drawn process through the 
parent dept. and concerned PAO. Such Pension Disbursing 
Authorities (PDAs) can very easily facilitate surrender of FMA to 
the pensioners on reques t, as no FMA or other allowance amount is 
mentioned in PPOs issued by CPAO. Only ‘as admissible’ is 
recorded there. Clear instructions to all PDAs may be issued in this 
regard, so that all such pensioners can get hassle free FMA 
Surrender Certificates to a vail CGHS facilities to which they are 
entitled after paying subscription to the Central Govt. Health Scheme 
(CGHS). 
3.15. Regarding reimbursement of expenditure incurred by a beneficiary of 
Central Government Health Scheme on his or her treatment in non -empanelled 
Private Hospitals, DoPPW has clarified that the matter of reimbursement of 
medical expenses of serving employees and pensioners comes under the 
administrative purview of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. All 
instructions are issued by the ad ministrative ministry after examining the 
judgment of the Court and in consultation with other concerned Departments 
e.g.  Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Finance etc. The Department 
has assured the Committee that this suggestion of the Associa tions shall be 
conveyed to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
3.16. Regarding the establishment of CGHS wellness centre and expansion of 
CGHS Network, DoPPW has clarified in its submission that it comes under the 
purview of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  Such decisions are taken by 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare based on their guidelines and 

28 
 
availability of resources. However, this suggestion of the Associations shall be 
conveyed to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
3.17. In regard to enhancement of Fixed Medical Allowance granted to 
pensioners, who reside outside the CGHS areas, for meeting expenditure on day 
to day medical expenses (OPD) that do not require hospitalization, the DoPPW 
has stated that the amount of Fixed Med ical Allowance was increased from Rs. 
300/- per month to Rs. 500/ - per month vide Department of Pension & PW’s 
OM dated 19.11.2014. The question of increasing the amount of Fixed Medical 
Allowance was examined by the 7th Central Pay Commission. Since the amount 
of this allowance was increased to Rs. 500/ - per month w.e.f. 19.11.2014, the 
Commission did not recommend any further enhancement of the allowance. 
According to DoPPW, the Committee headed by Finance Secretary was 
constituted to examine the recommendations of the 7th Central Pay Commission 
on various allowances payable to the Government employees/pensioners and 
the said Committee recommended enhancement of the Fixed Medical 
Allowance from Rs. 500/- p.m. to Rs. 1000/- per month. Accordingly, orders for 
enhancement of the Fixed Medical Allowance from Rs. 500/- p.m. to Rs. 1000/- 
per month, w.e.f. 1.7.2017, have been issued vide OM dated 19.7.2017. The 
Department has, however, assured that the suggestion of the Associations to 
further increase the same to Rs. 3000 p.m. shall be forwarded to the Department 
of Expenditure. 
3.18. Regarding hassle free FMA Surrender Certificates, DoPPW has 
submitted that this pertains to the codal formalities for processing such cases in 
accordance with the instructions of the CPAO and the Bank Authorities, 
however, they have assured that this issue shall be taken up with the CPAO for 
examination to explore the feasibility of simplification of procedure, if required. 
3.19. The Committee notes that despite favourable decision  of apex Court 
in a number of cases, all the expenditure incurred by a beneficiary of 
Central Government Health Scheme on his or her treatment in non -

29 
 
empanelled Private Hospitals should be reimbursed to the beneficiary, the 
Government has not yet issued an y general instructions in this regard and 
the pensioners/beneficiaries have to approach the Court of law for justice 
by spending a lot of money and time. The Committee believes that rules 
and procedures are just a means to achieve a larger goal i.e. welfare of 
pensioners and they should not become an end in themselves. Strict 
adherence and conformity to norms, rules and procedures might lead to a 
situation where strictly following these norms, rules and procedures instead 
of being means, become ends in themselves which create stumbling blocks 
in achieving mandated objectives/ends. The Committee is of the view there 
may be exigencies when the old age pensione rs may directly approach non-
empanelled hospitals for treatment without first approaching a 
Government hospital. They should not be deprived of their rightful 
entitlements under any circumstances. The Committee recommends the 
Department to play a pro -active role and pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Health and Family welfare. The Committee also recommends 
the Department to seek details of action taken by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare on the judgements of the Apex Court in this regard 
and furnish them to the Committee in its Action Taken Replies. 
3.20. The Committee is in agreement with the views of Pensioners’ 
Associations that CGHS should not confine its operations to metro cities, 
state capitals and a few large urban centres only. The Gove rnment may 
explore opening of CGHS centres at district locations or designate already 
functional Government hospitals in district headquarters as CGHS 
Centres to provide treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The Government 
may also include settlement of medical  facility related grievances of 
pensioners on the portal of CPENGRAMS as requested by pensioners and 
the DoPPW should work in tandem with Health Ministry in this regard. 

30 
 
3.21. The Committee takes note of the fact that Fixed Medical Allowance is 
granted to pensioners who reside outside the CGHS areas for meeting 
expenditure on day -to-day medical expenses (OPD) that do not require 
hospitalization. The Committee also takes note of the request of 
Pensioners’ Associations for enhancement of Fixed Medical Allowan ce 
from Rs 1000 to Rs 3000 per month as most pensioners are suffering from 
different diseases at old age and are unable to manage with meagre pension 
as CGHS hospital is not available in every town. The Committee 
recommends DoPPWto take up this issue of en hancement of Fixed Medical 
Allowance with the Finance Ministry as Rs 1000 is a very meagre amount 
for an old age pensioner and apprise the views of the Finance Ministry to 
the Committee in its Action Taken Replies.  
3.22. The Committee takes note of the di fficulties faced by pensioners in 
surrendering their Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) and getting FMA 
Surrender Certificate to avail CGHS indoor & outdoor (OPD) facilities, 
and, accordingly, recommends  DoPPW and CGA that the procedural 
loopholes coming in th is way should be plugged and ensure that all such 
pensioners should get FMA Surrender Certificates in a hassle free manner 
through online mode under intimation to the bank concerned and a 
timeline should be fixed in this regard.  
3.23. The Committee notes that the Central Government provides health 
care facilities for both, serving as well as, retired employees. However, the 
Committee observes that serving employees of central government are 
covered under the Central Service (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944  (CS 
(MA) Rules), which provides facilities for availing medical facilities outside 
CGHS covered areas. However, these Rules are not applicable to 
pensioners, and instead pensioners residing outside CGHS covered area are 
entitled to Fixed Medical Allowance  (FMA). The Committee is of the view 
that non -applicability of CS (MA) Rules to pensioners residing outside 

31 
 
CGHS areas has placed them at disadvantaged position vis -à-vis serving 
employees. Accordingly, the Committee feels that either the provisions for 
medical facilities available to serving employees also needs to be extended 
to pensioners or instead of increasing FMA year after year, DoPPW may 
moot a proposal for introducing cashless health insurance facilities for such 
pensioners in nearby Private Healt h Centers in lieu of FMA on voluntary 
basis. 
 
Additional Quantum of Pension 
3.24. At present, Central Government Pensioners are entitled to receive an 
additional quantum of pension equivalent to 20% of basic pension on attaining 
the age of 80 years, 30% on attaining 85 years, 40% on attaining 90 years, 50%  
on attaining 95 years and 100% of on crossing 100 years.  
3.25  In this regard, Pensioners’ bodies have requested that 5% additional 
quantum of Pension may be considered to be commenced on attaining the age 
of 65 years, 10% on 70 years, 15% on 75 years and 20% on 80 years. 
3.26. The Department in their written submission has stated that the provision 
regarding additional pension/family pension on attaining the age of 80 years and 
above was introduced with effect from 01.01.2006 on implementation of the 
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission.  
3.27. The Department further stated that the Commission was of the view that 
older pensioners/family pensioners require a better deal because their needs, 
especially those relating to health, increase with age. Accordingly, the 
pensioners/family pensioners get additional quantum of pension amounting to 
20% on attaining the age of 80 years, 30% on 85 years, 40% on 90 years, 50% 
on 95 years and 100% on attaining the age of 100 years. This provision was 
examined by the 7th Central Pay Commission also. The Commission was of the 
view that the existing rates of additional pension and additional family pension 

32 
 
are appropriate. The Department has, however, assured that this suggestion of 
the Associations shall be conveyed to the Department of Expenditure. 
3.28. The Committee is very much cognizant of the social churning taking 
place in our society over the years.  The joint family system is breaking 
down giving way to nuclear families. The growth of nuclear families due to 
geographical and social  mobility have further led to rise in individualism 
and individualistic thinking and the generation who want to live away from 
shackles of joint families and patronage of elderly parents or grandparents. 
According to one estimate, by 2050, the share of pop ulation over the age of 
60 is likely to increase significantly in the country.  In view of such changes 
at societal level, we need to have a robust pension system for elderly which 
can help them survive in this world without being a burden on anyone. The 
Committee is of the view that the Government should sympathetically 
consider the demand of Pensioners’ Associations for 5% additional 
quantum of Pension on attaining the age of 65 years, 10% on 70 years, 15% 
on 75 years and 20% on 80 years to the Pensioners . The Committee 
recommends DoPPW to pursue vigorously with Finance Ministry and 
apprise the Committee of the outcome. 
Enhancement of Grant-in -aid 
3.29. The Pensioners Associations have also made a request for enhancement 
of Grant in aid admissible to iden tified Pensioners’ Associations from Rs. 
75,000-/ per year to Rs.1,50,000/- per year. 
3.30. The Department in their response has stated that this issue would be 
decided on the basis of justification for additional funds by the Associations 
considering thei r previous performance/fund utilization and subject to 
availability of resources. 
3.31. The Committee is of the view that Pensioners’ associations play an 
instrumental role in promoting Pensioners’ Welfare besides providing a 

33 
 
platform for the retirees to p roject their grievances to the concerned 
agencies/authorities for their overall welfare. The Committee is satisfied 
with the reply of the Department and hopes that additional funds will be 
provided to deserving associations based on their previous performa nce 
and fund utilization. 
Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP) 
3.32. The Pensioners’ bodies have claimed that Modified Assured Career 
Progression (MACP) was awarded by the Government to its employees and 
pensioners in 6 th Central Pay Commission from September 2008 onwards after 
release of 6 th CPC Report. MACP assures 03 Promotions to an employee, each 
up gradation after completion of 10 years service. In case of non -availability of 
posts, Non Functional Grades (NFU) are gi ven with financial benefit. They 
have mentioned that there is a demand of pre -September 2008 pensioners  that 
MACP should be implemented w.e.f 1 st January, 2006, giving relief to 
pensioners retiring in the intervening period i.e. from January, 2006 to Augu st, 
2008. According to them, 3 rd MACP has been denied to this section of 
pensioners, whereas all other benefits have been given from January 2006 in 
terms of 6th CPC recommendations. 
3.33. Besides this, Pensioners’ Associations have also submitted that increment 
should be given to employees who retired on 30 th June after January 2006. 
According to them, this issue also arose after implementation of 6 th CPC 
recommendations wherein date of Increment to all Government Employees was 
brought a uniform date of 1 st July every year. Those employees who retired on 
30th June and had served one Full Year for earning increment were denied the 
increment on the plea that next date of increment is 1 st July. Such cases of 
pensioners who retired on 30 th June after Jan. 2006 will be not many, in 
hundreds only. But they were denied the last increment even after serving one 
full last year of service. Government should resolve the issue in favour of such 

34 
 
deserving pensioners. Also it is a matter of one last increment and does not  
pertain to very large numbers and heavy financial implications. 
3.34. DoPPW in its written reply has stated that this is a policy matter and 
comes within the purview of the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT). 
They have further stated that any dec ision on date of implementation of 
Modified Assured Progression Scheme and Grant of Increment is taken by the 
DoPT keeping in view various factors including the judicial dicta. However, 
they have assured to convey this suggestion of the Associations to DoPT. 
3.35. The Committee feels that DoPPW should pursue the matter of 
implementation of MACP w.e.f 1 st January, 2006 with DoPT as it will  give 
relief to pensioners retiring in the intervening period i.e. from January, 
2006 to August, 2008  as all other benefits were given to them from January 
2006 as per  6 th CPC recommendations. The Committee also recomm ends 
DOPPW to consider the case of Pensioners’ who retired on 30 th June and 
were denied the increment on the plea that next date of retirement is 1 st 
July. 
War widows 
3.36 The Committee received a representation from an aggrieved woman 
family pensioner whe rein she has mentioned that certain provisions applicable 
to widows of paramilitary forces and civil government servants whichcause 
disparity in payment of liberalized full pension to widows of civil/ paramilitary 
forces as compared to widows of Defence Forces Personnel. As per rule, widow 
of a defence personnel is entitled to full pension irrespective of her remarriage 
status, whereas widow of a paramilitary/ civilian govt. servant gets only 30% of 
her applicable full liberalized pension (a huge 70% deduct ion) if she remarries  
andthis rule is applicable even when she fully supports kids from her previous 
marriage.  
3.37  The Committee feels that widows of paramilitary/ civilian govt. 
servants should not be discriminated against widows of Defence forces 

35 
 
Personnel and recommends that the Government should sympathetically 
consider the plight of such women and explore the feasibility of amending 
Central Civil Services Pension rules to enable widows of Paramilitary/Civil 
Government Servants get full liberalized pension at par with widows of 
defence personnel even after their remarriage. 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
Grievances pertaining to Authorization, sanction and processing of pension 
 
Authorization, Sanction and Processing of pension 
4.0 As per the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 and 
orders/instructions issued by the Government, the authorities/agencies involved in 
the process of preparation and payment of pensionary benefits to the pensioners and 
their respective role in this regard is described in ensuing paras: 
4.1 Each individual Ministry/Department of Govt. of India is responsible for the 
Pension processing, sanction and payment of pensionary benefits of its retiring 
employees. Within each of the Ministries/Departments, the following authorities are 
involved in the process: 
I Head of Office of the concerned Ministry/Department 
Head of Office functions under the overall supervision and control of the 
concerned Administrative Ministry/Department . The Head of Office in a 
Ministry/Department is a Gazetted officer declared as such under the Delegation 
of Financial Powers Rules, 1978. He is required to perform the following duties: 
(i) Authorisation of pension  
 To obtain and maintain the nomination forms of the Government servant 
for gratuity, GPF, CGEGIS, Commutation of pension, etc., 
 To verify the service qualifying for pension and gratuity, if necessary, in 
consultation with the Department/offices where the Government servant 
had worked in the past. 
 To obtain No Dues certificate from Directorate of Estate s, in respect of 
the Government accommodation occupied by the Government servant. 

37 
 
 To obtain the forms/pension papers from the retiring Government servant 
six months before his/her date of retirement. 
 To determine the emoluments and qualifying service for d etermining the 
amount of pension and gratuity. 
 To determine the amount of Government dues (like House Building 
Advance & other advances, excess payment of pay and allowances, etc.) 
to be recovered from the gratuity and intimating the same to Pay & 
Accounts Office. 
 To communicate the fact regarding pendency of departmental/judicial 
proceedings against the retiring Government servant. 
 To forward the pension papers to the Pay & Accounts Office for 
Authorisation of pension, gratuity, and commutation of pension by 
issuing a Pension Payment Order. 
 To sanction Provisional pension and provisional gratuity in cases where 
there is likely to be a delay in authorisation of pension & issue of PPO. 
 To make payment of Retirement Gratuity (after adjusting the Government 
dues) and Commuted value of pension after authorisation by Pay & 
Accounts Office. 
(ii) Authorisation of Family Pension on death of a serving Government 
servant 
 To obtain claim for family pension//death certificate in respect of the 
deceased Government servant from the eligible family member. 
 To determine the emoluments for determining the amount of family 
pension and death gratuity. 

38 
 
 To determine the amount of Government dues to be recovered from death 
gratuity and intimating the same to Pay & Accounts Office. 
 To verify the eligibility of the claimant for family pension. 
 To forward the pension papers to the Pay & Accounts Office for 
Authorisation of family pension and death gratuity by issuing a Pension 
Payment Order. 
 To sanction Provisional family pension pending au thorisation of regular 
family pension & issue of PPO. 
 To make payment of Death Gratuity (after adjusting the Government 
dues) in accordance with the nominations/relevant rules, after 
authorisation by Pay & Accounts Office. 
(iii) Authorisation of Family Pension o n death of a pensioner/family 
pensioner 
 To obtain claim for family pension/death certificate in respect of the 
deceased pensioner/family pensioner from the eligible family member, in 
cases where the name of family pensioner is not included in the PPO to 
the pensioner. 
 To verify the eligibility of the claimant for family pension. 
 To forward the pension papers to the Pay & Accounts Office for 
Authorisation of family pension and death gratuity by issuing a Pension 
Payment Order.  
(iv) Revision of Pension/family pension 
 To prepare the case for revision of pension/family pension in accordance 
with the instructions issued by the Government on the recommendations 

39 
 
of the Pay Commission and to send it to Pay& Accounts Office for 
issuing a revised Pension Payment Authority. 
II Pay & Accounts Office of the concerned Ministry/Department 
Pay & Accounts Offices attached to every Ministry/Department function under 
the overall supervision and control of the Controller General of Accounts, 
Department of Expenditure. The PAO attached to the concerned 
Ministry/Department is required to perform the following duties in regard to 
authorisation of pension/family pension and revision of pension/family pension: 
 To apply the requisite checks on the pension and family pension 
case/papers sent by the HOD. 
 To assess the amount of pension, family pension/family pension and 
gratuity and to issue the pension payment order. 
 To indicate in the Pension Payment Order, the name of the spouse of the 
Government servant, if alive, as family pensioner.  
 To indicate in the Pension Payment Order, the names of the  permanently 
disabled child or children and dependent parents and disabled siblings as 
family pensioners if there is no other member of family to whom family 
pension may become payable before su ch disabled child or children or 
dependent parents or disabled siblings. 
 To intimate to the Head of Office the amount of gratuity and commuted 
value of pension, as determined by the Accounts Officer, with the 
remarks that the amount of the gratuity may be drawn and disbursed by 
the Head of Office to the retired Government servant after adjusting the 
Government dues, if any, and the amount to be withheld, if any, as per the 
intimation of Directorate of Estates. 
 To forward a copy of the Pension Payment Order or the Revised Pension 
Payment Authority to the Central Pension Accounting Office for issuing a 
Special Seal of Authority.  

40 
 
 To authorize a provisional pension, in case any departmental or judicial 
proceedings are pending against the Government servant, and  no gratuity 
shall be paid to the Government servant until the conclusion of the 
departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon.  
III Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO), Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure 
Central Pension Accounting Office  is required to perform the following 
duties: 
 To issue the Special Seal of Authority and forward the same to the 
Pension Disbursing Authority/Bank along with the copy of the Pension 
Payment Order or the Revised Pension Payment Auth ority issued by the 
Accounts Officer. 
4.2 The Committee deliberated with the Secretary, Department of Pensions 
and Pensioners’ Welfare and the Controller General of Accounts regarding the 
grievances arising from authorization and processing of pensions.  
End-to-end Digitization 
 
4.3 DoPPW has apprised the Committee that it has taken various measures 
for simplification of procedures to reduce delays in processing, disbursal and 
revision of pensionary benefits such as:  
i. A common Pension processing software ‘BHAVISHYA’ was created 
with pre -fed Rules for Pension calculations for all Central Ministries. 
This has not only simplified the pension processing procedure, but also 
reduced the delays by the respective Ministries and  each stage of the 
Pension processing can be monitored by the concerned Ministry. 
BHAVISHYA has been made mandatory for all Central Civil 
Pensioners w.e.f. 01.01.2017 for Pension settlement. Pension process 

41 
 
tracking has ensured seamless and accurate pensio n processing for all 
Central Govt. Employees. 
ii. This has made ‘End to End Digitization’  of the Pension settlement 
possible resulting in the issue of electronic PPOs. The Department went 
a step further and now e -PPO can be sent directly to the Digi Locker of 
the Pensioner to enable quick retrieval of the PPO. 
4.4 Bhavishya software allows online filing of application for pension by the 
retiring employees, encapsulates the Pension Rules required for processing 
pension cases and generates all forms necessary for  finalizing pension cases as 
well as reports needed for monitoring by the Departments. The software has laid 
down strict timelines for various stages of pension processing across all 
stakeholders involved and keeps throwing up alerts to the pensioner on mo bile 
as well as to the stakeholder for meeting out the deadlines prescribed for various 
stages. By keeping track of the progress as well as close monitoring of each 
pension case, it introduces transparency and accountability into the system 
thereby pluggin g delays. Thus, the Bhavishya software benefits the retiring 
employees, pensioners and the Government authorities equally. 
4.5 The disbursal of pension by banks is monitored by Central Pension 
Accounting Office (CPAO), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
through e-scroll software in which CPAO examines the scroll received from the 
banks and analyses the delay in disbursal and the correct amount of pension etc. 
However, Bhavishya has the facility to only show the first credit of pension in 
the retiree’s account. 
4.6 Pensioners’ Associations have apprised the Committee that there is much 
delay, mainly on the part of parent departments/offices in processing pension 
papers from where the pensioner has retired. The delay is due to pending 
digitization of old office records and difficulties in manual retrieval of data.  
4.7 The Committee is of the view that end -to-end digitization of the 
pension process, right from the stage of submission of pension papers by 

42 
 
the retiring Government servant to Head of O ffice to the stage of 
forwarding of PPO and Special seal of Authority to the Pension Disbursing 
authority by Central Pension accounting Office will smoothen the pension 
process further, arrest the minutest of delays besides significantly bringing 
down the volume of grievances being registered on CPENGRAMS. The 
Committee recommends the Department to apprise it whether Bhavishya 
software renders end -to-end digitization of the whole pension process 
possible in its Action Taken Replies. The Department may also inform the 
Committee about the status of implementation of Bhavishya Software by 
non-civil Ministries in its Action Taken Replies. 
Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO)Web utility  
4.8 CPAO has apprised the Committee that it has developed a mobile 
responsive web utility i.e. Web Responsive Pensioners’ Service. Pensioners 
can avail the following services after registration & login on CPAO website: 
a) Pensioner Profile: Pensioners can view their own basic details and also 
view bank and PAO details.  They can u pdate/provide their contact details like 
mobile number, email, and Aadhaar number. 
b) Digital Record of Pension & Revision Orders: Pensioners can view list 
of all Pension Payments & Revision Orders sent to banks from CPAO, 
authorization of payment of pension with details like PPO& SSA No. and date 
sent from CPAO to bank. 
c) Download Facility of Pension/Revision Orders Sent to Banks : 
Pensioners can download the Pension/Revision Orders sent to Banks from 
CPAO.   
d) Pension Processing Status Tracking:  Both retired and retiring 
pensioners can track status of their pension cases both in fresh as well as 
revision cases like date of receipt of their cases in CPAO and date sent from 
CPAO to bank. 

43 
 
e) Monthly Details of Pension Payment:  Pensioners can view the details 
of monthly payments of pension, which are credited to their accounts by the 
bank, i.e. their basic pension, dearness relief, medical allowance, arrear 
payments, etc.   
f) Grievance Redressal:  Apart from Desktop, Pensioners can now lodge 
their grievances from their mobi le devices and view/track the status of their 
grievances. Besides lodging their grievances online on CPAO website, facility 
to lodge grievance by letter, fax, email, Toll free Number and personal visits 
and tracking the status is already provided. After re ceiving the grievances from 
pensioners; CPAO forwards the same online to the banks and field offices for 
redressal and status is updated in its website for the information of pensioners.  
g) SMS Facility : Pensioners are now provided SMS facility for pension 
process status at CPAO and at the stage of grievance registration & disposal. 
h) Links to Jeevan Pramaan, Bhavishya and CPENGRAMS Portals : To 
facilitate the pensioners for submission of Digital Life Certificate (DLC) in the 
month of November, a link to Jeevan Pramaan Portal has been provided on 
CPAO website.  For those Government servants who are going to retire soon, a 
link has been establ ished with Bhavishya Portal of DP&PW to enable them to 
track the status of their pension cases even before it reaches CPAO.  A link to 
CPENGRAMS (Central Pension Grievance Redress and Monitoring System) 
has also been provided so that if pensioners desire, they can lodge and track 
their grievances in CPENGRAMS portal.  
4.9 The Committee notes that CPAO’s web responsive Pensioners’ 
service offers a single point web solution for pensioners to obtain 
comprehensive information relating to status of pensions and pension 
payments. However,  the Committee observes that this web portal needs 
more publicity. The Committee is of the view that the success of any 
initiative depends upon the extent of its  reachability to the targeted 

44 
 
population groups. The Committee also e mphasizes that CPAO should 
publicise the portal through all possible means including the print and 
electronic media so that the benefits of the portal reach targeted 
beneficiaries. 
Simplification of procedure  
4.10. On being asked about the procedure for claiming family pension, DPPW 
has stated that in accordance with the extant rules/ instructions, a pensioner is 
required to open a joint account with his/her spouse. On death of a pensioner, 
family pension to the spou se, whose name is included in the PPO, is 
commenced by the Bank on submission of application on plain paper along with 
the death certificate of the deceased pensioner; whereas family pension to a 
member of the family, whose name is not included in the PPO,  is commenced 
by the Bank after a fresh PPO is issued by the concerned Pension sanctioning 
authority.  
4.11 On being asked about the procedure for claiming family pension by the 
children of a Government Servant suffering from physical or mental infirmities , 
the Department replied as under: 
‘As per Rule 54 (6) of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, if the son or daughter 
of a Government servant is suffering from any disorder or disability of 
mind including the mentally retarded or is physically crippled or disabled 
so as to render him or her unable to earn a living even after attaining the 
age of twenty -five years, the family pension is payable to such son or 
daughter for life subject to the fulfilment of the conditions laid down in 
the said rules. Further, before allowing the family pension for life to  any 
such son or daughter, the appointing authority is to satisfy that the 
handicap is of such a nature so as to prevent him or her from earning his 
or her livelihood and the same should be evidenced by a certificate 
obtained from a Medical Board comprisin g of a Medical Superintendent 
or a Principal or a Director or Head of the Institution or his nominee as 

45 
 
Chairman and two other members, out of which at least one shall be a 
Specialist in the particular area of mental or physical disability including 
mental retardation setting out, as far as possible, the exact mental or 
physical condition of the child. Further, the authority competent to issue 
disability certificate would be as specified in the guidelines issued by the 
M/o Health & Family Welfare. Any hospi tal or institution specified as 
Medical Authority for the purposes with the person with disabilities 
(equal opportunities protection of rights and full participation) Act by 
notification by the Central Government or State Government or a Union 
Territory Administration can issue disability certificate.’ 
4.12 The Department has informed the Committee vide its written submission 
that the following difficulties are encountered by the Children while obtaining 
disability certificate for the purpose of claiming family pension: 
 Delay due to taking decision by Pension Sanctioning 
authority/Appointing authority handicap is of such a nature so as to 
prevent him or her from earning his or her livelihood. 
 Delay in start of family pension by the banks. 
4.13 The Committee recommends the Department to instruct the 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to be proactive, reach 
out to the family pensioners and also assist them in claiming family 
pension. The Committee notes that the procedure of obtaining medical 
certificate/disability certificate by children of a deceased Government 
Servant is Kafkaesque and needs to be simplified. 
4.14. The Committee is of the view that Head of Office in a 
Ministry/Department may consider obtaining the forms/ pension papers 
from the retiring Government servant one year instead of six months 
before his or her date of retirement and determining the amount o f 
Government dues (like House Building Advance & other advances, excess 
payment of pay and allowances, etc.) to be recovered from the gratuity and 

46 
 
intimating the same to Pay & Accounts Office. Besides, in cases of 
authorization of Family Pension on death of a serving Government servant, 
the concerned Ministry/Department may keep a record of dependents of 
serving employees in a descending order in terms of their eligibility as it 
will help fast pace verification and decision in regard to the eligible 
claimant for family pension.  
4.15. The Committee also expresses its concern with regard to 
discontinuation/ delay in disbursement of Family Pension, especially in the 
case of pensioners and family pensioners of paramilitary forces based in 
rural areas due to var ious reasons. Further, as per the existing 
instructions, the last place of posting is considered as place of pension 
disbursement leading to harassment of family pensioners of paramilitary 
forces who have laid their life in the line of duty. The Committee,  
accordingly, recommends that for the benefit of pensioners/family 
pensioners’ of paramilitary forces, the Battalion Headquarter should be 
made place of pension’s disbursement, instead of last place of posting. 
Further, the Committee also feels that Depart ment needs to explore the 
feasibility of giving a choice to pensioners to choose place of pension 
disbursement in case of transferable job. 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER 5 
Grievances pertaining to disbursement of pension 
 
5.0 Pension is disbursed through Pension Disbursing A gencies comprising 
Banks, treasuries, Defence Pension Disbursing Offices among others. Majority 
of pensioners receive pension through banks. Banks have established their 
Centralised Pension Processing Centres (CPPC), which are the focal points in 
each bank to process pension cases. 
5.1 The role of Pension disbursing agencies (Banks) in the disbursement of 
pension is as follows: 
(i) Once the Special Seal Authority PPO is issued by the PAO of the 
concerned Ministry/Department to the Pension Disbursing Bank’s CPPC 
(Centralized Pension Processing Cell), each Pension disbursing bank has to 
ensure that the pension is credited into the pensioner’s account by the last 
working day of the month to which pension relates, except in the month of 
March when it would be credited in the first working day of April. 
(ii) Banks are to upwardly revise the Pension of the pensioner/family 
pensioner with their increasing age:  
Age of the Pensioner Additional Quantum of Pension 
From 80 years to less than 85 years 20% of basic pension 
From 85 years to less than 90 years 30% of basic pension 
From 90 years to less than 95 years 40% of basic pension 
From 95 years to less than 100 years 50% of basic pension 
100 years or more 100% of basic pension 
This percentage of upward revision is built into the Banks’ software and 
happens automatically. 
(iii) Ordinarily, the Annual Life Certificate should be submitted in the Bank 
from November 1 to November 30 every year. However, keeping in view the 
difficulties faced by very senior ci tizens aged 80 years and above, an 

48 
 
exclusive window from October 1 onwards has been provided to them to 
avoid the major rush from 1st November onwards. 
(iv) Further, in view of the pandemic and with the objective of avoiding 
crowds in the Pension Disbursin g Banks, the timeline for submission of Life 
Certificate, in consultation with the Controller General of Accounts, Dept. of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, has been extended from November 30, 
2020 to February 28, 2021 so that pension flow does not stop a fter the month 
of November. 
5.2 The Committee has received a large number of representations from 
pensioners and Pensioner Associations highlighting the grievances faced by 
pensioners’ during disbursement of pension. The representations were forwarded to 
the Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare for comments. The Committee 
has examined the replies furnished by the Department which are dealt with in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
Jeevan Pramaan Patra (Digital Life Certificate) 
5.3 As per the Guidelines  of the Ministry of Finance, the pensioner would be 
required to furnish a life certificate in November each year in the prescribed 
form. However, a pensioner who produces a life certificate in the prescribed 
form signed by any of the following, is exempted from personal appearance: - 
a) A person exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Criminal 
Procedure code; 
b) A Registrar or Sub -Registrar appointed under Indian Registration 
Act; 
c) A Gazetted officer of the Government; 
d) A Police Officer not below the rank o f Sub-Inspector in-charge of a 
Police Station; 
e) A Class-I officer of the Reserve Bank of India, an officer (including 
Grade II office) of the State Bank of India or its subsidiary; 

49 
 
f) A pensioned Officer who, before retirement, exercised the powers of 
a magistrate; 
g) A Justice of Peace; 
h) A Block Development Officer, Munsif, Tehsildar or Naib Tehsildar; 
i) A Head of Village Panchayat, Gram Panchayat, Gaon  Panchayat 
or an Executive Committee of a Village; 
j) A Member of Parliament, of State legislatures or of legislatures of 
Union Territory Governments/Administration 
k) Treasury Officer 
5.4      Some common difficulties encountered by Pensioners in the submission 
of physical life certificate are: 
 Old pensioners often find it difficult to go physically to the Bank 
branches for giving Life Certificate. 
 The queues in the branches in the month of November are often very 
long and Pensioners find it difficult to wait. 
5.5 Some common difficulties encountered by Pension disbursing Banks in 
receiving physical life certificate are: 
 The space in branches is small and difficult to offer Pensioners 
comfortable waiting space. 
 Shortage of staff in branches for obtaining Life certificate. 
5.6 Instructions have, therefore, been issued for submission of Life 
Certificate digitally through Jeevan Pramaan App. Such Digital Life Certificate 
can be submitted using finger print or iris scanning of the pensioner with the 
help of a bio -metric device which can be connected to a mobile phone or a 
computer. In case, however, it is not possible to h ave Digital Life Certificate 
either through finger print or through iris scanning, physical Life Certificate 
submitted by the pensioner is also acceptable. 
5.7 DoPPW commenced a pilot project in 8 cities and later expanded it to 24 
cities wherein all the P ensioners’ Associations were roped in to obtain Life 

50 
 
Certificate from the homes of Pensioners using an Iris -enabled device provided 
by the Department free of cost. Further, t his Department has been continuously 
monitoring/coordinating with all major pensio n disbursing banks to resolve 
these issues. As a result,  alliance of Public Sector Banks (PSB) has started 
Doorstep Banking Service and submission of Life Certificate is one of the 
services included under this scheme in 100 major cities.   
5.8 The Departme nt has also issued instructions, whereby the Banks were 
directed to resort to Video -based KYC within the guidelines of RBI which will 
obviate the need to resort to a bio-metric enabled device. UCO Bank has already 
started this successfully and other Banks have been asked to follow suit. 
DoPPW advised all the Pension Disbursing Banks vide its OMs dated 
11.09.2020 and 27.11.2020 to adopt the Video based Customer Identification 
Process (V-CIP) as an additional facility for obtaining a Life Certificate from 
the pensioners, within permissible RBI guidelines. UCO Bank has become a 
pioneer in this area and has already collected video -based life certificate for 
their 6546 pensioners. The Department is also coordinating with other Banks 
and National Payment Corporati on of India (NPCI) for further progress in the 
matter. 
5.9 In order to make this facility available across the country,  DoPPW roped 
in the India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) and utilise its huge network of Postmen 
and Gramin Dak Sevaks in providing doorstep f acility to pensioners for 
submission of life certificate digitally. As a result a huge number of pensioners 
across the country shall be able to avail  door step service  through Postmen/ 
Gramin Dak Sevak, without visiting to bank branch or standing in a queue 
outside the bank branches by paying a nominal amount. 
5.10 The Department also engaged with Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) to develop a face -recognition technology -
based system based on UIDAI Aadhaar software. As per this facility, the 
identity of a person will be established through face recognition technique. The 

51 
 
UIDAI server will identify the same and DLC shall get generated. Various 
checks are being incorporated into the system to avoid any malfunctioning. 
However, as o f now trials are on for this digital facility. This is in advanced 
stage of trials by MeitY. Once successful, it will be possible to give LC from 
any Android based smart phone. 
5.11 The Committee is highly appreciative of the Department for 
leveraging adva nced technology to the maximum possible extent and for 
leaving no stone unturned in redressing pensioners’ grievances and 
promoting their welfare. Infact, the Committee wishes that each Ministry 
and Department of the Government should work with similar con viction in 
public interest. The Committee recommends the Department to gradually 
expand the scope of DLC from Home project, Doorstep Banking and 
submission of DLC through postal agent to all major cities and towns. The 
Committee recommends the Department t o ensure that Video based 
Customer Identification Process and Facial recognition technology  are 
operationalized on a wider scale at the earliest. 
5.12 The Committee is of the view that elderly people, especially those 
aged 70 and above and those with physi cal infirmities experience 
inconvenience in withdrawing their pension amount from the Bank. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department to take up the 
matter with Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance and assess the 
feasibility of utilizing the Business Correspondent network to enable senior 
citizens to withdraw their pension amount from the comfort of their homes. 
Sensitization of Bank Officials and need for a Pensioner Ombudsman 
5.13 Pensioners’ associations have apprised the Committee that Banks take 
unduly long time to convert pension accounts to the family pensioner after the 
death of the main pensioner and in starting family pension sanctioned to the 
dependent unmarried/ widowed/ d ivorced daughters, leading to unnecessary 

52 
 
harassment. Instructions of Ministry of Finance are available to convert all 
pension accounts to joint accounts with the spouse and to start pension without 
delay in all cases. Pension payment should be started without delay on receipt of 
PPO in all other cases. Besides this, the Committee observed that significant 
number of grievances lodged in CPENGRAMS portal are related to inordinate 
delay in the revision of pension/family pension, submission of life certificate , 
etc. 
5.14 On being asked about the average time taken for the commencement of 
family pension, the Department has informed the Committee that as per 
information gathered from CPAO, scrolls received from Banks during the 
calendar year 2020 i.e. from January2020 to December2020, time taken for the 
commencement of family pension to spouse on death of pensioner or other 
family member co -authorized for pension on the same PPO No. varied from a 
minimum of 34 days to a maximum of 126 days. 
5.15 As per information received from banks, the difficulties faced by Pension 
Disbursing authorities while processing family pension cases is as under:- 
  
i. Late submission of information of death of the pensioner and 
complete documents by the family pensioner of the deceas ed 
pensioners. 
ii. In many cases, the name of family pensioner is either not available 
in PPO/e -SSA or it is deleted in subsequent e -SSA for which 
CPPCs seek clarification from the PSA through CPAO, which 
results in delay. 
iii. The name of family pensioner differs between PPO & CBS 
account with Bank. 
iv. The rate of admissible family pension is not clear to bank in some 
cases. 
v. In certain cases family pensioner is settled abroad without 
informing the bank and the case of family pension/death certificate 
duly authenticate d by appropriate authorities does not reach the 
bank in time. 
vi. Late information of death of regular pensioner is received from the 
family pensioner/members. In the meantime the pensioner’s 
account is continuously credited with regular pension payment till 
date of submission of next life certificate 

53 
 
vii. Late submission of complete set of documents duly verified by 
pension account holding branch officials 
viii. ln case of missing regular pensioners, as per codal procedures the 
copy of FlR, final report of investigating officer, affidavit from the 
family pensioners etc. needs to be processed through HOD to PAO 
to CPAO and CPAO to CPPC, it takes a lot of time for 
commencement of family pension to spouse. 
 
5.16 The Committee notes that Central Pension Processing Centres 
(CPPC) had been established as the central repository of data to facilitate 
data management and processing in a centralised manner. The intention 
was that the CPCC, one for each bank, would function as a back office to 
support the functioning of the large num ber of pension paying branches. 
The pension paying branches were to continue to be interface with 
individual pensioners. The Committee notes that pension paying branches, 
instead of resolving issues raised by the pensioners, either direct the 
pensioners to approach the CPPC or pass on the responsibility for delays 
and inaccuracy in payment to the CPPC. The Committee takes cognizance 
of the difficulties faced by Banks in processing family pension cases but 
also feels that Bank officials need to be properly s ensitised about their role 
and to appreciate the special need s of senior citizens. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to discuss the matter with RBI and Ministry 
of Finance and assess the feasibility of appointing a Pensioner Ombudsman 
on the lines of Bank Ombudsman for resolving grievances arising out of 
disbursement of pensions and apprise the Committee regarding the same in 
its Action Taken Replies. 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER 2 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CPENGRAMS AND PENSION ADALATS-WAY FORWARD 
 
1.  The Committee is concerned to note that, on an average 20% of grievances are 
not being disposed of within the stipulated time limit of 60 days. The Committee 
recommends the Department to instruct the Ministries/Departments of Central 
Government to constitute social audit panels to identify core grievance prone areas and 
streamline their systems accordingly. The Committee further recommends DoPPW to 
take up the matter with higher authorities of the concerned Ministries/Departments 
and impress upon them to re solve the grievances within the prescribed time limit.   
                                                                                                                                   (Para 2.10)                                                                                                                                         
2. The Committee notes the fact that the Department has identified core grievance 
prone areas which account for a large number of complaints lodged on CPENGRAMS 
portal. It appea rs to the Committee that majority of grievances lodged on 
CPENGRAMS portal are related to Delay or incorrect sanction of pension/family 
pension and other retirement benefits, Non -payment of arrears of pension, Revision of 
pension/family pension/pension pay ment Order, Issues related to medical facilities and 
Other service-related issues such as fixation of pay, MACP. The Committee recommends 
the Department to rope in Quality Council of India and enable the agencies involved in 
Pension authorization, sanction ing, processing and disbursement to streamline their 
systems so as to mitigate the volume of grievances and also to ensure citizen satisfaction.  
                                                                                                                                    (Para 2.12)                                                                  
3. The Committee notes that there is a steep increase in the number of re-registered 
grievances over the years. This, coupled with the feedback given by the aggrieved, 
drives home the point that the quality of grievance redressal is not satisfactory. The 
Department may put an accountability mechanism in place and explore the feasibility of 
holding the grievance redressal authorities concerned answerable for su mmarily 
disposing of grievances without appropriate qualitative action.                        (Para 2.16) 
4. The Committee acknowledges the consistent efforts being made by the 
Department to improve the effectiveness of grievance redressal machinery. The 
Committee in its 100 th Report recommended the Department to strengthen the 
Grievance Redressal mechanism and make it more citizen friendly. The Committee 

55 
 
desired that there should be a nodal authority in the department to whom complaints 
against the orders /decisions of individual Ministries/Departments can be made. The 
Committee hopes that the appellate mechanism shall be operationalized at the earliest. 
The Department may apprise the Committee about the status of appellate mechanism in 
its Action Taken Replies.                                                                         (Para 2.21) 
5. The Committee is pleased to note that Pension Adalat has emerged as an 
effective platform for the redressal of pension grievances. The Committee recommends 
the Dep artment to harness video conferencing technology and hold Virtual All India 
Pension Adalats on a half -yearly basis so that the grievances which could not be 
resolved through CPENGRAMS during the six -month period and beyond can be 
redressed at once. The Committee urges the Department to ensure that pension Adalats 
cover all Ministries/Departments having long pending grievances on a rotational basis 
so that no Ministry/ Department is left out. Further, the Committee impresses upon 
individual Ministries/Depart ments to ensure that pension adalats should be presided 
over by officers of appropriate level and reasonable seniority having sufficient 
knowledge of current as well as past rules and procedures.                               (Para 2.30)                                                                  
6. The Committee believes that denial of timely justice amounts to denial of justice 
itself. The Committee is of the considered view that the elderly should not be forced to 
approach Courts to claim their rightful entitlements. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Department to explore the feasibility of institutionalizing an 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism such as pre -litigation conciliation to resolve 
the grievances of pensioners at pre-litigation stage itself.                                    (Para 2.33) 
 
CHAPTER 3 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CPENGRAMS AND PENSION ADALATS- 
WAY FORWARD 
 
7. The Committee is of the view that the benefits provided by social security systems 
should improve quality of life, support independence and compensate for the loss of 
income after retirement. As regards CGEGIS, the Committee notes that the monthly 
deduction as well as the insurance amount have remained unchanged since 1990. In the 
present context, the insurance cover provided by CGEGIS seems to be too meagre to be 

56 
 
commensurate with the elevated cost of living.  Therefore, the Committee recommends 
the Govern ment to implement the recommendations of Seventh Central Pay 
Commission and increase the Insurance amount to Rs. 50,00,000, Rs. 25,00,000 and 
Rs.15,00,000 for Group 'A', 'B' and C officers/ staff respectively with commensurate 
enhancement in monthly contri bution of Rs. 5000, Rs. 2500 and Rs. 1500 for respective 
Groups of officers/ staff.                                                                                (Para 3.3) 
8. The Committee takes note of the fact that India has been undergoing rapid 
demographic changes over the last three decades. The mortality and morbidity rates 
have also changed remarkably. The Committee also notes that the 'Table of Benefits' 
published by the Ministry of Finance is based on the mortality rate of 3.75 per thousand 
per annum upto 31.12.1987 and 3.60 per thousand per annum thereafter. Therefore, the 
Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to review the current mortality rate and 
accordingly revise the apportionment between the Savings and Insurance funds. The 
Committee agrees with the observation made by the Seventh Central Pay Commission in 
this regard and recommends that the ratio of Savings Fund to Insurance Fund be 
modified from the present 70:30 to 75:25 at the earliest.                                       (Para 3.4) 
 
9. The Committee is appreciative of the remedial action taken by the Department of 
Pension and Pensioners' Welfare to resolve GPF related grievances of pensioners vide 
their OM dated 17th July, 2020 and expects that the same would help in the regular 
updation of GPF account and in addressing the issue of missing credit. The Committee 
further observes that in this era of digitization and online banking, Government 
accounting system operates as an integrated unit. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the extant practice of opening multiple GPF accounts by an employee 
in transferable establishment should be done away with and that only single GPF 
account should be in operation throughout the duration of his/ her service. Further, if a 
Government servant is posted in an Establishment where GPF Rules are not applicable, 
the monthly deposit in the Fund should be made from the salary of the subscriber and 
transferred by the borrowing organization to his/ her parent department where his/her 
GPF account is maintained through electronic mode under intimation to the subscriber. 
                                                                                                                                    (Para 3.10)                                                                  
10. The Committee desires that retirees should not be regarded as recipients of 
welfare dole but as the claimants of their rightful entitlements. As per the extant 
instructions laid down under Rule 64 of the CCS (Pension) Rules,1972, the payment of 

57 
 
provisional pension will initially continue for a period not exceeding six months from 
the date of retirement. The period of provisional pension may be further extended, in 
exceptional cases, with the concurrence of PAO and after approval by the Head of 
Department. However, the total period of provisional pension shall, in no case, be more 
than one year from the date of retirement. The Committee believes that every retiree 
should have a basic right to get “provisional” pension till their regular Pension Payment 
Order (PPO) is issued and other procedural formalities are completed. The Committee 
recommends that the Government may consider payment of “Provisional Pension” until 
the final pension is sanctioned to the retired Government servant.                   (Para 3.12) 
 
11. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that ongoing pandemic has further 
caused delay in disbursal of pensionary benefits to employees who got retired during 
this pandemic as they faced difficulties in submitting their Pension Forms to the He ad 
of Office or furnishing the hard copy of Claim Form along with Service Book to the 
concerned Pay and Accounts Office in time. The retiree belonging to Central Armed 
Police Forces (CAPFs) who usually are posted at different locations and whose Heads of 
Offices sit in offices of cities different from where their Pay and Accounts Office is 
located, faced more difficulties during this period. The Department should intervene in 
the matter and come up with a viable solution and apprise the Committee in this 
regard.                                                                                                                      (Para 3.13) 
12. The Committee notes that despite favourable decision of apex Court in a number 
of cases, all the expenditure incurred  by a beneficiary of Central Government Health 
Scheme on his or her treatment in non -empanelled Private Hospitals should be 
reimbursed to the beneficiary, the Government has not yet issued any general 
instructions in this regard and the pensioners/benefici aries have to approach the Court 
of law for justice by spending a lot of money and time. The Committee believes that 
rules and procedures are just a means to achieve a larger goal i.e. welfare of pensioners 
and they should not become an end in themselves. Strict adherence and conformity to 
norms, rules and procedures might lead to a situation where strictly following these 
norms, rules and procedures instead of being means, become ends in themselves which 
create stumbling blocks in achieving mandated objectives/ends. The Committee is of the 
view there may be exigencies when the old age pensioners may directly approach non -
empanelled hospitals for treatment without first approaching a Government hospital. 
They should not be deprived of their rightful entitlements under any circumstances. 

58 
 
The Committee recommends the Department to play a pro -active role and pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Health and Family welfare. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to seek details of action taken by the Ministry of Healt h 
and Family Welfare on the judgements of the Apex Court in this regard and furnish 
them to the Committee in its Action Taken Replies.                                            (Para 3.19)                                                                                                                     
13. The Committee is in agreement with the views of Pensioners’ Associations that 
CGHS should not confine its operations to metro cities, state capitals and a few large 
urban centres only. The Government may explore opening of CGHS centres at district 
locations or designate already functional Government hospitals in district headquarters 
as CGHS Centres to provide treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The Government may 
also include settlement of medical facility related grievances of pensioners on the portal 
of CPENGRAMS as requested by pensioners and the DoPPW should work in tandem 
with Health Ministry in this regard.                                                                      (Para 3.20) 
 
14. The Committee takes note of the fact that Fixed Medical Allowance is granted to 
pensioners who reside outside the CGHS areas for meeting expenditure on day-to-day 
medical expenses (OPD) that do not require hospitalization. The Committee also takes 
note of the request of Pensioners’ Associations for enhancement of Fixed Medical 
Allowance from Rs 1000 to Rs 3000 per month as most pensioners are suffering from 
different diseases at old age and are unable to manage with meagre pension as CGHS 
hospital is not available in every town. The Committee recommends DoPPWto take up 
this issue of enhancement of Fixed Medical Allowance with the Finance Ministry as Rs 
1000 is a very meagre amount for an old age pensioner and apprise the views of the 
Finance Ministry to the Committee in its Action Taken Replies.                       (Para 3.21) 
15. The Committee takes note of the difficulties faced by pensioners in surrendering 
their Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) and getting FMA Surrender Certificate to avail 
CGHS indoor & outdoor (OPD) facilities, and, accordingly, recommends  DoPPW and 
CGA that the procedural loopholes coming in this way should be plugged and ensure 
that all such pensioners should get FMA Surrender Certificates in a hassle free manner 
through online mode under intimation to the bank concerned and a timeline should be 
fixed in this regard.                                                                                                 (Para 3.22) 
16. The Committee notes that the Central Government provides health care facilities 
for both, serving as well as, retired employees. However, the Committee observes that 
serving employees of central government are covered under the Central Service 

59 
 
(Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 (CS (MA) Rules), which provides facilit ies for 
availing medical facilities outside CGHS covered areas. However, these Rules are not 
applicable to pensioners, and instead pensioners residing outside CGHS covered area 
are entitled to Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA). The Committee is of the view tha t non-
applicability of CS (MA) Rules to pensioners residing outside CGHS areas has placed 
them at disadvantaged position vis-à-vis serving employees. Accordingly, the Committee 
feels that either the provisions for medical facilities available to serving em ployees also 
needs to be extended to pensioners or instead of increasing FMA year after year, 
DoPPW may moot a proposal for introducing cashless health insurance facilities for 
such pensioners in nearby Private Health Centers in lieu of FMA on voluntary ba sis.      
                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.23)           
17. The Committee is very much cognizant of the social churning taking place in our 
society over the years.  The joint family system is breaking down giving way to nuclear 
families. The growth of nuclear families due to geographical and social mobility have 
further led to rise in individualism and individualistic thinking and the generation who 
want to live away from shackles of joint families and patronage of elderly parents or 
grandparents. According to one estimate, by 2050, the share of population over the age 
of 60 is likely to increase significantly in the country.  In view of such changes at  societal 
level, we need to have a robust pension system for elderly which can help them survive 
in this world without being a burden on anyone. The Committee is of the view that the 
Government should sympathetically consider the demand of Pensioners’ Asso ciations 
for 5% additional quantum of Pension on attaining the age of 65 years, 10% on 70 
years, 15% on 75 years and 20% on 80 years to the Pensioners. The Committee 
recommends DoPPW to pursue vigorously with Finance Ministry and apprise the 
Committee of the outcome.                                                                                     (Para 3.28) 
18. The Committee is of the view that Pensioners’ associations play an instrumental 
role in promoting Pensioners’ Welfare besides providing a platfo rm for the retirees to 
project their grievances to the concerned agencies/authorities for their overall welfare. 
The Committee is satisfied with the reply of the Department and hopes that additional 
funds will be provided to deserving associations based on  their previous performance 
and fund utilization.                                                                                                (Para 3.31) 
19. The Committee feels that DoPPW should pursue the matter of implementation of 
MACP w.e.f 1 st January, 2006 with DoPT as it will  give relief to pensioners retiring in 
the intervening period i.e. from January, 2006 to August, 2008  as all other benefits 

60 
 
were given to them from January 2006 as per  6 th CPC recommendations. The 
Committee also recommends DOPPW to consider the case of Pensioners’ who retired 
on 30th June and were denied the increment on the plea that next date of retirement is 
1st July.                                                                                                 (Para 3.35) 
20. The Committee feels that widows of paramilitary/ civilian govt. servants should 
not be discriminated against widows of Defence forces Personnel and recommends that 
the Government should sympathetically consider the plight of such women and explore 
the feasibility of amending Central Civil Services Pension rules to enable widows of 
Paramilitary/Civil Government Servants get full liberalized pension at par with widows 
of defence personnel even after their remarriage.                                                (Para 3.37) 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 4 
 
Grievances pertaining to Authorization, sanction and processing of pension 
 
21. The Committee is of the view that end -to-end digitization of the pension process, 
right from the stage of submission of pension papers by the retiring Government 
servant to Head of Office to the stage of forwarding of PPO and Special seal of 
Authority to t he Pension Disbursing authority by Central Pension accounting Office 
will smoothen the pension process further, arrest the minutest of delays besides 
significantly bringing down the volume of grievances being registered on 
CPENGRAMS. The Committee recommen ds the Department to apprise it whether 
Bhavishya software renders end -to-end digitization of the whole pension process 
possible in its Action Taken Replies. The Department may also inform the Committee 
about the status of implementation of Bhavishya Softw are by non-civil Ministries in its 
Action Taken Replies.                                                                                               (Para 4.7) 
            
22. The Committee notes that CPAO’s web responsive Pensioners’ service offers a 
single point web solution for pensioners to obtain comprehensive information relating to 
status of pensions and pension payments. However,  the Committee observes that this 
web portal needs more publicity. The Committee is of the view that the success of any 
initiative depends upon the extent of its  reachability to the targeted population groups. 

61 
 
The Committee also emphasizes that CPAO should  publicise the portal through all 
possible means including the print and electronic media so that the benefits of the portal 
reach targeted beneficiaries.                                                                                     (Para 4.9) 
23. The Committee recommends the Department to instruct the 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to be proactive, reach out to the 
family pensioners and also assist them in claiming family pension. The Committee notes 
that the procedure of obtaining medical certificate/disability certificate by children of a 
deceased Government Servant is Kafkaesque and needs to be simplified.        (Para 4.13) 
24. The Committee is of the view that Head of Office in a Ministry/Department may 
consider obtaining the forms/ pension papers from the retiring Government servant one 
year instead of six months before his or her date of retirement and determining the 
amount of Government dues (like House Building Advance & other advances, excess 
payment of pay and allowances, etc.) to be recovered from the gratuity and intimating 
the same to Pay & Accounts Office. Besides, in cases of authorization of Family Pension 
on death of a serving Government servant, the concerned Ministry/Department may 
keep a record of dependents of se rving employees in a descending order in terms of 
their eligibility as it will help fast pace verification and decision in regard to the eligible 
claimant for family pension.                                                                                   (Para 4.14) 
25. The Committee also expresses its concern with regard to discontinuation/ delay 
in disbursement of Family Pension, especially in the case of pensioners and family 
pensioners of paramilitary forces based in rural areas due to various reasons . Further, 
as per the existing instructions, the last place of posting is considered as place of pension 
disbursement leading to harassment of family pensioners of paramilitary forces who 
have laid their life in the line of duty. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that for 
the benefit of pensioners/family pensioners’ of paramilitary forces, the Battalion 
Headquarter should be made place of pension’s disbursement, instead of last place of 
posting. Further, the Committee also feels that Department needs t o explore the 
feasibility of giving a choice to pensioners to choose place of pension disbursement in 
case of transferable job.                                                                                          (Para 4.15)          
 
 
 

62 
 
CHAPTER 5 
Grievances pertaining to disbursement of pension 
26. The Committee is highly appreciative of the Department for leveraging advanced 
technology to the maximum possible extent and for leaving no stone unturned in 
redressing pensioners’ grievances and promoting their welfare. Infact, the Committee 
wishes that each Ministry and Department of the Government should work with similar 
conviction in public interest. The Committee recommends the Department to gradually 
expand the scope of DLC from Home project , Doorstep Banking and submission of 
DLC through postal agent to all major cities and towns. The Committee recommends 
the Department to ensure that Video based Customer Identification Process and Facial 
recognition technology are operationalized on a wider scale at the earliest.     (Para 5.11) 
27. The Committee is of the view that elderly people, especially those aged 70 and 
above and those with physical infirmities experience inconvenience in withdrawing their 
pension amount from the Bank. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department 
to take up the matter with Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance and assess 
the feasibility of utilizing the Business Correspondent network to enable senior citizens 
to withdraw their pension amount from the comfort of their homes.                (Para 5.12) 
28. The Committee notes that Central Pension Processing Centres (CPPC) had been 
established as the central repository of data to facilitate data management and 
processing in a centralised manner. The intention  was that the CPCC, one for each 
bank, would function as a back office to support the functioning of the large number of 
pension paying branches. The pension paying branches were to continue to be interface 
with individual pensioners. The Committee notes t hat pension paying branches, instead 
of resolving issues raised by the pensioners, either direct the pensioners to approach the 
CPPC or pass on the responsibility for delays and inaccuracy in payment to the CPPC. 
The Committee takes cognizance of the diffi culties faced by Banks in processing family 
pension cases but also feels that Bank officials need to be properly sensitised about their 
role and to appreciate the special needs of senior citizens. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to discuss the  matter with RBI and Ministry of Finance 
and assess the feasibility of appointing a Pensioner Ombudsman on the lines of Bank 
Ombudsman for resolving grievances arising out of disbursement of pensions and 
apprise the Committee regarding the same in its Action Taken Replies.          (Para 5.16) 
***** 

63 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

64 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
       
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on the 8 th December, 2021 
in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi – 110001.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
(ii) Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(v) Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
(vi) Shri P.Wilson 
(vii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 

65 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
 Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
          Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Mohd. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 
WITNESSES 
I. *             *                  * 
II.        *             *                  * 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members about the agenda for 
the meeting, i.e.,  
(i)  consideration & adoption of draft 108th, 109 th, 110 th and 111 th reports of 
the Committee and  
(ii)       *             *                  * 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to Parliament on 10 th December, 2021.  The Chairman 
nominated Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar & Dr. Sasmit Patra for 
presenting the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari & Shri 
Jasbir Singh Gill for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
 
4. *             *                  * 
 
5. *             *                  * 
 
6. *             *                  * 
 
7. *             *                  * 
 
8. *             *                  * 
 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.      The meeting adjourned at 04.51 PM.  
_______________________  
***relate to other matters 