Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY THIRD REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
The Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013
 
REPORT NO. 
63


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

25
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY THIRD REPORT
The Rajasthan Legislative Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-125

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—3
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 5—13
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 15 —24
(i) The Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 .......................................................... 17—22
(ii) List of organizations/individuals who have offered views on the Bill ................ 23—24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Sixty-third Report of the Committee on the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013.
(Annexure-I)
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
6
th August, 2013 to this Committee on the 7 th August, 2013 for examination and report.
3. The Committee issued a press communiqué to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/
organisations on various provisions of the Bill. In response thereto the Committee received thirty-four
memoranda containing suggestions from various organizations/ individuals/experts. Comments of the
Legislative Department on the views/suggestions thereon were sought for consideration of the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice on various provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 27
th September, 2013 and
recorded oral evidence on the subject matter of the Bill in its meeting held on 30 th October, 2013.
During its Study visit to Jaipur between 8 th to 10 th October, 2013, the Committee interacted with the
representatives of the Government of Rajasthan, representatives of political parties such as The Indian
National Congress, Bahujan Samaj Party, Bharatiya Janata Party, Communist Party of India (M),
Communist Party of India and representatives of organizations viz.  Consumer Unity and Trust Society,
People’s Union for Civil Liberties, Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan, Transparency International  and
other individuals. List of individuals/organizations who deposed before the Committee on the Bill are
placed at Annexure-II.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on various provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Legislative Department thereon; and
(iii) Replies of State Government of Rajasthan to Questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat
on the issues dealt with by the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 27
th November, 2013.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Agrahayana 27, 1935 ( Saka) on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

ACRONYMS
CPI Communist Party of India
CPI (M) Communist Party of India (Marxist)
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 seeks to amend Article 168 of Constitution as well
as relevant Schedule/Section of the Representation of People Act, 1951 for the purpose of creating
Legislative Council (Vidhan Parishad) for the State of Rajasthan with sixty six members.
2. So far six out of twenty eight States have bicameral legislatures. Those States are Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. Legislative Councils
in the States of Punjab and West Bengal have been abolished. Legislative Councils in the States of
Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh are yet to be made operational. However, legislative measures are
being taken to abolish Legislative Council in the State of Tamil Nadu.
3. Article 168 of Constitution provides for Constitution of State Legislature. The procedure for
creation and abolition of Legislative Council is enumerated under Article 169 of the Constitution. Entry
Nos. 37, 38 and 39 of State list enumerated under Seventh Schedule of Constitution are relatable to
Legislative Council of the State.
3.1 In accordance with the provision of Article 169(1), the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Rajasthan has passed the following resolution on 18
th April, 2012 by special majority to that effect:
“Whereas, the House is of the view that to provide extensive representation to the
people in the State Legislature and to establish healthy and strong democratic traditions, it is
necessary to create Legislative Council in the State.
Therefore, in pursuance of clause (1) of Article 169 of the Constitution of India, the
House resolves that a law may be passed by the Parliament to create Legislative Council in
the State of Rajasthan”.
That resolution has received support of 152 Members against 4 Members out of 156 members
of that House present and voting on that day. That resolution was forwarded to Union Government
on 4
th May, 2012 which received the approval of the Union Cabinet on 18 th April, 2013.
4. Category-wise representation of Members as per Article 171 (3) of Constitution is given
below:–
(a) Members elected by the State : 22(1/3 of total strength)
Legislative Assembly
(b) Members elected by the Local : 22(1/3 of total strength)
Bodies
(c) Members elected from the : 06(1/12 of total strength)
Graduates’ Constituency
(d) Members elected from the : 06(1/12 of total strength)
Teachers’ Constituency
(e) Members nominated by the : 10(1/6 of total strength)
Governor
TOTAL :: 6 6

2
The State Government of Rajasthan has mentioned that all elected members of Municipal
Corporation, Municipal Council, Municipal Boards, Gram Panchyats, Cantonment Boards, Panchayat
Samiti and Zila Parishad would be the local bodies for the purpose of election of Legislative Council.
5. The Committee heard NGOs and members of Civil Society in Delhi and Jaipur. It had also
heard recognized political parties of Rajasthan and State Government of Rajasthan at Jaipur. Following
important views have been expressed on the Bill:-
(a) Article 169 of Constitution is an experimental provision. There was no unanimity on the
existence of second chamber in State in Constituent Assembly. Citing the Tamil Nadu
experience about creation/abolition of second chamber it was pointed that Article 169 is
highly politicized in present days. There is a need to evolve national policy regarding the
existence of second chamber for all States uniformly by amending Article 169 to ensure
that second chamber once created cannot be abolished at the whims and fancy of a
newly elected Government.
(b) Legislative Council in the State is not only second chamber but also secondary to
Legislative Assembly in its role. Unlike Rajya Sabha, it can only delay ordinary legislation
for a maximum period of four months. Moreover, Article 197 of the Constitution is also
putting restriction on powers of Legislative Councils as to Bills other than money Bills.
From utility point of view Legislative Council should be abolished in all States.
(c) Creation of Legislative Council in Rajasthan would pose huge financial burden on the State
exchequer.
(d) Legislative Council in the State would provide opportunity to the particular tribe/caste who
does not get elected to Legislative Assembly because of their lesser numerical strength.
(e) Pre-legislative consultation at village and taluq levels and operationalisation of Wards
Committee mentioned under Article 243 (S) of Constitution was preferred to creation of
Legislative Council for the time being to enable the elected representatives of Legislative
Assembly to get filtered view of people at grass root level.
(f) As to composition of Legislative Council, representation should be exclusively made from
local self Government institutions and for nominated members dispensing with Teachers’
and Graduates’ constituencies which were rare and respected soon after independence.
6. All recognized political parties in Rajasthan except CPI & CPI(M) have supported creation of
Legislative Council in the State of Rajasthan.
7. State Government of Rajasthan in their reply to the questionnaire of the Committee have
submitted that creation of Legislative Council in that State would involve an expenditure amounting to
R100/- crores approximately which the State has the capacity to bear.
8. The Committee after examining views expressed about creation of Legislative Council
for the State of Rajasthan, unanimously recommends to Parliament to pass the legislation in
larger public interest .
9. The Committee, however takes note of the following suggestions made to it during
consideration of the Bill:
(i) There is a need to evolve a national policy conscientious with regard to creation/
abolition of Legislative Council particularly in regard to the fact that the status of
Second Chamber cannot be of temporary in nature depending on the mood of the
Government of the day nor can be abolished once created, only at the whims and
fancy of a newly elected Government in the State.

3
(ii) There is a need for a detail review of composition of the Legislative Councils
particularly with reference to representations of local bodies which should not
remain limited to urban local bodies only. There is a need for proper representation
of elected representatives of both the Panchayati Raj and urban local self
Government bodies and ward Committees as mentioned in Article 243(S) of the
Constitution.
(iii) Compr ehensive review of present constituencies like members elected by the State
Legislative Assemblies, Graduates & Teachers is required considering todays’
changing scenario.
10. The Committee feels these suggestions need urgent consideration by Government and
can be addressed at appropriate time in the future.

MINUTES

7
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 27 th September, 2013 in Room No. G-074, Parliament
House Library, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Pinaki Misra
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
13. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
I. The Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013
Ministry of Law and Justice
● Legislative Department
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Dr. M. Vijayawargiya, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel

8
II. The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
● Department of Personnel and Training
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Secretary
2. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sandeep Jain, Director (IR)
● Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Udaya Kumara, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
The Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary, Legislative Department
and senior officers of the Legislative Department to the meeting. He then requested the Secretary,
Legislative Department to place before the Committee, the views of his Department on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013.
3. The Secretary, Legislative Department while making a power point presentation, touched upon
various aspects of the Legislative Councils and said that presently the States viz., Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh have Legislative Councils. He
further said that in West Bengal and Punjab, the Legislative Councils were abolished. In Madhya
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, although Legislative Councils have been created, they are not operational and
also steps are being taken for its abolition in Tamil Nadu.
4. He further stated that the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly passed a resolution on 18
th April, 2012
in order to provide extensive representation to the people of the state and to establish healthy and
strong democratic traditions, it is necessary to create Legislative Council in the State, and that in
pursuance of Clause (1) of Article 169 of the Constitution of India, the House resolved that a law may
be passed by the Parliament to create Legislative Council in the State of Rajasthan.
5. He apprised the Committee that it was decided to create Legislative Council for the State of
Rajasthan and thus the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 was introduced wherein Clause 3 of
the Bill provides for creation of Legislative Council for the State of Rajasthan with effect from the
date to be appointed by the president. He clarified that Article 171 of the Constitution provides that the
total number of Members in the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall not exceed
one third of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State, provided that the
total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be less than forty and
that 66 Members are proposed in the Legislative Council in Rajasthan.
6. Some queries were raised by Members regarding the various provisions of the Bill, and the
same were responded to by the Secretary.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
*** Relate to some other matters.

9
10. * * *
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.32 P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

10
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30 th October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri T.R. Baalu
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Arjun Meghwal
8. Shri Pinaki Misra
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S.D. Shariq
11. Shrimati Meena Singh
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
I. List of Non-Official Witnesses
1. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna, M.P (Rajya Sabha)
2. Shri Subash C. Agrawal, RTI Activist
3. Shri P.N. Mendola, Jaipur
4. Shri Chouth Mal Gupta, Jaipur
5. Shri Bal Mukund Sanaday, Rajasthan
II. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. Mukulita Vijaywargiya, JS & LC
2 Divergent views were expressed by the non-official witnesses for creation of second chamber
for the State of Rajasthan.
10

11
3. Views expressed in support of the Bill were that provisions of Article 169 of Constitution
which relates to abolition or creation of Legislative Council for the State was an experimental provision
leaving the decision mainly to the concerned State. It was stated that there was no unanimity on that
issue in the Constituent Assembly. Citing the Tamil Nadu experience about creation/abolition of second
chamber it was pointed out that Article 169 is highly politicized in present days. In order to avoid that
there is need to evolve a uniform national policy regarding the existence of second chamber for all
States by amending Article 169 to ensure that second chamber once created cannot be abolished at
the whim and fancy of a newly elected Government. As to composition of Legislative Council,
representation should be exclusively made from local self Government institutions and for nominated
members dispensing with Teachers’ and Graduates’ constituencies which were rare and respected soon
after independence.
4. Views expressed in opposition to the creation of Legislative Council held that there was no
utility of second chamber. Unlike Rajya Sabha, Legislative Council is not only second chamber but also
secondary to Legislative Assembly which can not disagree but delay the legislation passed by lower
house to the maximum period of four months. It was, therefore, pleaded that second chamber in all
States should be abolished and the Article 169 of Constitution should be deleted from the Constitution.
Since it has no utility, it would pose huge financial burden on the state exchequer thereby affects
developmental work.
5. Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill which mentions that better
opportunities to people’s participation in governance and decision making would be ensured by making
operational ‘Wards Committees’ mentioned under Article 243(S) of Constitution. It was also pointed
out that second chamber is being created to rehabilitate defeated politicians and their relatives in the
legislature enabling them to get pay, perquisite, allowance which would be a burden on the State
without having any definite utility.
6. On the issue of composition of Legislative Council, one of the Members referred to Jammu
and Kashmir Constitution where Teachers’ and Graduates’ Constituencies have been deleted in order
to insulate educational institutions from politics. Some other Members opposed abolition of Teachers’
Constituencies in the State for second chamber.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 4.25 
P.M. to meet again at 11 A.M. on 6 th November, 2013.

12
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 27 th November, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri T.R. Baalu
8. Shir P.C. Gaddigoudar
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Shrimati Meena Singh
14. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
15. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
16. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
WITNESSES
***
2. * * *
3. * * *
12
*** Relate to some other matters.

13
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft Sixty- third and Sixty- fourth Reports
on the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 and the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013.
The Members expressed their views on the draft Reports and adopted the same with some minor
modifications.
7. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri  Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar  and in his absence, Shri Abhijit
Mukherjee to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on Friday, the 6
th  December, 2013.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.48 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA 06 August, 2013
Bill No. XLIV of 2013
THE RAJASTHAN LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of the Legislative Council for the State
of Rajasthan and for matters supplemental, incidental and
consequential thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Rajasthan Legislative Council
Act, 2013.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, each of
the words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950, shall have the same
meaning as in that Act.
3. (1) As from such date as the President may, by order,
appoint, there shall be a Legislative Council for the State of
Rajasthan; and as from that date, in sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of
article 168, after the word “Karnataka,”, the word “Rajasthan,” shall
be inserted.
17
Short title.
Definition.
Creation of
Legislative
Council for
Rajasthan.
43 of 1950.

18
(2) In the said Council, there shall be 66 seats of which—
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by
the electorates referred to in sub-clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) of
clause (3) of article 171 shall be 22, 6 and 6 respectively;
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the
members of the Legislative Assembly of Rajasthan in accordance
with the provisions of sub-clause ( d) of the said clause shall
be 22; and
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the
Governor of Rajasthan in accordance with the provisions of
sub-clause ( e) of that clause shall be 10.
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the
President, after consultation with the Election Commission, shall, by
order, determine —
(a) the constituencies into which the State of Rajasthan
shall be divided for the purpose of elections to the said Council
under each of the sub-clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) of clause (3) of
article 171;
(b) the extent of each constituency; and
(c) the number of seats to be allotted to each constituency.
(4) Every order made under sub-section ( 3) shall be laid before
each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made, and shall
be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make on a motion
made within twenty days from the date on which the order is so laid.
(5) As soon as may be after such determination, steps shall be
taken to constitute the said Council in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the
Representation of the People Act, 1951.
4. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,—
(a) in the Third Schedule, after entry No. 6 relating to
Karnataka, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“7. Rajasthan 66 22 6 6 22 10”;
(b) existing entries 7 and 8 shall be renumbered as entries
8 and 9, respectively;
(c) in the Fourth Schedule, after the heading
“KARNATAKA” and the entries thereunder, the following heading
and entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“RAJASTHAN
1. Municipal Corporations.
2. Municipal Councils.
Amendment of
Third Schedule
and Fourth
Schedule to
Act 43 of 1950.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.

19
3. Municipal Boards.
4. Cantonment Boards.
5. Gram Panchayats.
6. Panchayat Samitis.
7. Zila Parishads.”.
5. In section 15A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
after the words and figures “and constituting the Legislative Council
of the State of Tamil Nadu under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council
Act, 2010”, the words and figures “and constituting the Legislative
Council of the State of Rajasthan under the Rajasthan Legislative
Council Act, 2013” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
section 15A of
Act 43 of 1951.
16 of 2010.

20
20
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Clause (1) of article 169 of the Constitution provides that
Parliament may, by law, provide for the abolition of the Legislative
Council of a State having such a Council or for the creation of such
a Council in a State having no such Council if the Legislative Assembly
of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total
membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
2. On the 18th April, 2012, the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly
passed a resolution in terms of clause (1) of article 169 of the
Constitution for the creation of Legislative Council in that State. It is,
accordingly, proposed to enact a law providing for the creation of
Legislative Council for the State of Rajasthan with sixty-six members
paving way for giving better opportunity to people’s participation in
governance and decision making.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and also provides
for matters supplemental, incidental and consequential to the creation
of the Legislative Council for the State of Rajasthan.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL.
The 24th June, 2013.

21
21
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1950
(43 OF 1950)
* *** *
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 10)
Allocation of seats in the Legislative Councils
Number to be elected or nominated under article 171(3)
Name of Total number Sub-clause Sub-clause Sub-clause Sub-clause Sub-clause
State of seats (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
12 3 4567
* *** *
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 27( 2)]
Local authorities for purposes of elections to Legislative Councils
* *** *
EXTRACT FROM THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* *** *
15A. For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Council
of the State of Madhya Pradesh under the States Reorganisation
Act, 1956 and constituting the Legislative Council of the State of
Andhra Pradesh under the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Councils
Act, 2005 and constituting the Legislative Council of the State of
Tamil Nadu under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010, the
Governor of each of the aforesaid States shall, by one or more
notifications published in the Official Gazette of the State on such date
or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission, call
upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and all the
Council constituencies to elect members in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder.
* *** *
Notification for
certain elections
to Legislative
Councils.37 of 1956.
1 of 2006.
16 of 2010.

22
22
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of the Legislative Council for the State of
Rajasthan and for matters supplemental, incidental and consequential thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice )

23
ANNEXURE-II
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Committee during its study visit from
3rd to 10 th October, 2013 on the Rajasthan Legislative Council, Bill, 20013
Date : 10 th October, 2013 Place : Jaipur, Rajasthan
Sl. No. Name of Individual Organisation
1. Shri C.K. Mathew Chief Secretary, Government of Rajasthan
2. Shri Rakesh Srivastava Principal Secretary, General Administration
3. Shri Mukesh Sharma Principal Secretary, Department of Personnel,
Government of Rajasthan
4. Shri Prakash Gupta Principal Secretary (Law), Government of Rajasthan
5. Shri Govind Sharma Principal Secretary, Finance Department, Government
of Rajasthan
6. Shri P.D. Pareek Dy. Secretary, Rajasthan Legislative Assembly
7. Shrimati Aruna Roy Social Activist
8. Shri Nikhil Dey Social Activist
9. Shri Bharwar Meshwanshi Social Activist
10. Shrimati Mamata Jailtely Social Activist
11. Shri Surendra Lamba Bahujan Samaj Party
12. Shri Rupchand Radia Bahujan Samaj Party
13. Shri Onker Singhal Bhartiya Janata Party
14. Shri Satyender Singh Raghav Bhartiya Rashtriya Congress
15. Shri Rajender Ranaut Bhartiya Janata Party
16. Shri Kailashnath Bhar Bhartiya Janata Party
17. Shrimati Remila Pameeecha RTI Activist
18. Shri Rajendra Bhanawat Doosra Dashak
19. Shri Radhakant PUCL
23

24
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Committee in
New Delhi on the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013
Date : 30 th October, 2013 Place : New Delhi
Sl. No. Name of Individual Organisation
1. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna M.P. (Rajya Sabha)
2. Shri Subash C. Agrawal RTI Activist
3. Shri P.N. Mendola Jaipur
4. Shri Chouth Mal Gupta Jaipur
5. Shri Bal Mukund Sanaday Rajasthan

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.