Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th November, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th November, 2014)
The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014
 
REPORT NO. 
72


63
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th November, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th November, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
November, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-142

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—6
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 7—8
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 9—30
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 31 —51
I. The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 ...................................................... 33—37
II. List of Individuals/organization who deposed before the Committee .................. 38—39
III. Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions  contained in
memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the Bill ... ............ 40—49
IV . Detailed Statistical information relating to High Court of  Delhi  and District
Courts in Delhi ............................................................................................................ 50—51
8. A PPENDIX ................................................................................................................................ 53—62
List of Reports Presented by the Committee .................................................................. 55—62

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(As Constituted on 31 st August, 2013 )
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(As Constituted on 1st September, 2014 )
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
16. Shri Innocent
17. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
18. Shri Shanta Kumar
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V. Naik
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri V . Panneerselvam
25. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri Udhayakumar M.
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
31. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Seventy-second Report of the Committee on the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014.
(Annexure-I)
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
17
th February, 2014 to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice on the 24 th February, 2014, for examination and report to Parliament
within two months i.e. by the 24 th April, 2014. The Committee, however, in view of busy schedule
of Members during the General Elections to the Sixteenth Lok Sabha, could not complete consideration
of the Bill during its term. The Committee was reconstituted w.e.f. the 1
st September, 2014. After its
reconstitution, extension of time for presentation of its report was granted till the 30 th November, 2014.
3. The Committee issued a press communiqué on the 13 th September, 2014 to solicit views/
suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on various provisions of the Bill. In response
thereto the Committee received several memoranda containing suggestions from various organizations/
individuals/experts. Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions thereon were
obtained for consideration of the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice on various provisions of the Bill in its meetings held on the 13
th March and the
19th September, 2014. During its local study-visit to Saket court complex and Patiala House Court
complex, Delhi on the 28 th October, 2014, the Committee also interacted with the judicial officers of
both these court complexes. It gathered an impression that these courts are well-equipped with
infrastructure, information technology and human resources to handle ensuing work load with the
enactment of the proposed legislation.
5. In its sittings held on the 7
th and the 20 th October, 2014, the Committee recorded oral evidence
of District Court Bar Associations in Delhi and Delhi High Court Bar Association, respectively. In its
sitting held on the 11
th November, 2014, the Committee heard non-official witnesses on the subject
matter of the Bill . List of individuals/organizations who deposed before the Committee are appended
as Annexure-II. In its meeting held on the 18 th November, 2014, the Committee heard views of Law
Secretaries to Government of India as well as Government of Maharashtra on issue of legislative
competence of Parliament/State Legislature to alter or abolish original civil jurisdiction of chartered
High Courts at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata as also of Delhi High Court.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Justice thereon (Annexure-III);

(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by District
Court Bar Associations in Delhi, Delhi High Court Bar Association and Non-official
witnesses;
(iv) Replies of Department of Justice to Questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat on the
issues dealt with by the Bill, and
(v) Detailed Statistical information relating to High Court of Delhi and District Courts in Delhi
(Annexure IV).
7. The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meeting held on the 25 th November, 2014.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
25th November, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
(iv)

ACRONYMS
AP AA Asian Patent Attorneys’ Association
CPC Code of Civil Procedure 1908
NCT National Captial Territory of Delhi
(v)

1
REPORT
Objective of the Bill
The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 seeks to amend Section 5 of the Delhi High
Court Act, 1966 and Section 25 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 for the purpose of enhancing original
pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi and eleven District Courts in National Capital Territory
of Delhi from rupees twenty lakhs to rupees two crores. Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts in
National Capital Territory of Delhi is provided in the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 and is applicable to Delhi
also, in accordance with Section 1 (2) of the said Act.
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill mentions that enhancement of said
jurisdiction would reduce the work load of High Court of Delhi as well as pendency therein and also
provide justice at door steps of the litigant public with reduced cost of litigation and maximum
convenience.
Background of pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi High Court and Chartered High Courts.
3. Like chartered High Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai (set up in 1962 through identical
Letters of Patent issued under the Indian High Court Act, 1861) the High Court of Delhi is endowed
with pecuniary jurisdiction on Original Side. The Delhi High Court owes its origin to the High Court
at Lahore which was set up in 1919. After independence Punjab High Court was set up for Punjab
and Union Territory of Delhi. That court continued to be governed by Letters of Patent (Clause 9)
which had conferred extra-ordinary original jurisdiction. The Delhi High Court was established on
31
st October, 1966 with sanctioned Bench strength of four judges and was also conferred with original
jurisdiction under Section 5 (2) of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966. Out of present strength of 60
judges of the High Court, 6 judges are entrusted with the duty to adjudicate civil suits on Original
Side. There are 24 vacancies existing at present in High Court of Delhi.
4. The National Capital Territory of Delhi which was only one judicial district way back in 1966
has now been divided into eleven judicial districts for administrative convenience. These District Courts
are now functioning from six court complexes at Tis Hazari, Patiala House, Rohini, Karkardooma,
Dwarka and Saket with 250 judicial officers including 11 District judges. Initially the pecuniary
jurisdiction of Delhi High Court on Original Side was above rupees twenty five thousand which was
subsequently raised to rupees fifty thousand in the year 1970. It was further enhanced to rupees one
lakh in 1980, to rupees five lakhs in the year 1992 and to rupees twenty lakhs in the year 2003. The
proposed amendment to the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 is to further enhance the said jurisdiction to
rupees two crores from present rupees twenty lakhs. Following the proposed amendment, civil suits
and proceedings not exceeding rupees two crores would be filed in respective District Courts in
National Capital Territory of Delhi. Furthermore, cases in which valuation is less than rupees two
crores and are pending in High Court of Delhi would be transferred to the concerned District Courts
in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. As per information submitted to the Committee by the
Registrar General of High Court of Delhi, a total number of 12,211 cases which are pending in Delhi
High Court for adjudication would be transferred to concerned District Courts. Eight judicial officers
who are presently working as Joint Registrar (Judicial) on deputation in High Court of Delhi are
proposed to be repatriated to District Courts for dealing with cases transferred to those courts.
5. In the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee took note of the status of jurisdiction
in the chartered High Courts. The pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Bombay was last revised
in the year 2012 to rupees one crore by effecting amendment to the Bombay City Civil Court Act,

2
1948. However, Section 3 of the said Act permits the High Court of Bombay to retain jurisdiction over
matters connected with Intellectual Property Right, Letters of Patent, Parsi Marriage and Divorce, etc.
even if valuation of suits thereon is less than rupees one crore.
6. The pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Calcutta was last revised in the year 2013 from
rupees ten lakhs to rupees one crore by effecting amendment to the Kolkata City Civil Court
Act, 1953. Section 5 of that Act, however, provides concurrent jurisdiction of both High Court of
Calcutta and Kolkata City civil Courts on the suits whose valuation exceeds rupees ten lakhs but not
exceeds rupees one crore. Similarly, the pecuniary jurisdiction on original side of Madras High Court
was enhanced to rupees twenty five lakhs in the year 2010 by effecting amendment to Madras City
Civil Courts Act, 1892.
7. The full Bench of High Court of Delhi through Resolution dated 21
st November, 2012
recommended for increasing the original pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi as well as
District Courts under its jurisdiction to rupees two crores. The said decision of the High Court of
Delhi was communicated to the Department of Justice, Government of India on 6
th May, 2013 by the
Registrar General of High Court of Delhi.
Deposition of Secretary, Department of Justice
8. The Secretary, Department of Justice in her deposition submitted that the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi after careful consideration of the request of the Co-ordination
Committee of all Bar Associations of Delhi had recommended to the Union Government for enhancement
of pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi High Court as well as District Courts in Delhi. That Government also
felt that such an increase would lessen burden on High Court and be helpful to the litigants in
providing them justice at their doorsteps as District Courts have been set up in different locations of
Delhi.
Views of Stake holders
9. The District Courts Bar Associations as well as Delhi High Court Bar Association are amongst
the principal stakeholders so far as the subject matter of the Bill is concerned. The Committee heard
the Coordination Committee of all District Courts Bar Associations and Delhi High Court Bar Association,
separately. While District Courts Bar Associations supported the move of the Government for
enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts, their peers in Delhi High Court opposed the
move citing various reasons in favour of their stand. The Committee also heard Asian Patent Attorneys’
Association (APAA), New Delhi and other individuals who responded to the Press Communiqué of the
Committee published on 13
th September, 2014. The gist of important suggestions made by the
stakeholders in their oral as well as written submissions is given below.
(i) Enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts in Delhi would provide justice
at doorsteps of the litigant besides ensuring speedier disposal of cases by the concerned
District Courts. In addition to benefiting legal practitioners in District Courts such a
move would also be beneficial to the litigants as well as the witnesses:
(ii) Out of 24 High Courts, 20 High Courts do not have original civil jurisdiction. For the
sake of uniformity, original pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi as well as
chartered High Courts may be abolished by conferring unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction
upon City Civil Courts in metropolitan cities of Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.
High Courts should be exclusively a forum for adjudicating cases filed under Writ and
Appellate side.
(iii) Evidence of parties under Original Side in High Court of Delhi is generally recorded
by Joint Registrar or the Advocate Commissioner not by judges. Moreover, fees of

3
counsel and total cost of litigation by including examination of witnesses in High Court
are higher than that of District Courts. In order to provide justice at minimum cost and
maximum convenience, cases on civil side ought to be tried by District Courts:
(iv) District Courts in neighbourhood of Delhi, Gurgaon, Noida, Gaziabad and Faridabad
enjoy unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction. District Courts in Delhi need to be equated with
District courts in adjourning areas of Delhi so far as pecuniary jurisdiction is concerned:
(v) Litigants prefer High Court for injunctive relief for which valuation of suit is done
without having nexus with the real valuation of the property. Parties may revalue their
suit under Rule 17 of Order VI of CPC, 1908 to bring the case to High Court. With
the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court, the litigant has to pay more
court fee which will adversely affect the interest of litigants and advocates in High
Court of Delhi.
(vi) In accordance with Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the District Court is the
minimum judicial forum for adjudication of cases relating to trade mark, copy rights,
etc. Similarly, Section 104 of the Patents Act, 1970 provides that the minimum judicial
forum for infringement of a patent is the District Court. In the commercial dispute
involving Intellectual Property Right, Letters of Patent, commercial arbitration, etc.
parties prefer High Court for efficacious and expeditious adjudication of the issue
involved in those cases as both Bench and Bar of the High Court are having specialization
for the purpose. With the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction, the owner of copy
right/patent need to pay more court fee enabling them to bring it to the High Court.
Therefore, exception may be provided for hyper technical cases to be tried by High Court
of Delhi irrespective of their valuations on the lines similar exception done for the High
Court of Bombay by legislature.
(vii) The ten-fold increase of pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts needs rationalisation
taking into account the price index of commodities.
(viii) Delhi High Court has lost its jurisdiction on many issues consequent upon creation of
Tribunals as an aid in administration of justice.
(ix) The Commercial Division of High Court Bill, 2009, if enacted, will provide an Original
jurisdiction to every High Court of the country to hear commercial cases of more than
rupees one crore valuation. Hiving off the Original Side of Delhi High Court to the
District and Civil Courts under the garb of enhancement of jurisdiction will be
antithetical to the aforesaid proposed law.
(x) In accordance with Section 21 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 the jurisdiction of
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is to entertain complaint where the
value of service or goods exceeds rupees one crore. The appeal against the order of
National Commission under Section 23 of the said Act lies to Supreme Court. In view
of the above provisions, it was submitted by a non-official witness that pecuniary
jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi should not be raised beyond rupees one crore as an
appeal against the decisions of High Court lies to Supreme Court also. In case pecuniary
jurisdiction of High Court is raised to rupees two crores, the relevant Section of
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 may also be amended to increase the jurisdiction of
National Commission to rupees two crores.
(xi) Rules made by Chartered High Courts ensure faster disposal of cases. The rules made
by High Court of Delhi under the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 should be tuned with the
Rules made by Chartered High Courts for speedier disposal of cases.

4
(xii) There would be no additional burden on account of Court fee on the litigants in the
event of transfer of suits from High Court of Delhi to concerned District Courts in Delhi
rather it would be convenient for the litigants and witnesses to approach District Courts
with minimum cost and maximum convenience. There would be no loss of revenue to the
Government on account of Court fee as court fee is charged ad-velrom both in High
Court and District Courts and rates are same.
Deposition of Law Secretary
10. The Law Secretary, Government of India submitted that the limit of pecuniary jurisdiction is
not mentioned in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908. The pecuniary jurisdiction of Subordinate Courts
and High Court is of substantive nature which can only be altered by legislature itself. These alterations
cannot be made by the High Court under its rules. Both Union Parliament and State legislature have
concurrent power and competence to alter the pecuniary jurisdiction of High Courts and District
Courts by the combined reading of Article 225, Entry 78 of List I (Union List) and Entry 11A, 13,
46 of List III (Concurrent List) of the Constitution. He further added that both Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 and Punjab Courts Act, 1918 are central Acts which deal with pecuniary jurisdiction of High
Court of Delhi as well as District Courts in Delhi, respectively. Article 239 AA(3)(a) under Part VIII
of Constitution inter-alia expressly curtail the legislative power of National Capital Territory of Delhi
to make law under Entry 65 of List II (State List) under Seventh Schedule of Constitution in so far
as that relate to Entry I (Public Order), Entry 2 (Police) and Entry 18 (Land). It is relevant to note
that Entry 65 of State List talks about jurisdiction and power of all courts except the Supreme Court
with respect to any matters in the said List. Furthermore, the full Bench of the Delhi High Court in
the case of the Geetika Panwar and Delhi High Courts Bar Association and Anr.Vs. Government of
NCT of Delhi and Ors. (AIR, 2003, Delhi, 317) had held that the Delhi High Courts (Amendment)
Act, 2001 passed by Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi to increase pecuniary jurisdiction of High
Court of Delhi and District Courts in Delhi from rupees five lakhs to rupees twenty lakhs as ultra
vires as the NCT of Delhi has no legislative competence to amend the Delhi High Court Act, 1966.
It had held that Parliament alone has the power to alter jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi. This
decision of Delhi High Court was not challenged in the Supreme Court by the NCT of Delhi.
Moreover, pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi and District Courts in Delhi was enhanced by
Parliamentary enactment in 2003 to rupees twenty lakhs from rupees five lakhs.
11. While responding to a query as to whether exclusion of certain technical matters especially the
Intellectual Property Rights can be provided under the Rules framed by the concerned High Court, the
Law Secretary submitted that the power of giving exception to certain technical areas to be filed under
Original jurisdiction of High Court irrespective of its valuation lies with the legislature.
Deposition of Law Secretary, Government of Maharashtra
12. The Law Secretary, Government of Maharashtra was also invited before the Committee to
dwell on the issue of exclusion of certain areas of law from the ambit of Bombay City Civil Court
and the process adopted in this regard. The Law Secretary then explained that the Section 3 of
Bombay City Civil Court Act, 1948 empowers the State Government to enhance pecuniary jurisdiction
of the City Courts at Mumbai and correspondingly alter pecuniary jurisdiction of Bombay High Court
after consultation with the said High Court by notification. The constitutional validity of the said Act
was challenged in the case of Jamshed N. Gazdar Vs. State of Maharashtra (2005) SCC 591 and Five
Judge Bench of the Supreme Court declared the Act intra vires and held that both State Legislature
and Union Parliament have power to confer jurisdiction on High Courts in view of Entry 11 A of
List III (Concurrent List) under Seventh Schedule of Constitution.
13. The Committee was also apprised by the Department of Justice through its written submissions,
that the Calcutta High Court is the only High Court in the country which has concurrent jurisdiction

5
with the City Civil Courts over suits valued between rupees ten lakhs and one crore, since 2013. The
case of Indu Bhushan De Vs. State of West Bengal 1986 SCC (3) 682 was referred to the Apex Court
where it was held that the state legislature of West Bengal is competent to amend Calcutta City Civil
Court Act, 1953 to enhance the pecuniary jurisdiction of city civil courts as well as the Calcutta High
Court.
Recommendations/Observations
14. Out of 24 High Courts in the country, only 4 High Courts i.e. High Courts of Bombay,
Calcutta, Madras and Delhi have original civil jurisdiction. Therefore, a limit has been fixed
on the pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts only in metropolitan cities of Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai and Calcutta. The limit on pecuniary jurisdiction was imposed through Statute/
Charter/Letters of Patent under which the concerned court is instituted, which can be enhanced
or reduced by making amendment therein. The Committee understands that Parliament alone
has legislative competence to constitute and organize the High Courts in view of Entry 78 of
List-I (Union List) under Seventh Schedule of Constitution. But, both Parliament and the
concerned State Legislature have concurrent jurisdiction to confer general jurisdiction and
power including pecuniary and territorial jurisdictions of the High Courts of concerned State
in accordance with Entry 11A of List III (Concurrent List). The Committee observes that
original jurisdiction of the Chartered High Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai were
provided under Letters of Patent which can be amended by the concerned State Legislature.
15. The Committee understands that enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of Courts in
metropolitan cities has been a periodic exercise which depends upon increase in value of
property in the territory over which those courts exercise their jurisdiction. Since 2003 circle
rate of property has been enhanced leading to increase of their value by several times. The
Committee feels that enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi as well as
District Courts in Delhi is over due in view of devaluation of currency as well as increase of
property rates in Delhi during the last one decade. The Committee is happy to note that 12,211
cases which are pending in High Court of Delhi would be distributed amongst eleven District
Courts which would facilitate their speedier disposal. There would be neither additional burden
on account of court fee on the parties to dispute nor loss of revenue to Government on the
same account. Rather it would provide justice at door steps of the litigants with reduced cost
of litigation and maximum convenience which would further the ends of justice. In addition to
facilitating the speedier disposal of cases such a measure would also provide an opportunity to
the litigants to file an appeal in the High Court.
16. The Committee while endorsing the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi
High Court and District Courts in Delhi to rupees two crores from twenty lakhs as proposed
in the Bill, is of the view that there is also a need to bring in uniformity in the pecuniary
jurisdiction of all High Courts in the country. It is high time for the Government to realise
that the legacy of original jurisdiction of Chartered High Courts of colonial era needs a review
and in the spirit of the provisions of the Section 6 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, all District
Civil Courts in the country including the City Civil Courts in the metropolitan cities of
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Delhi need to be given unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction. The
Committee believes that it would lighten the burden on the High Courts if these are made
exclusive forum for entertaining appeals and exercise of writ jurisdiction.
17. The Committee further observes that now the District Courts are being set up with
proper infrastructure, it would be a further motivating factor if the District Courts are allowed
to adjudicate in the technical areas of law as well which have been kept under the original
jurisdiction of some of the High Courts. These technical matters, no doubt, would continue to

6
be dealt by the concerned statute regulating that area and jurisdiction would be exercisable by
minimum judicial forum provided in that statute.
18. Taking note of the provision of the Commercial Division of High Court Bill, 2009 which
has since lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the Committee
observed that in case such a Bill is enacted, High Court alone would have jurisdiction to
adjudicate all commercial disputes of specified value and commercial disputes pending in
Subordinate Courts of value above the specified value would have to be transferred to the
Commercial Division of the High Court.

7
7
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
1. Out of 24 High Courts in the country, only 4 High Courts i.e. High Courts of Bombay,
Calcutta, Madras and Delhi have original civil jurisdiction. Therefore, a limit has been fixed
on the pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts only in metropolitan cities of Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai and Calcutta. The limit on pecuniary jurisdiction was imposed through Statute/
Charter/Letters of Patent under which the concerned court is instituted, which can be enhanced
or reduced by making amendment therein. The Committee understands that Parliament alone
has legislative competence to constitute and organize the High Courts in view of Entry 78 of
List-I (Union List) under Seventh Schedule of Constitution. But, both Parliament and the
concerned State Legislature have concurrent jurisdiction to confer general jurisdiction and
power including pecuniary and territorial jurisdictions of the High Courts of concerned State
in accordance with Entry llA of List III (Concurrent List). The Committee observes that
original jurisdiction of the Chartered High Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai were
provided under Letters of Patent which can be amended by the concerned State Legislature.
(Para 14)
2. The Committee understands that enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of Courts in
metropolitan cities has been a periodic exercise which depends upon increase in value of
property in the territory over which those courts exercise their jurisdiction. Since 2003 circle
rate of property has been enhanced leading to increase of their value by several times. The
Committee feels that enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi as well as
District Courts in Delhi is over due in view of devaluation of currency as well as increase of
property rates in Delhi during the last one decade. The Committee is happy to note that 12,211
cases which are pending in High Court of Delhi would be distributed amongst eleven District
Courts which would facilitate their speedier disposal. There would be neither additional burden
on account of court fee on the parties to dispute nor loss of revenue to Government on the
same account. Rather it would provide justice at door steps of the litigants with reduced cost
of litigation and maximum convenience which would further the ends of justice. In addition to
facilitating the speedier disposal of cases such a measure would also provide an opportunity to
the litigants to file an appeal in the High Court. (Para 15)
3. The Committee while endorsing the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi
High Court and District Courts in Delhi to rupees two crores from twenty lakhs as proposed
in the Bill, is of the view that there is also a need to bring in uniformity in the pecuniary
jurisdiction of all High Courts in the country. It is high time for the Government to realise
that the legacy of original jurisdiction of Chartered High Courts of colonial era needs a review
and in the spirit of the provisions of the Section 6 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, all District
Civil Courts in the country including the City Civil Courts in the metropolitan cities of
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Delhi need to be given unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction. The
Committee believes that it would lighten the burden on the High Courts if these are made
exclusive forum for entertaining appeals and exercise of writ jurisdiction. (Para 16)
4. The Committee further observes that now the District Courts are being set up with
proper infrastructure, it would be a further motivating factor if the District Courts are allowed
to adjudicate in the technical areas of law as well which have been kept under the original
jurisdiction of some of the High Courts. These technical matters, no doubt, would continue to

8
be dealt by the concerned statute regulating that area and jurisdiction would be exercisable by
minimum judicial forum provided in that statute. (Para 17)
5. Taking note of the provision of the Commercial Division of High Court Bill, 2009 which
ha since lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the Committee
observed that in case such a Bill is enacted, High Court alone would have jurisdiction to
adjudicate all commercial disputes of specified value and commercial disputes pending in
Subordinate Courts of value above the specified value would have to be transferred to the
Commercial Division of the High Court. (Para 18)

9
MINUTES

11
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 13 th March, 2014 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
3. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
4. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
5. Shri Arjun Meghwal
6. Shri S.S. Ramasubhu
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Shri S.D. Shariq
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
II. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shrimati Anita Kaul, Secretary
2. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary
4. Shri. Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and Secretary, Department of Justice
and other Officers of the Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. He then requested the Secretary,
Department of Justice to make a presentation, inter-alia, clarifying the various provisions of The Delhi
High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Other Authorities
(Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014.

12
I. The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014
3. In her deposition on the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014, the Secretary submitted that
the objective of the Bill is to enhance the pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts of Delhi to two
crore rupees from twenty lakh which was fixed in the year 2003. This proposal has been mooted,
with concurrence of the Delhi High Court and with consultation with Coordination Committee of all
Bar Associations of Delhi, by the Government of the NCT of Delhi. She further mentioned that
Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and Section 25 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 would
be amended to substitute the words ‘twenty lakhs’ with the words ‘two crores’. She averred that High
Courts of Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras have original pecuniary jurisdiction; some limit,
therefore, needs to be fixed for the District Courts. Enhancing of the pecuniary jurisdiction upto
Rupees two crores for the District Courts in Delhi would reduce the burden on the High Court of
Delhi on original side. She expressed apprehension that the number of appeals may increase with the
proposed amendment.
4. Several queries arising out of the presentation were raised by Members regarding the various
provisions of the Bill, and the same were clarified by the Secretary.
II. The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014
5. The Secretary gave the background which necessitated the proposed amendment and opined
that the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014, inter
alia, intends to ensure uniform service conditions, allowances and perquisites for Chairman and
Members of 26 quasi-judicial bodies, including the Central Administrative Tribunal, State Administrative
Tribunals, National Green Tribunal, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, the Press Council of India, etc.
On the basis of decision of the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG), the Department of Justice has been
designated as central agency for administrative control of those Tribunals and accordingly proposed
to provide uniform tenure, age of retirement and residential accommodation of members of Tribunals
through a common legislation.
6. Responding to the query about different retirement age, she mentioned that appointment to
Tribunals is tenure based and retirement age is calculated on the basis of retirement of the incumbent
and therefore age of retirement is 70 years for a Supreme Court Judge, 67 years for a High Court
Judge and 65 years for others. She further opined that they can be appointed for one term of a
maximum of five years so long as they satisfy the criteria of age of retirement and there is no bar
on appointment on another Tribunal, provided that the Member is within the stipulated age of
retirement. She also apprised the Committee about the accommodation, medical and LTC facilities to
be provided to Chairmen and Members of the Tribunals.
7. She further added that Chairpersons/Members of Tribunals may not be allowed to take up
arbitration work while functioning on Tribunals. However, if they have arbitration work at hand at the
time of their appointment, competent authority may permit them to complete such arbitration after
examining the request on a case-to-case basis. Further Chairpersons/Members of Tribunals shall have
to declare their assets/liabilities and financial/other interests at the time of their appointment, which also
will be placed in their personal records.-
8. Several queries arising out of the presentation were raised by Members regarding the various
provisions of the Bill, and the same were clarified by the Secretary.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.01 
P.M.

13
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 19 th September, 2014 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
8. Shri Santosh Kumar
9. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
10. Shri B.V . Naik
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Shri V . Panneerselvam
13. Dr. A. Sampath
14. Shri Bharat Singh
15. Shri Udhayakumar M.
16. Dr. Anshul Verma
17. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Ministry of Law and Justice
I. Department of Justice
1. Shrimati Anita Kaul, Secretary;
2. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary;
13

14
4. Shri Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri V .K. Tripathi, Director;
6. Shri Y .M. Pande, Director; and
7. Shri S.P. Singh, Director.
II. Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Secretary;
2. Dr. G.N. Raju, Addl. Secretary;
3. Shri R.D. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
4. Ms. Reeta Vasistha, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
5. Shri H.C. Azad, Director.
III. Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary;
2. Shri T.N. Tiwari, Addl. Secretary;
3. Shri S.K. Mohapatra, Addl. Secretary;
4. Shrimati Sushma Suri, Addl. Secretary; and
5. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary and LA.
IV. Election Commission of India
1. Shri Sudhir Tripathi, Deputy Election Commissioner;
2. Shri K.F. Wilfred, Principal Secretary; and
3. Shri S.K. Mendiratta, Legal Advisor.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. *** He, thereafter, invited Secretary, Department of Justice, to make power point presentation
on structure, function and mandate of the Department followed by presentation on the Delhi High
Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 ***
5. The Secretary, Department of Justice made a power point presentation inter-alia touching
upon issues relating to setting up of new High Courts in North Eastern Region (Manipur, Tripura and
Meghalaya), new Benches of High Court at Gulbarga and Dharwad; bifurcation of High Court of
Andhra Pradesh; vacancy position of judges in higher judiciary (335) and Subordinate judiciary (4398);
pendency of cases in Supreme Court (63,000), High Courts (44 lakhs) and Subordinate Courts
(2.68 crores); additional requirement of judges (2708) in addition to sanctioned strength (19431) to
clear backlog of cases; institution and disposal rate of cases in Subordinate Courts; infrastructural
facility for Subordinate Courts; implementation of E-Court Project; A2J Project; Gram Nayalayas, etc.
6. To a query of Chairman about functioning of Fast Track courts and absorption of adhoc
judges earlier appointed in those courts, the Secretary informed that Fast Track Courts started during
Eleventh Five Year Plan as a fully Central Funded Scheme but Central funding was discontinued in
Twelfth Five Year Plan. 1192 Fast Track Courts are however still functioning in various States based
on funding from the respective States. She further added that 1800 Fast Track Courts have been
proposed to Fourteenth Finance Commission, the report of which is due. About ten percent of adhoc
judges in Fast Track Courts have been absorbed in accordance with the decision of Supreme Court
in Brij Mohan Lal Case. Queries relating to vacancies in higher judiciary in terms of judges and
*** Relate to some other matters.

15
additional judges required; delay in filling up of vacancies; details of pending Civil and Criminal cases
with their break-up as well as 5 to 10 years period bracket cases; separate High Court for the State
of Goa; laying of time limit for Fast Track Courts, Bench of High Court of Kerala in the State capital
of Thiruvanantupuran, keeping Family Court out of the premises of Criminal Courts, lack of basic
infrastructural facilities in subordinate Courts were raised by Members.
7. Secretary while responding to some of queries of Members submitted that vacancies in higher
judiciary largely depend upon recommendations of collegium system which is entirely in the hand of
judiciary. However, the Minister of Law has drawn attention of concerned High Courts to the large
number of vacancies and requested them to expedite filling up of vacancies in various High Courts.
She submitted figure of 5 to 10 years old cases (9,69,000) and more than 10 years cases (6,62,000)
that were pending in various Courts. She assured the Committee to send a statement of civil and
criminal break-up of pending cases in all 24 High Courts, High Court wise, to the Committee in writing
(The Committee adjourned for tea and reassembled thereafter)
8. The Joint Secretary of the Department made a power point presentation on the Delhi High Court
(Amendment) Bill, 2014. He submitted that pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi High Court and District Courts
in Delhi have been proposed to be enhanced from Rs. 20 lakhs to 2 crores by affecting amendment to
Section 5(2) of Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and Section 25 of Punjab Courts Act, 1918. The request
for enhancing original pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi to Rs. 2 crores has emanated from
the Co-ordination Committee of all Bar Associations of Delhi which was agreed to by Delhi High Court
also. The Delhi Government has requested the Union Government to consider their request since Delhi
High Court Act, 1966 is a central legislation. Thereafter he enumerated advantages of the proposed
enactment as it would reduce burden of Delhi High Court and facilitate speedy disposal of cases in
respective district Courts which are in the close vicinity of the litigants. After the enactment of the
legislation, cases pending in Delhi High Court of value of less than 2 crores would be transferred to
respective district Courts in Delhi. To a query whether the Department has considered the views of Delhi
High Court Bar Association, the Joint Secretary replied that the Department has basically gone by the
recommendation of State Government of Delhi and High Court of Delhi; they have not sought the opinion
of Bar Association of Delhi High Court or Bar Associations of District Courts in Delhi. The Chairman
at that point requested the Secretary to make a study on the cost of litigation vis-a-vis the revenue
generated by the Court through Court fee and submit the same to the Committee.
9. While responding to a query of a Member about the request of Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu
and Bar Association of Madras High Court for use of Tamil language as Court language in Madras
High Court, the Secretary submitted that the request of State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and
Chhatisgarh for use of regional language in their respective High Courts was referred to Supreme
Court for their consideration. The Full Bench of Supreme Court on 11
th October, 2012 had decided
not to accept the proposal of those State Governments. However, the request of Chief Minister of
Tamil Nadu has again been referred to Chief Justice of India for reconsideration, but the response of
the Court is awaited. At that point of time, the Chairman pointed out that there was no obligation under
the Constitution for getting consent of the Supreme Court and the matter is within the domain of the
Executive and Legislature in accordance with Article 348 (2) of the Constitution. The Secretary replied
that consultation with Chief Justice of India is based on convention which is in vogue since 1965 after
a decision of the Cabinet to that effect. The Committee observed that convention cannot over ride
provisions of Constitution. Chairman directed the Secretary to forward the said Resolution of Cabinet
to the Committee for its consideration. The Committee sought data regarding cases to be transferred
from High Courts of Delhi to District Courts in Delhi, adequacy of infrastructural facility in District
Courts and the extent of which the High Courts of Delhi is going to be relieved of the burden of
cases, in the event of enactment of proposed legislation. The Committee thereafter, deferred deposition
of Secretary, Department of Justice on The Tribunal Appellate Tribunal Other Authorities (Conditions
of Service) Bill, 2014.

16
(Witnesses then withdrew )
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
17. The Committee then adjourned at 2.24 
P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the
26th September, 2014.
*** Relates to some other matters.

17
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7 th October, 2014, in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Shri Ramachandra Prasad Singh
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
6. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
7. Shri B.V . Naik
8. Shri Vincent H. Pala
9. Dr. A. Sampath
10. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
11. Dr. Anshul Verma
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Shri D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
***
The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014
I. Co-ordination Committee of all District Court Bar Associations of Delhi
1. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Former Chairman, BCD
2. Shri B.D. Kaushik, Former President of DBA
3. Shri Deepak Khosla, Advocate
4. Shri Ajay Swami, Advocate
5. Shri Narender Kalra, Advocate
6. Shri Sohan Sharma, Advocate
17
*** Relates to some other matter.

18
*** Relate to some other matters.
II. Delhi Bar Association, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi
1. Shri Sanjeev Nasiar, President
2. Shri Divya Drshan Sharma, Hony. Secretary
3. Shri Ajay Gaur, Sr. Vice-President
4. Shri Vikas Manchanda, Vice-President
III. New Delhi Bar Association, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi
1. Shri R.K. Wadhwa, President
2. Shri Ranbir S. Kundu, Hony. Secretary
3. Shri Shalendra, Vice-President
IV. Shahdara Bar Association, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi
1. Shri Arun K. Sharma, President
2. Shri Mahender Bhardwaj, Vice-President
V. Rohini Court Bar Association, Rohini, Delhi
1. Shri Satnarain Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok K. Drall, Vice-President
VI. Dwarka Court Bar Association, Dwarka, New Delhi
1. Shri Dinesh K. Mudgil, President
2. Shri Rajender Singh, Vice-President
3. Shjri Rajendra Singh, Sehrawat
VII. Saket Court Bar Association, Saket, New Delhi
1. Shri Vinod Sharma, President
2. Shri Karnail Singh, Hony. Secretary
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Chairman welcomed representatives of the Bar Associations of District Courts in Delhi and
requested them to express their views on the provisions of the Delhi High Court (Amendment)
Bill, 2014 one by one. He requested them also to touch upon the effect of this Bill upon infrastructure
and manpower of District Courts as a lot of cases would have to be transferred from High Courts
to the District Courts in Delhi in the event of enactment of proposed legislation. He also requested
them to comment upon the court fee structure which is presently in vogue in the High Court and
District Courts and let the Committee know if the proposed amendment would lead to payment of
greater court fee.
8. Initiating the presentation on behalf of Co-ordination Committee of all District Courts Bar
Association of Delhi, Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, submitted that pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of
Delhi as well as District Courts in Delhi has been enhanced from time to time from Rs. 25,000/- in

19
1966 to Rs. 20 lakhs in 2003. The circle rate of property in Delhi has been increased manifold. Even
value of a small Janta Flat has now become more than 20 lakhs and the suit therefor need to be filed
in High Court of Delhi which is inconvenient to the litigants. He mentioned that pendency per judge
in District courts is 549 whereas pendency per judge in High Court is 3333. He referred to great
deficiency in recording of evidence in High Court as recording of evidence in High court is delegated
to Joint Registrar whereas it is undertaken by the judges themselves in District Courts. Referring to
biennial report published by High Court, he submitted that a judge of High Court is able to devote 4
minutes 36 seconds per case whereas a judge in District Courts devotes 24 minutes 50 second per
case every day.
9. He further added that out of 24 High Courts only 4 High Courts have been allocated for
original pecuniary jurisdiction which need to be dispensed with in the interest of justice and for
uniformity. He referred to Supreme Court judgement of 2008 after which nine Judicial Districts were
carved out and Court complexes at Saket, Karkardooma, Dwarka, Rohini came up with better
infrastructure and manpower. He also submitted that the High Court of Delhi under whose jurisdiction
District Courts of Delhi are functioning have recommended for enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction
of High Courts of Delhi from Rs 20 lakhs to Rs. 2 crores. The proposed legislation is in the interest
of public as it would ensure speedier justice at the door step of the client. He was of the view that
all the District Courts are better equipped in terms of infrastructure and human resources to tackle
additional burden of cases to be transferred from High Court of Delhi to District Courts in Delhi in
the event of enactment of the proposed legislation. There would be no additional burden on the litigant
so far as court fee is concerned. Moreover, the fee of advocates in the District Courts happens to
be lesser than the fee of the advocate in the High Court.
10. Shri Sanjeev Nasiar, President, Delhi Bar Association, Tis Hazari Courts submitted that before
the enactment of Delhi High Court Act 1996, unlimited original pecuniary jurisdiction vested with the
Tis Hazari Court. However, in pursuance of the Supreme Court order, District Courts in Delhi were
bifurcated into eleven judicial Districts for speedy, inexpensive justice to litigants. With regard to
infrastructure, he opined that the District Courts have adequate infrastructure and manpower to handle
the proposed workload consequent to the increase in pecuniary jurisdictions. While concluding his
presentation, he requested the Committee to resolve the issue of raising pecuniary jurisdiction without
further delay.
11. Shri Vinod Sharma, President, Saket Bar Association opined that Saket Court complex is well
equipped, has enough court rooms and the best infrastructure in the country. With regard to cost, he
opined that justice in District Courts is much cheaper in comparison to High Court. Shri Dinesh K.
Mudgil, President Dwarka Court Bar Association submitted that District Courts in Dwarka have
adequate infrastructure to support the proposed increase in pecuniary jurisdiction of District Court.
Shri Avinash Rana, Secretary, Dwarka Court Bar Association adding to the views of President, opined
that the increase in jurisdiction will help advocates as well as litigants.
12. Shri Satnarayan Sharma, Secretary, Rohini Court Bar Association apprised the Committee that
the Rohini Court has very good infrastructure. He added that ninety-eight percent lawyers in Delhi
practise in the District Courts with a few practising in both District Courts as well as High Court.
He informed that in 2012, a Committee constituted by the High Court of Delhi had recommended for
increasing the pecuniary jurisdiction up to 2 crore, which was objected to by the High Court Bar
Association. However, a full bench of the High Court endorsed the resolution for increasing the
pecuniary jurisdiction. He added that Delhi, despite being a semi-State has a High Court of original
jurisdiction whereas in other 20 High Courts, original jurisdiction lies with the trial courts. Shri R.K.
Wadhwa, President, New Delhi Bar Association, Patiala House Court informed that the District Courts
have huge infrastructure and original jurisdiction of the District Courts needs to be restored. It should
therefore not be limited to two crores since the District Courts earlier were having unlimited pecuniary

20
jurisdictions. Shri Arun K. Sharma, President, Shahdara Bar Association added that the litigant’s right
of appeal to High Court would also become available if the original pecuniary jurisdiction comes to
District Courts.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. The Committee decided to visit District Court complexes at Saket and Patiala House to interact
with judicial officers and to get first hand information of the infrastructural facilities created in the
recent past in those Courts.
14. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15. The Committee then adjourned at 5.39 
P.M. to meet again on 20 th October, 2014.

21
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th October, 2014, in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramachandra Prasad Singh
5. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
6. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
10. Shri Innocent
11. Shri Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
12. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
13. Shri Anoop Mishra
14. Shri B.V . Naik
15. Shri Vincent H. Pala
16. Dr. A. Sampath
17. Shri Udhayakumar M.
18. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
19. Dr. Anshul Verma
20. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
I. * * *
21
*** Relates to some other matter.

22
I I . *  *       *
III. *  *       *
B. The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill,  2014
Delhi High Court Bar Association
1. Shri Amarjit Singh Chandhoke, Senior Advocate and former Additional Solicitor
General of India
2. Shri P.V . Kapur, Senior Advocate
3. Shri Rajiv Nayar, Senior Advocate
4. Shri J.P. Sengh, Senior Advocate
5. Shri Arvind K. Nigam, Senior Advocate
6. Shri Sudhir Nandrajog, Senior Advocate
7. Shri Anish Dayal, Advocate
8. Shri Abhijat, Hony. Secretary
9. Shri Sunil Mittal, Advocate, Member Executive
10. Ms. Meghna Mital Sankhla, Lady Executive Member
11. Ms. Kaadambari Singh Puri, Executive Member
12. Shri Rahul Srivastava, Advocate
13. Shri Ashutosh Lohia, Treasurer
14. Shri Rishabh Bansal, Advocate
15. Shri Isahwar Mohanty, Advocate
16. Shri Pankaj Kapoor, Executive Member
17. Shri Mayank Bamniyal, Advocate
18. Shri Honey Kolwar, Advocate
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Chairman welcomed representatives of Delhi High Court Bar Association and Senior Officers
of Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice to the meeting of the Committee. He then
requested the Bar members to present their views on the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014.
7. The former Additional Solicitor General of India and Senior Advocate of Delhi High Court in
his deposition on behalf of the Delhi High Court Bar Association mentioned that three Chartered High
Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai as well as High Court of Delhi have been conferred original
pecuniary jurisdiction. The increase of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Courts of Delhi from rupees
twenty lakhs to rupees two crores has no-nexus with the objective of the Bill as parties come to High
Court of Delhi especially for injunction relief by enhancing valuation of the property which is usually
left to the parties to the dispute. He added that there has been no survey, no scientific analysis for
ten fold increase of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi. Mediation Centre which has been
in operation since 2006 in High Court of Delhi have helped to reduce the burden of Delhi High Courts
*** Relates to some other matters.

23
to a large extent which was supported by some of the members of the Committee. Thereafter, he
requested the Committee to visit the Mediation as well as Arbitrator Centre managed by the Members
of the Bar in the Delhi High Court.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 5.29 
P.M. to meet again on 28 th October, 2014.

24
24
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11 th November, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
7. Shri Santosh Kumar
8. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
9. Shri B.V. Naik
10. Shri Vincent H. Pala
11. Dr. A. Sampath
12. Shri Udhayakumar M.
13. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
14. Dr. Anshul Verma
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Non-Official Witnesses
1. Asian Patent Attrorneys Association, New Delhi
(i) Shri Chander Lall;
(ii) Ms. Nancy Roy; and
(iii) Ms. Namrita Kochhar.
2. Shri I.C. Kumar, Advocate, Delhi High Court
3. Shri Hansraj Jain, Social Activitsts
4. Shri Subash C. Agrawal, RTI Activist
5. Shri Rajiv Kakria
6. Shri Chetan Sharma

25
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the non-official witnesses who had been
invited to tender oral evidence on the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and senior officers
of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice.
3. A view expressed was that the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts in
Delhi would provide justice at doorsteps of the litigant besides ensuring speedier disposal of cases by
the concerned District Courts. In addition, it would benefit the legal practitioners in District Courts,
litigants and witnesses. Responding to a query on court fee, the witnesses opined that, there would
be no additional burden on account of court fee on the litigants in the event of transfer of suits to
the concerned District Courts in Delhi as court fee is same both in High Court and District Courts
in Delhi. They further added that it would rather become convenient for litigants and witnesses to
approach District Courts with minimum cost and maximum convenience.
4. A contrary view was that IPR is a very specialised area of law and requires a very high level
of specialised knowledge and certain quality of judges to evaluate the cases. The enhancement of
pecuniary jurisdiction would force the Intellectual Property owners to go to District Courts which are
not trained and equipped to handle such cases. It was further added that in commercial disputes
involving Intellectual Property Right, Letters of Patent, Commercial Arbitration, etc. parties prefer High
Court for efficacious and expeditious adjudication as both Bench and Bar of the High Court have
acquired specialization in such matters. After the enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction, the owner of
copy right/patent will have to pay more court fee so as to bring the matter to the High Court. Finally,
it was argued that at least an exception may be made for the technical cases which should be tried
in the High Court of Delhi irrespective of their valuations on the lines similar exception has been done
for the High Court of Bombay.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.25 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 18 th November, 2014.

26
26
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th November, 2014 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
6. Shri Innocent
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
8. Shri B.V. Naik
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
12. Dr. Anshul Verma
13. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Ministry of Law and Justice
A. Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary & LA; and
3. Shri Mahendra Khandelwall, Addl. G.A.
Department of Justice
Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
B. Government of Maharashtra
Shri M.A. Sayeed, Law Secretary

27
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting. He informed that the Committee had invited Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice and Law Secretary, Government of Maharashtra to make
presentations on the Delhi High Court (Amendment), 2014. He further apprised the Members that the
Committee would have an in-house discussion on the various provisions of the Bill after their
presentations.
3. The Chairman after welcoming Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and other senior officers
of that Ministry mentioned that the Committee was interested to know his views on the statutory
provisions regulating original jurisdiction of Chartered High Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai
and legislative competence of State Legislature to alter pecuniary jurisdiction of City Civil Courts as
well as the Chartered High Courts. He asked him to enlighten the Committee about the exclusion of
intellectual property matters from the remit of City Civil Courts in Mumbai. He further asked him to
clarify to the Committee whether any Special Leave Petition is pending before the Supreme Court on
the legislative competence of Maharashtra Legislature in providing unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction to
City Civil Courts in Mumbai.
4. The Law Secretary in his deposition stated that the Delhi High Court was carved out from the
Punjab High Court with pecuniary jurisdiction on original side in 1966. He averred that pecuniary
jurisdiction is a substantive matter which could not be altered by the rule making power of High Court.
Both Union Legislature as well as the State Legislature have competence and concurrent power to alter
pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court by combined reading of Article 225 of Constitution, Entry 78 in
Union List and Entries 11A, 13 and 46 in the Concurrent List. He referred to the decision of a Five
Judge Bench of Supreme Court in the case of Jamshed N Gazdar Vs. State of Maharashtra (2005)
where it has been held that both Union Parliament and State Legislature have concurrent power to alter
the pecuniary jurisdiction of Bombay High Court.
5. The Chairman made a query as to whether the Legislature of NCT of Delhi is having power
and competence similar to Legislature of Maharashtra to alter pecuniary jurisdiction of City Civil
Courts in view of provisions provided in Article 239 AA of the Constitution wherein power to
determine the matters in Entry-I (Union List) relating to public, order, police and land has been
reserved for Union Legislature. The Secretary in response thereto submitted that the full Bench of
Delhi High Court in the case of Geetika Panwar and Delhi High Courts Bar Association and Anr. Vs.
Government of NCT of Delhi and Ors. (AIR 2003, Delhi 317) has held that the Legislature Assembly
of NCT of Delhi had no legislative competence to alter the pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of
Delhi and Parliament alone had competence and power to alter the said jurisdiction. Even the Five
Bench Judgment of Supreme Court delivered in 2005 had agreed to this view taken by Delhi High
Court in 2003. While responding to a query as to whether exclusion of certain technical matters
especially the Intellectual Property Rights could be provided under the Rules framed by the concerned
High Court, the Secretary opined that the power of giving exception to certain technical areas
exclusively lies with the Legislature.
(Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs then withdrew)
6. The Chairman welcomed the Law Secretary, Government of Maharashtra to the meeting of the
Committee and requested him to dwell on the issue of exclusion of certain areas of law, viz.,
Intellectual Property Rights, from the ambit of Bombay City Civil Court and the process adopted in
this regard while making his presentation. The Law Secretary informed that the Bombay High Court
is one of the four Chartered High Courts in the country governed by the Letters of Patent. He added
that Section 3 of Bombay City Civil Court Act, 1948 empowers the State Government to enhance
pecuniary jurisdiction of the City Courts at Mumbai and correspondingly alter pecuniary jurisdiction
of Bombay High Court after consultation with the said High Court by notification. He further stated
that it was challenged in the case of Jamshed N Gazdar Vs. State of Maharashtra (2005) see 591 and

28
Five Judge Bench of the Supreme Court declared the Act intra vires and held that both State
Legislature and Union Parliament have power to confer jurisdiction on High Courts under Seventh
Schedule of Constitution. Responding to the queries of the Members on the exclusion of IPR from
the jurisdiction of City Civil courts, the Secretary opined that it would go directly to the High Court.
(Law Secretary, Government of Maharashtra withdrew)
7. The Committee thereafter held in house deliberation on the clauses of the Bill. A view was
expressed to enhance the pecuniary jurisdiction from rupees twenty lakhs to rupees five crores and
even make it unlimited for the District Courts as it is the case of District Courts in other parts of
the country. Majority of the Members were in favour of the proposed enhancement to rupees two
crores as it would provide justice at the door step of the litigants with maximum convenience and
minimum cost. Members also felt the need for unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction of City Civil Courts in
Metropolitan Cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai by altering the relevant provisions for the
Chartered High Courts.
8. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.28 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the
25th November, 2014.

29
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2014, in Room ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
6. Adv. Sharad Bansode
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
8. Shri Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri Santosh Kumar
10. Shri B.V . Naik
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Shri V . Panneerselvam
13. Dr. A. Sampath
14. Shri Bharat Singh
15. Shri Udhayakumar M.
16. Dr. Anshul Verma
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of Committee. Thereafter, he mentioned that a suggestion
had been received from a Member for concurrent pecuniary jurisdiction for High Court of Delhi and
District Courts in Delhi for the suits valued between rupees fifty lakhs and one crore. The said
suggestion appeared to be in consonance with the spirit of the Commercial Bench of High Court Bill,
2009. Another Member of the Committee has furnished very useful statistical information pertaining
to High Court of Delhi and District Courts in Delhi. He requested members to offer their views
especially on the concurrent jurisdiction for both the Courts in Delhi on the lines of similar provision
existing for Calcutta High Court and City Civil Courts in Kolkata. The Committee, however, did not
29

30
favour the suggestion of the member but desired that a few lines about the Commercial Bench of High
Court Bill, 2009 may be mentioned in the Report. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the
following para:–
“Taking note of the provision of the Commercial Division of High Court Bill, 2009 which has
since lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the Committee
observed that in case such a Bill is enacted, High Court alone would have jurisdiction to
adjudicate all commercial disputes of specified value and commercial disputes pending in
Subordinate Courts of value above the specified value would have to be transferred to the
Commercial Division of the High Court”.
It was also decided to annex the statistical information relating to High Court and District
Courts in Delhi as forwarded by the member. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft report with
the aforesaid modifications.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the
28
th November, 2014. It also authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Majeed Memon to
present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri Santosh Kumar and in his absence, Choudhary Mehboob
Ali Kaiser to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee decided to undertake a study visit in the third week of January, 2015 in
connection with subjects/Bills under consideration.
5. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.21 
P.M.

31
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
17 Feb., 2014
Bill No. VI of 2014
THE DELHI HIGH COURT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi High Court Act,  1966.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi High Court
(Amendment) Bill, 2014
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In sub-section ( 2) of section 5 of the Delhi High Court
Act, 1966, for the words “rupees twenty lakhs”, the words “rupees
two crore”, shall be substituted.
3. In the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, as in force in the National
Capital Territory of Delhi, in section 25, for the words “rupees
twenty lakhs”, the words “rupees two crores” shall be substituted.
33
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 5.26 of 1966.
Amendment
of Punjab Act
VI of 1918,
as in force in
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.

34
4. The Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi may transfer
any suit or other proceedings which is or are pending in the High
Court immediately before the commencement of this Act to such
subordinate court in the National Capital Territory of Delhi as would
have jurisdiction to entertain such suit or proceedings had such suit
or proceedings been instituted or filed for the first time after such
commencement.
Power of
Chief Justice
to transfer
pending suits
and proceed-
ings to
subordinate
courts.

35
35
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Under sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 the High Court of Delhi has ordinary original civil jurisdiction
in respect of suits, the value of which exceeds rupees twenty lakhs.
The pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi and District
Courts of Delhi was last revised in the year 2003 from rupees
five lakhs to twenty lakhs by the Delhi High Court (Amendment)
Act, 2003.
2. At present, cases involving even a small property are required
to be filed before Delhi High Court as the Delhi High Court has
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the civil suits involving value of
rupees twenty lakhs and above. This has increased the work load of
the Delhi High Court and on the other hand, poor people living in Delhi
have to cover considerable distance to approach Delhi-High Court to
seek justice in their cases.
3. The Coordination Committee of Bar Associations of Delhi at
various forums has requested for enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction
of District Courts in Delhi. The Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi has considered the request of the Bar Associations
of Delhi and requested the Central Government for enhancement of
pecuniary jurisdiction of ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court
of Delhi from the existing rupees twenty lakhs to rupees two crore.
4. Accordingly, it has been decided to increase pecuniary
jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi from rupees twenty lakhs to
two crore by amending the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918, as in force in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 11th February, 2014.

36
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE D ELHI H IGH C OURT A CT, 1966
(26 OF 1966)
*****
5. ( 1)* * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
being in force, the High Court of Delhi shall also have in respect of
the said territories ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every suit the
value of which exceeds rupees twenty lakhs.
*****
E
XTRACT FROM THE P UNJAB C OURTS A CT, 1918
(6 OF 1918)
**** *
25. Except as otherwise provided by any enactment for the time
being in force, the court of the District Judge shall have jurisdiction
in every original civil suit the value of which does not exceed rupees
twenty lakhs.
*****
Jurisdiction of
High Court of
Delhi.
Original Juris-
diction of Dis-
trict Judge in
suits.

37
RAHYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi High Court Act, 1966.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice )

38
ANNEXURE-II
38
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATION WHO DEPOSED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
I. Co-ordination Committee of all District Court Bar Associations of Delhi
1. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Former Chairman, BCD
2. Shri B.D. Kaushik, Former President of DBA
3. Shri Deepak Khosla, Advocate
4. Shri Ajay Swami, Advocate
5. Shri Narender Kalra, Advocate
6. Shri Sohan Sharma, Advocate
II. Delhi Bar Association, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi
1. Shri Sanjeev Nasiar, President
2. Shri Divya Darshan Sharma, Hony. Secretary
3. Shri Ajay Gaur, Sr. Vice-President
4. Shri Vikas Manchanda, Vice-President
III. New Delhi Bar Association, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi
1. Shri R.K. Wadhwa, President
2. Shri Ranbir S. Kundu, Hony. Secretary
3. Shri Shalendra, Vice-President
IV. Shahdara Bar Association, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi.
1. Shri Arun K. Sharma, President
2. Shri Mahender Bhardwaj, Vice-President
V. Rohini Court Bar Association, Rohini, Delhi
1. Shri Satnarain Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok K. Drall, Vice-President
VI. Dwarka Court Bar Association, Dwarka, New Delhi
1. Shri Dinesh K. Mudgil, President
2. Shri Rajender Singh, Vice-President
3. Shri Rajendra Singh Sehrawat

39
VII. Saket Court Bar Association, Saket, New Delhi
1. Shri Vinod Sharma, President
2. Shri Karnail Singh, Hony. Secretary
VIII. Delhi High Court Bar Association
1. Shri Amarjit Singh Chandhoke, Senior Advocate and former Additional Solicitor General-
of India
2. Shri P.V . Kapur, Senior Advocate
3. Shri Rajiv Nayar Senior Advocate
4. Shri J.P. Singh, Senior Advocate
5. Shri Arvind K. Nigam, Senior Advocate
6. Shri Sudhir Nandrajog, Senior Advocate
7. Shri Anish Dayal, Advocate
8. Shri Abhijat, Hony. Secretary,
9. Shri Sunil Mittal, Advocate, Member Executive
10. Ms. Meghna Mital Sankhla, Lady Executive Member
11. Ms. Kaadambari Singh Puri, Executive Member
12. Shri Rahul Srivastava, Advocate
13. Shri Ashutosh Lohia, Treasurer
14. Shri Rishabh Bansal, Advocate
15. Shri Isahwar Mohanty, Advocate
16. Shri Pankaj Kapoor, Executive Member
17. Shri Mayank Bamniyal, Advocate
18. Shri Honey Kolwar, Advocate
IX. Asian Patent Attorneys Association, New Delhi
1. Shri Chander Lall
2. Ms. Nancy Roy
3. Ms. Namrita Kochhar

40
ANNEXURE -III
STATEMENT REGARDING VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF THE INDIVIDUALS/ASSOCIATIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS ON
DELHI HIGH COURT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014 AND COMMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE THEREON
Sl. Name and Address Views/Suggestions in brief Comments of Department of Justice
No. of the Sender
12 3 4
1.
2.
3.
Shri Subhash Chandra
Agrawal
1775, Kucha Lattu Shah,
Dariba, Chandni Chowk,
Delhi-110 006.
Shri Parveen Jain,
D-29, Vivek Vihar,
Delhi-110 095.
Shri Amit P. Deshpande,
Advocate, Deshpande &
Company
F-157, L.G .F., Lajpat
Nagar-1,
New Delhi-110 024.
(i) Rules (for pecuniary jurisdiction) for
all High Courts in the country should
be common and same.
(ii) Power to increase pecuniary
jurisdiction of High Courts should
rest with some specified body, like
Chief Justice of India (CJI), Law
Commission of India (LCI) etc.,
rather than requiring any Bill to
amend to be legislated through
Parliament at regular intervals to
avoid sudden jerk of increase like
the present one.
Supported the Bill.
Supported the Bill.
Also suggested that Delhi High Court may
not have any original jurisdiction at all.
Article 227 of Constitution of India provides the High
Courts the power of superintendence over all Courts
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises
jurisdiction. Article 227(2) provides that High Courts may
make and issue general Rules for regulating the practice
and proceedings of Subordinate Courts with the previous
approval of Governor of the State.
As such, the pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is
decided by the Government in consultation with the High
Court concerned.
No comments.
No comments.

41
Merely enacting new HC Laws is like painting
an altar of injustice, oppression & suppression
with new paints and no substantive change
has been initiated. This amendment will have
same effect of causing inordinate delay in
meting out justice like present system. Please
utilize the amicus curie  status of a lawyer in
the process of litigation and pass on the fees
taking lawyer to conclude the litigation within
10 to 15 minutes with effect of the
pronouncement of judgement as ipso facto
a Judgement – decree, and the state will
bound to execute the decree by default. So
no another execution decree or court order
is required.
Submitted in public interest that the pecuniary
jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court may be
revised to rupees 5 (five) crore because the
aims and objectives of this amendment stand
outdated due to obsessive price rise in the
past 10 years.
All High Courts of India must have uniform
single law so that there will not be any
discrimination among the High Courts of
India. For Example Letters Patents Appeal
(L.P.A.) power has been granted to some
High Courts. When a Writ Petition is disposed
of by single Judge, then L.P.A. lies and if
Writ Petition is disposed off by Division
Bench; L.P.A. does not lie. Where substantial
The memorandum submitted by Mr. Ghose is not relevant
to the present Bill which seeks to enhance the pecuniary
jurisdiction of District Courts in Delhi from Rs. 20 lakh to
Rs. 2 crore.
The pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by
the State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. The Government of NCT of Delhi and the
Delhi High Court have recommended increase of pecuniary
jurisdiction of District Courts of Delhi to Rs. 2 crore after
due consideration.
Suggestion of Mr. Gupta to increase the pecuniary
jurisdiction of District Court in Delhi to Rs. 5 crore is for
consideration of the Committee.
The present Bill is limited to the issue of original pecuniary
jurisdiction of Delhi High Court, and does not address the
issue procedure for disposal of cases in High Courts.
Shri Pijush Ghose,
Bally, Howarh-711 201,
West Bengal.
Shri M.L. Gupta,
Flat # 319, RBCACGHS,
Plot-3, Sect-10, DWARKA,
New Delhi-110 075.
Shri Kolla Gangadhar,
#1-5-237/3, New
Maruthingar,
Hyderabad-500 060,
Andhra Pradesh.
4.
5.
6.

42
12 3 4
question of law is involved Writ Petition be
heard by Division Bench of High Court and
where there is no substantial question of law
involved, that may be heard by Single Judge
of High Court, so that recious time of High
Courts will be saved.
The proposed Bill will not solve the present
problems because the local limits of the City
are periodically enlarged and there is a large
influx of population, besides large volume of
Trade and commerce having grown over the
last 10 years, which have all led to increase
in litigation. These problems exist in Chennai
where the original side of the Madras High
Court which at present has pecuniary
jurisdiction over suits above Rs. 25 lacs
similar to Delhi High Court. The only
permanent solution is abolition of the original
side of High Courts of New Delhi & Madras.
The powers and jurisdiction of all the High
Courts in India should be uniform.
Supported the Bill.
Supported the Bill.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. His suggestion to have unlimited pecuniary
jurisdiction for District Courts of Delhi (and Chennai) may
be considered by the Committee.
No Comments.
No Comments.
7.
8.
9.
Shri Prabhu, Advocate, 33,
Lawyers Chambers, Old
High Court Bldg.,
Chennai-04.
Shri Divya Darshan Sharma,
Hony, Secretary, Delhi Bar
Association, Tis Hazari
Courts, Delhi-110 054.
Shri Navroop Singh,
Advocate (D977/08) H-7,
Green Park Extension,
New Delhi-110 016.

43
It is illogical to have different pecuniary
jurisdiction for different High Courts as value
of money/rupee is almost same throughout
India. Further, it is illogical to amend acts
and rules for different States at different
times, which is not only a cumbersome
process but also a burden on exchequer.
Rules for all High Courts in India should be
common and same throughout. The power
to increase pecuniary jurisdiction of High
Courts in the country should be given to
some specific competent authority like LCI
or Ministry of Finance instead of requiring
any Bill to amend/be legislated through
Parliament every time. The task of increasing
only the pecuniary limit which is related to
depreciation of rupee during certain period
may also be given to any committee
constituted by Chief Justice of India or some
other competent body formed in this regard.
Further the said competent body should be
required to authorize increase in pecuniary
jurisdiction of all High Courts in India at
regular intervals with fall in value of money
rather than suddenly increasing ten times of
the limit as proposed at present. It is difficult
to believe that pecuniary limit will be
arbitrarily fixed by the competent body or
will be challenged in any court of law. We
have scientific methods to determine the
valuation of money and the said pecuniary
limit can be fixed on the basis of price index
of commodities etc. as in the case of WPI
or DA declared by the Government for its
employees from time to time.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. The present Bill is on the limited issue of
pecuniary jurisdiction in Courts in Delhi.
Shri S.P. Manchanda,
President, Elderly People’s
Forum,
C-2/35 B, Keshav Puram,
Delhi-110 035.
10.

44
12 3 4
The pecuniary jurisdiction of “District Judge”,
being the Judge of a principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction, should be limitless
throughout the Territory of India. The pecuniary
jurisdiction of a District Judge could not be
curbed or curtailed without offending the
directive principle of State Policy contained in
Article 44 of the Constitution of India. As the
High Court of Delhi is discharging the duties of
“District Judge” in respect of the “District”
comprising the local limits of its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, there could not be a court of
“District Judge” for the District forming part
of the local limits of the ordinary original Civil
jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court. There
should have been a City Civil Court with limited
pecuniary jurisdiction to function within the
local limits of ordinary original Civil Jurisdiction
of the Delhi High Court.
The proposed amendment in Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 is not valid because any National
Commission, which is equivalent to a High
Court, has jurisdiction of Rs. one crore and
above. Therefore, Government should increase
it either to Rs. two crores from Rs. one
crore or the proposed amendment should raise
the pecuniary jurisdiction to Rs. one crore.
He has also suggested that :
1. While carrying out the proposed
amendment, due attention may be paid on
the Writ Petitions filed in Supreme Court.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. His suggestion to have unlimited pecuniary
jurisdiction for District Courts throughout the country is
for consideration of the Committee.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. His other views are not relevant to the present
Bill.
11.
12.
Shri N.C. Chaki, Flat: 1 :
243, Dum Dum Park,
Kolkata - 700 055.
Shri Hansraj Jain, A-85,
Kaithwada Usmanpur,
Delhi-110 053.

45
2. Court fees should be uniform.
3. Special Courts be set up to deal with
cases pertaining to pre- amendment period.
4. Writ Petitions be disposed off quickly by
the Courts.
5. Courts should be changed only when
the both parties agree.
The Hon’ble Committee may like to know
the reasons for backlog of suits filed on
original side before recommending the
amendment. Raising pecuniary jurisdiction
would not solve the problem of pendency of
suits. Solution lies not in raising the pecuniary
jurisdiction from time to time but only in
following the functioning of Ordinary Original
Civil Jurisdiction of Bombay, Calcutta, Madras
High Courts.
Supported the Bill. Suggested to have
unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction for Districts
Courts in Delhi in view of the frequently
increasing circle rates of properties in Delhi
which has virtually rendered all properties in
Delhi out of trial by District Courts.
Supported the Bill
The Registrar General of Delhi High Court has provided
details of cases pending in Delhi High Court separately to
the Committee.
Suggestion given by Mr. Mudgil to have unlimited pecuniary
jurisdiction for District Courts in Delhi is for consideration
of the Committee.
No comments.
Shri I.C. Kumar,
Advocate, 221, Lawyers
Chambers, Delhi High
Court, New Delhi.
Shri Dinesh K. Mudgil,
President, Dwarka Court
Bar Association, Sector
10, Dwarka,
New Delhi-110 078
Co-ordination Committee
All District Court Bar
Associations of Delhi, Tis
Hazari Courts,
Delhi-110 054.
13.
14.
15.

46
12 3 4
Categorically opposed the proposed
amendment to the Delhi High Court Act,
1966 stating that, geographically, the Delhi
High Court is located centrally and to say
that poor people living in Delhi have to cover
considerable distance to approach Delhi High
Court to seek justice in their cases, is absurd
etc.
The Association has requested some more
time to file their views/memorandum as they
are in the process of collecting the vital
statistics.
Supported the Bill.
Suggested to link the pecuniary jurisdiction
with the circle rates of properties in Delhi.
Supported the Bill.
Supported the bill and suggested for having
unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction for District
Courts in Delhi.
1. Section 5(2) of the Delhi High Court
Act, 1966 regarding original Civil jurisdiction
of Delhi High Court be examined.
The proposed increases in pecuniary jurisdiction of Delhi
District Courts is based inter-alia on the recommendation
of the Delhi High Court. The Committee has fixed
20
th October, 2014 to hear the Delhi High Court Bar
Association.
No comments.
No comments.
The suggestion to have unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction for
District Courts in Delhi is for consideration of the
Committee.
The Bill proposes an amendment to Section 5(2) of the
Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and Section 25 of the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918 as these two Legislations determine the
original civil jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court and District
Courts respectively.
Delhi High Court Bar
Association, New Delhi.
E-Block Residents’ Welfare
Society (Regd.) E-334,
Greater Kailash-I,
New Delhi.
Shri Mohammad Ikram,
Advocate, 623, Lawyers
Chambers, Rohni Courts,
New Delhi-110 085.
Rohini Bar Association,
Rohini Court Complex,
Delhi.
Mr. Vincent H. Pala, MP
(Lok Sabha)
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

47
2. We must have data from the High Courts
about transfer of cases to District Court on
account of the proposed Bill and only then
the Committee must take a decision.
3. We should have a separate Act for NCT
of Delhi instead of Punjab Courts Act, 1918.
Supported the Bill.
Opposed the Bill on the following grounds:
1. The Bill will scuttle the Parliamentary
vision and mandate etc.
2. The original side of the Delhi High Court
has a commendable disposal rate.
3. There is efficient and adequate qualitative
infrastructure in Delhi High Court to deal
with increased work load. There has been
tremendous increase in the disposal rate of
Delhi High Court.
4. The infrastructure in the District Courts
is pathetic.
Opposed the Bill on the following grounds:
1. There will be additional burden on the
District Courts resulting in delay in Justice.
2. Views of Delhi High Court Bar
Association not taken into account.
Necessary data about transfer of cases from Delhi High
court to District Courts, on passing of the Bill, has been
provided to the Committee by the Registrar General of the
Delhi High Court.
No comments.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned. Registrar General, Delhi High Court has
confirmed that there is adequate infrastructure, including
Judicial Officers, in District Courts in Delhi to handle
additional work load on transfer of cases consequent on
passing of the Bill.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is decided by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned.
The proposal has been sent by State Government of Delhi
and duly endorsed by Delhi High Court.
Advocates of all District
Courts Bar Associations of
Delhi.
Mr. Amarjit Singh
Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate,
Former ASG C-524,
Defence Colony,
New Delhi-110 024.
Intellectual Property
Attorneys Association.
D-17, South Extension – II
New Delhi-110 049.
21.
22.
23.

48
12 3 4
3. The proposed Bill is contrary to the report of the
Committee of Judges constituted by Delhi High Court.
4. Cases in the District Courts will rise and will result in
delay in justice.
5. Not in uniformity with the pecuniary jurisdiction of
other High Courts.
6. The Bill would impede the growth of Minor members
at the Delhi High Court Bar in terms of procedure and
manner of appearance on the original side.
Supported the Bill. Suggested to give unlimited pecuniary
jurisdiction to Trial Courts.
Oppose the Bill on the following grounds:
1. Delhi High Court Bar Association has not been
consulted.
2. No material, minutes or deliberations, which could
have formed the basis opinion of the High Court to
increase the pecuniary jurisdiction, were disclosed.
3. Delhi High Court is centrally located.
4. The said Bill is contrary to the report dated 5.07.2011
of the Committee of Judges set up by Delhi High Court.
5. If the Bill is passed it will leave only 2757 suits on
the original side with Delhi High Court which works out
557 cases per Judge which is too less.
The Committee has decided to hear the views
of Delhi High Court Bar Association on 20th
October, 2014.
No comments.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is
decided by the State Government in
consultation with the High Court concerned.
Registrar General, Delhi High Court has
confirmed that there is adequate infrastructure,
including Judicial Officers, in District Courts
in Delhi to handle additional work load on
transfer of cases consequent on passing of
the Bill.
Shri Rajesh Jain,
Advocate, Delhi
Mr. Atul Bhuchar,
Advocate, Delhi
24.
25.

49
Mr. Vinod Sharma,
President, Saket Bar
Association,
New Delhi-110017.
Asian Patents Attorney
Association, F-11, Jung
Pura, Extension,
New Delhi.
Dr. Lokesh Kumar, Dilshad
Garden, Delhi.
No comments.
Pecuniary jurisdiction of District Courts is
decided by the State Government in
consultation with the High Court concerned.
The proposal has been sent by State
Government of Delhi and duly endorsed by
Delhi High Court.
The Committee has decided to hear the views
of Delhi High Court Bar Association on
20
th October, 2014.
The suggestions given by Dr. Lokesh Kumar
are not relevant to the proposed Bill which
seeks to enhance the pecuniary jurisdiction of
Delhi High Court from Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 2
crore.
Supported the Bill.
Opposed the Bill on the following grounds:
1. There will be additional burden on the District Courts
resulting in delay in Justice.
2. Views of Delhi High Court Bar Association not taken
into account.
3. The proposed Bill is contrary to the report of the
Committee of Judges constituted by Delhi High Court.
4. Not in uniformity with other High Courts.
5. The Bill would impede the growth of junior members
at the Delhi High Court Bar in terms of procedure and
manner of appearance on the original side.
No comments on the proposed Bill. He has suggested that
at least 10 judicial Districts in National Capital Region may
be transferred to Delhi High Court for reducing the load
on Allahabad High Court.
26.
27.
28.

50
ANNEXURE-IV
DETAILED STATISTICAL INFORMATION RELATING TO
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AND DISTRICT COURTS IN DELHI
● The following are the changes in the Pecuniary Jurisdiction:
➢ 1991, raised to Rs.5,00,000/-
➢ 2003, raised to Rs.20,00,000/-
➢ 2014, raised to Rs.2,00,00,000/- (Delhi HC Amendment Bill of 2014)
● Other Facts are discussed below:
➢ 9 district courts  were established, the pecuniary judgment remains unchanged.
➢ The District courts takes about 1.5-2 years  for decision.
➢ The high court takes about 10-12 years  for decision.
➢ Only 6 judges to dispense off the same in the Delhi High Court
➢ 482 Addl. District judges/Civil judges in all the nine district courts.
➢ Pending cases in District Courts of Delhi as on 31.07.2014 are
● Civil – 133487
● Total – 523377
➢ The district courts  have been completetely computerized.
➢ “Old Civil Supply Building” at Tis Hazari courts has been identified and found suitable
for establishing more Family courts.
➢ A plot of land measuring 5 acres has been allotted at Rouse Avenue, DDU Marg, New
Delhi for New Delhi District Courts complex.
➢ Provision for construction of 41 court rooms at Rouse Avenue.
➢ Government of India offered 1.51 acres land for construction of family courts  at Rouse
Avenue adjacent to the 5 acres plot offered for construction of New District Court
Comple.
➢ 2700 Sq.mt.  plot allotted to seven family courts adjacent to Rohini District Court
Complex.
➢ Efforts being made to achieve full available FAR by additional Construction at Rohini
Courts.
➢ A plot of land 6172 Sq. mt. allotted at Dwarka for construction of  additional Lawyers
chambers.
50

51
➢ District judges suggested PWD to construct 10 new court rooms.
➢ Proposal for construction of a permanent judicial lock-up Building.
➢ Structures of Family courts building having 2 Family Courts each at Janak Puri and
Dheerpur.
➢ 10 acres DDA land in Sector-26 Rohini and 10 acres DDA land at Tikri Khurd (Narela
Project) for construction of District Courts Complexes respectively.
➢ Sanctioned Strength in Delhi Higher judicial Service is 276, Fast Track Courts is 20
and Delhi Judicial Service is 482.
➢ 12,211 cases pending before the Delhi High Court  would be transferred to the District
Courts and 1547 Civil suits on original side will remain pending in the Delhi High
Court.
➢ 8 officers of Delhi Higher Judicial Services are working as Joint Registrar (Judicial)
on deputation in the Delhi High Court.
➢ Each Judicial Officer repatriated from the Delhi High Court may be Given 1000-1500
cases.
➢ 2014, pecuniary jurisdiction of the Civil judges is up to Rs. 3 lakhs.
● The pecuniary Jurisdiction of the Delhi High court:
➢ 1969, raised to Rs.50, 000/- (from 25,000/-)
➢ 1980, raised to Rs. 1,00,000/-
➢ 1992, raised to Rs. 5,00,000/-
➢ 2003, raised to Rs. 20,00,000/- & above

APPENDIX

55
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Right to Information Bill,
2004.
The Andhra Pradesh Legislative
Council Bill, 2004.
Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other Backward
Classes (Reservation in Posts
and Services) Bill, 2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29 th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
11.04.2005
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204
APPENDIX
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY ST ANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
Date of
Adoption
3
Session
No.
5

56
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
17.05.2006
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
The Arbitration and Conciliation
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
The High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005.
The National Tax Tribunal Bill,
2004.
The Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
The Prevention of Child Marriage
Bill, 2004.
Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
The Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
The Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences).
Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

57
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006,
Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Justice).
The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007,
Ministry of Law and Justice,
Legislative Department.
The Government’s Policy of
Appointment on Compassionate
Ground Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training).
Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training).
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Action Taken Replies on Law’s
Delays : Arrears in Courts (85
th
Report of Home Affairs).
The Supreme Court (Number of
Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008.
Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism.
08.05.2007
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

58
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Constraints being Faced by
Kendriya Bhandar.
The Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
The Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Representation of the
People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008.
The High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
The “Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 29
th Report
of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”.
“The Constitution (One Hundred
and Eighth Amendment) Bill,
2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”.
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010.
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

59
12 4 35
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Personal Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2010.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
being Faced by Kendriya
Bhandar”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
The Constitution (One Hundred
and Fourteenth Amendment)
Bill, 2010.
The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
The Public Interest Disclosure
and Protection to Persons
Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and of Lok Sabha on
10.08.11.
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
27.04.2010
29.07.2010
29.07.2010
16.11.2010
16.11.2010
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

60
12 4 35
The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010.
The Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011.
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011.
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Right of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and
Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011.
The Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.
The Registration of Births and
Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
15.05.2012
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012. Laid to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

61
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013.
The Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
The “Electoral Reforms—Code
of Conduct for Political Parties
and Anti Defection Law”.
The “Status of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”.
The Rajasthan Legislative Council
Bill, 2013.
The Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013.
The Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2013.
The Right to Information
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013.
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
27.11.2013
06.12.2013
13.12.2013
228
228
228
228
229
229
230
230
230
230

62
12 4 35
67th
68th
69th
70th
71st
The Infrastructure Development
and Strengthening of Subordinate
Courts.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 60
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
The Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.
The Assam Legislative Council
Bill, 2013.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendation/Observations
Contained in the 58
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
03.02.2014
03.02.2014
05.02.2014
03.02.2014
03.02.2014
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.02.2014.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.02.2014.
231
231
231
231
231

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.