 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022 / Phalguana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
113 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
OF THE DEPARTMENTS 
OF 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
(Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th March, 2022) 
 
 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 

 3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
 
Topic Pages 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4 
2 INTRODUCTION 5-6 
3 ACRONYMS 7-8 
4 REPORT  
 CHAPTER – I     OVERVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENTS 9-17 
 CHAPTER – II    OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS 
18-25 
 CHAPTER – III  POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 26-38 
 5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 39-45 
 6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 46-55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. *Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. #Shrimati Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.11.2021 
#Nominated w.e.f. 07.02.2022 

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Thirteenth  Report on 
Demands for Grants 2022 -23 pertaining to the Department of Administrative Reforms & 
Public Grievances and Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare  (Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances & Pensions). 
 
2. In accordance with the constitutiona l requirement under Article 113, the estimated 
expenditure of Ministries/Departments of Government of India projected under various 
Demands for Grants for the upcoming financial year need to be voted by the Parliament. 
Subsequently, the Demands for Grants of the relevant Ministries/Departments stand referred 
to concerned Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee to make a close scrutiny 
thereof under Rule 270 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of 
States. While making scru tiny of Demands for Grants, the Committee has made an appraisal 
of performance, programmes, schemes and policies of the D epartment of Administrative 
Reforms & Public Grievances and Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare vis-à-vis 
expenditure made out of Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
3. In the Report, scrutiny of Demand No. 74 pertaining to the Department of 
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances and Department of Pension & Pensioners' 
Welfare for the Financial Year 2022-23 has been made by the Committee. 
 
4. During the course of examination of the above Demands, the Committee heard the 
views of the Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances and 
Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare in its sitting held on the 3rd March, 2022.  
 
5. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations, has mainly relied 
upon the following:-  
(i) Detailed explanatory note on DFG 2022 -23 submitted by the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; 
(ii) Detailed explanatory note on D FG 2022 -23 submitted by the DARPG and 
DPPW; 
(iii) Replies of DARPG and DPPW on Questionnaire (General Issues); 
(iv) Replies of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on 
Questionnaire (Budget Specific); 
(v) Replies of DARPG and DPPW on Questionnaire (Supplementary Questionnaire) 
(vi) Presentation (PPT) made by the Secretary DARPG and DPPW in the meeting of 
the Committee held on 03.03.2022; 
(vii) Detailed Demands for Grants of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & 
Pensions.  
 

 6 
6. The Report is based on facts, figures and submissions (both oral and written) tendered 
by the Department/Institutions/Organizations to the Committee. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its sitting held on the 22nd 
March, 2022 and presented to both Houses of Parliament on 24th March, 2022.  
 
8. For ease of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
24th March, 2022                              Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
ACRONYMS 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AR Administrative Reforms 
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BE Budget Estimates 
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CC Client‟s Charter 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CPAO Central Pension Accounting Office 
CPC Central Pay Commission 
CPENGRAM Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CSD Civil Services Day 
DGGI District Good Governance Index 
DGMU Data Governance Monitoring Unit 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances  
DPPW Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare 
GoI Government of India 
HOO Head of Office 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IPPB India Posts and Payment Bank 
IT Information Technology 
J&K Jammu & Kashmir 
J&KAS Jammu & Kashmir Administrative Service 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MGMG Minimum Government - Maximum Governance 
ML Machine Learning 
MMPs Mission Mode Projects 
MoF  Ministry of Finance  

 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MOUs Memorandum of Understandings 
NCGG National Centre For Good Governance 
NeGP National e-Governance Plan 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
O&M Organisation and method 
PAO Pay and Account Office 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PPO Pension Payment Order 
PRCs Pre-Retirement Counseling Sessions 
PSB Public Sector Bank 
RE Revised Estimates 
SMS Short Message Service 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UTs Union Territories 

 9 
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER – I 
OVERVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENTS 
MINISTRY 
1.0 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions is the coordinating agency 
of the Central Government in personnel matters specially issues concerning recruitment, 
training, career development, staff welfare as well as the post retirement dispensation.  
1.1 The Ministry comprises the following three Departments: 
(i) Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT); 
(ii) Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG); and 
(iii) Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare (DPPW). 
 
 
  
1.2 The Ministry is presently under the overall charge of the Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
assisted by the Minister of State. The Department of Personnel and Training is functioning 
under the charge of an independent Secretary while the Department of Administrative 
Reforms & Public Grievances and the Department of Pensions and Pensioners‟ Welfare are 
functioning under the charge of another Secretary. This report pertains to the Department of 
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances; and the Department of Pensions and 
Pensioners‟ Welfare.  
 
 
Ministry of Personnel 
Public Grievances and 
Pensions
Department of Personnel 
and Training
Department of 
Administrative Reforms 
and Public Grievances
Department of Pension 
and Pensioners' Welfare

 10 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES (DARPG) 
Evolution of the Department 
1.3 In March, 1954, an Organisation and Method (O & M) Division was set up in Cabinet 
Secretariat as a follow up on one of the recommendations made by Paul H. Appleby. In 
March, 1964, a Department of Administrative Reforms was set up within the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Organisation and Method (O & M) Division was transferred to its charge 
from the Cabinet Secretariat. On 7th February, 1973, the work relating to the Department of 
Administrative Reforms was transferred to Department of Personnel created under Cabinet 
Secretariat on 1st August, 1970 and was re-designated as Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms. In April, 1977, the Department of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms was shifted from Cabinet Secretariat to the Ministry of Home Affairs. In March 
1985, the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms was elevated to a full fledged 
Ministry of Personnel and Training, Administrative Reforms, Public Grievances and 
Pensions. On 10th December, 1985 Ministry of Personnel and Training, Administrative 
Reforms, Public Grievances and Pensions was re-designated as the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions with three Departments namely, Department of Personnel 
and Training (DOPT), Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and 
Department of Pension and Pensioners Welfare. 
About the Department 
1.4 The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances is the nodal 
agency of the Government of India for administrative reforms as well as redress of public 
grievances relating to the States in general and grievances pertaining to Central Government 
agencies in particular. The Department disseminates information on important activities of 
the Government relating to administrative reforms and public grievance redressal through 
publications and documentation. The Department also undertakes activities in the field of 
international exchange and cooperation to promote public service reforms. There are 8 
Divisions in the Department namely Administrative Reforms, Organization & Methods, e -
Governance, Documentation & Dissemination, International Exchange & Cooperation, 
Administration & Coordination, Public Grievances and Ad ministrative Reforms Commission 
(ARC)/e-Office. The Department comes under the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions and is headed by a Secretary.  
Functions of the Department 
1.5 As per the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, the following subjects 
have been allocated to the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances: 
(i) Administrative Reforms, including e -governance and dissemination of best 
 practices. 
(ii) Organization and Methods. 

 11 
(iii) Policy, coordination and monitoring of issues relating to: 
(a)  Redress of public grievances in general; and 
(b)  Grievances pertaining to Central Government agencies. 
(c) Monitoring of implementation of e-Office in Central Ministries /  
  Departments. 
(iv) (a)  Research in public management; 
       (b)  Liaison with State Governments, professional institutions etc. in public 
  management matters. 
(v) Administration of Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure.  
 
1.6 Accordingly, the functions of the Department are as under:  
 
(i) Matters relating to administrative reforms. 
(ii) Organization of Civil Services Day and Prime Minister‟s Award for 
Excellence in Public Administration. 
(iii ) Capacity building, change management, and Government Process Re-
engineering to provide reform through e-governance. 
(iv) e-Office Mission Mode Project under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP). 
(v) Organization of National Conference on e-Governance and National awards 
on e-Governance. 
(vi) Management of Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism. 
(vii ) Documentation and dissemination of Good Governance Practices-innovations, 
adaptation and replication. 
 
MAJOR ACTIVITIES / INITIATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
Public Grievances 
1.7 An online system for grievance redress, called the „Centralized Public Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System (CP GRAMS) has evolved since 2007. The Department 
extensively uses this System to forward public grievances to both the Central Government 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations as well as the State Governments concerned. 
 1.8 Public grievance mechanism of PMO, the President‟s Secretariat, the Directorate of 
Public Grievances (Cabinet Secretariat), Department of Administrative Reforms & Public 
Grievances (DARPG) and that of Department of  Pension & Pensioners‟ Welfare portal are 
integrated through CPGARMS thus en abling grievances lodged to any of these entities to be 
transferred to the Central Ministries/ Departments and State / UTs Governments online 
through CPGRAMS.  
Introduction of an Appeal Mechanism/functionality in CPGRAMS 
1.9 The Appeal Mechanism/functionali ty introduced in CPGRAMS  is in line with this 
Committee's Recommendations in its 100 th Report. The Appeal provision is made for 

 12 
redressal of dissatisfied grievances identified through a mandatory feedback rating to be 
given by the Citizen on disposal of the grievance by the Nodal Grievance Officers. 
Citizens' Charter 
1.10 The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances , in order to 
provide more responsive and citizen -centric governance, coordinates the efforts of Ministries 
/ Departments to f ormulate and operationalize Citizen‟s Charters in Central Government 
Ministries / Departments as well as State Governments and UT Administrations. It provides 
guidelines for formulation and implementation of the Citizen‟s Charters. The 
Citizen‟s/Client‟s C harter (CC) was first introduced simultaneously in Central Government 
Departments and in all State Governments in May, 1997.  
Sevottam 
1.11 Sevottam is a generic framework for achieving excellence in public service delivery. 
It comprises of 3 modules namel y, Citizen‟s Charter, Grievance Redressal Mechanism and 
Capability Building for Service Delivery. As part of the Strategic plan for Capability 
Building towards implementing Sevottam Quality Management System, a Scheme for 
Strengthening of Administrative Tr aining Institutes has been implemented during the 12th 
Five Year Plan 2012 -2017 in 10 States. This Scheme was extended for a further period of 3 
years till 31.03.2021.  
International Exchange and Cooperation 
1.12 The Department works as the nodal point in respect of matters relating to international 
cooperation in the field of Public Administration and Governance, which includes organizing 
programmes and visits of the foreign delegations to India and visits of Indian delegations 
abroad as part of projects /  bilateral measures taken up in accordance with the Memorandum 
of Understandings (MOUs) / Agreements signed between India and other countries (bilateral 
or multilateral).  
e-Office - Mission Mode Project 
1.13 e-Office is one of the Mission Mode Projects (M MPs), under the National                       
e-Governance Plan (NeGP). The project is aimed at significantly improving the operational 
efficiency of Central Government Ministries and Departments through improvement in the 
workflow mechanisms and associa ted with office procedure manuals. The DAR&PG is the 
nodal agency f or implementing the project ' e-Office'. Effective steps have been taken to 
expedite implementation of e -office in Central Government Ministries/ Departments. 56 1 
Central Ministries and Departments have already implemented e -Office fully and other 
Central Ministries/Departments have also started showing improving trends. 
                                                           
1 Annual Report 2020-21 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 

 13 
Promotion of Documentation and Dissemination of Good Governance Initiatives 
1.14 The Documentation and Dissemination Divisio n of the Department primarily carries 
out the activities of documentation and dissemination of good governance practices of 
Central and State Governments and Union Territory Administration with a view to facilitate 
sharing of experience with one another and replication elsewhere. This Department brings out 
its e- Magazine titled „Minimum Government - Maximum Governance‟ (MGMG) as an e -
Book in its endeavor to document and disseminate successful good governance practices. In 
the e- Magazine, write-ups based on the shortlisted initiatives of PM Awards and National e - 
Governance Awards instituted by DARPG have been compiled and published on the website 
of the Department in e-Book form biannually.   
Prime Minister’s Awards for Excellence in Public Administration 
1.15 The Government of India has instituted a scheme "Prime Minister‟s Awards for 
Excellence in Public Administration" to acknowledge, recognize and reward the 
extraordinary and innovative work done by the Districts / implementing units and 
organisations o f Central and State Governments.  PM‟s Awards are presented on Civil 
Services Day (CSD) held on every 21st April of the year.               
National e-Governance Awards 
1.16 The Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances along with the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, in association with one of the State 
Governments, has been organizing the National Conference on e -Governance every year 
since 1997. This conference provides a platform for the senior officers of the Government 
including IT Secretaries of State Governments, IT Managers of the Central Government, and 
resource persons, experts, intellectuals from the industry and academic institutions, etc. to 
discuss, exchange views and experiences relating to various e-Governance initiatives.  
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG) 
1.17 National Centre for Good Governance was established as an autonomous institute 
under the aegis of the Department of Personnel and Training by upgrading the erstwhile 
National Institution of Adm inistrative Research, Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of 
Administration, Mussoorie. DARPG has been made the Administrative authority for NCGG 
since 08.11.2017.  
1.18 The Centre is envisaged to be the apex think -tank that would guide the Government 
and help in implementing good Governance reforms. It seeks to be a high -level institute for 
research and capacity building to deal with the entire gamut of governance issues from the 
National to State to the local level and in sectors across the Government.  
1.19 NCGG is governed by a Governing Body, under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet 
Secretary, GoI and a Management Committee with the Secretary of the Department as the 
Chairperson.  

 14 
Objectives of NCGG 
1.20 Following are the objectives of the NCGG:  
 To be a think tank for governance & policy reforms, cutting across 
administrative, social, economic and financial spheres. 
 To function as a national repository on information on best practices, initiatives 
and methodologies that promote Good Governance, E -Governance, innovation 
& change management within the government; 
 To initiate and participate in action research and capacity building on various 
aspects of regulatory and development administration, public policy, governance 
and public management at National/State & local levels; 
 To advise on key issues in governance and development synergy across various 
Ministries/ Departments of GoI, and State Governments; 
 To promote sharing and replication of innovative ideas and best practices in 
Governance.  
 To interact with  national and international organizations, in and outside 
government, engaged in research and capacity building in the above spheres.  
 
Mandate of NCGG 
1.21 The mandate of the NCGG is to promote Good Governance by:  
 Carrying out Action Research/ Studies on issues relating to governance. 
 Capacity Building on Public Policy and Governance at both National and 
International level. 
 Organizing consultations, workshops, seminars/webinars & talks to promote 
improved governance. 
 Undertaking initiatives for citizen centric governance. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE 
(DPPW) 
About the Department 
1.22 The Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare was set up in 1985 as part of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to formulate policy and coordination 
of matters relating to retirement benefits of Central Government employees. The Department 
started functioning independently with effect from 01.04.2007. The sanction process and 
implementation of the pension policy is done by the respecti ve Central Ministry/Department. 
This Department further, from time to time, simplifies the rules/guidelines and procedure to 
facilitate welfare of pensioners. All the Ministries/ Departments falling under the jurisdiction 
of the Controller General of Accoun ts (CGA) are governed by the pension policy framed by 

 15 
this Department. However, Defence, Railways, Post and Telecom have their own processing 
and sanctioning mechanism for pension. The expenditure incurred on pension is directly dealt 
with by the Controller General of Accounts, M/ o Finance for Central Government employees 
other than Defence, Railway, Post and Telecom. The Department also receives a large number 
of references from Ministries/ Departments and renders advice on interpretation of Pension 
Rules which govern Central Civil service.  
Functions of the Department 
1.23 The Allocation of Business Rules broadly allocates the following areas of working to 
the Department:- 
(i) Formulation of policy and co -ordination of matters relating to retirement 
benefits to Central Government employees. 
(ii) Administration of - 
 the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972; 
 the Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981; 
 the Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1939; 
 any other scheme relating to Central Governme nt pensioners, 
entrusted to the Department. 
(iii) Pension structure and relief to pensioners. 
(iv) New facilities of fringe benefits to the Central Government pensioners. 
(v) Matters relating to amendment to, or relaxation of, P ension rules or any other 
rule concerning retirement benefits. 
(vi) Policy and co -ordination relating to welfare of Central Government 
Pensioners. 
(vii) Matters with financial implication shall be subject to the concurrence of the 
Ministry of Finance. 
(viii) Action in respect of other matters involving recurring financial implications by 
way of relaxation or liberalization of any rule shall be subject, to guidelines, as 
agreed to between the Department of Pension and Pensioners‟ Welfare and the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure. 
MAJOR ACTIVITIES / INITIATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
Pensioners’ Portal 
1.24 The scheme, „Pensioners Portal‟ was started with an objective to serve as a one stop 
information source for the pensioners of Government of India a nd also facilitate redressal of 
their grievances online. With the passage of time, new activities were added under the 
„Pensioners' Portal‟ which now includes CPENGRAM, Bhavishya, Anubhav and Sankalp etc. 
with an objective to create a single window system for civil pensioners. 

 16 
1.25 Pensioners‟ Portal through its website provides pensioners with updated information 
on pension rules, personalized pension road map, online calculator for calculation of 
pension/family pension and redressal of Pensioners‟ grievances through CPENGRAM.  
Pensioners’ Grievance Redressal Machinery (CPENGRAM) 
 
1.26 The Department of Pension & Pensioners‟ Welfare being the nodal Department for 
formulation of policies relating to pension also provides a platform to redress grievances 
pertaining to pensioners through CPENGRAMS which is an online grievance registration and 
redressal portal.  
1.27 On this portal the pensioners can register their pension related grievances pertaining to 
any of the Central Government Departments/Ministries, whi ch are then forwarded to the 
concerned Ministry/Department for redressal within a time frame of 60 days. 
 
Pension Adalat 
 
1.28 The Department takes up chronic grievances registered in CPENGRAMS and  falling 
within the four walls of extant policy under Pensi on Adalat.  After giving advance notice to 
all the stake -holders, involving the Head of Office (HOO), Pay and Account Office (PAO), 
Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO), Pension Disbursing Bank/treasury etc. were 
called on a common platform in the pres ence of the pensioner/family pensioner or his/her 
representative during the Adalat, to resolve the case across the table. A large number of cases 
taken up in Pension Adalat are generally resolved. 
 
The ‘Bhavishya’ System 
 
1.29 To overcome the problems of d elay & clerical errors in processing the pension cases, 
duplication as well as financial loss and harassment to the pensioners, the DOPPW 
introduced, on a pilot basis, centralized pension processing software called „Bhavishya‟ for all 
central government Ministries/Departments. 
1.30 After a pilot, Bhavishya‟ was made mandatory for all central civil Ministries and 
Departments w.e.f 01.01.2017. At present, 96 Ministries/ Departments, 811 Offices and 7301 
DDOs are on Board. The „Bhavishya‟ software was indigeno usly made by the Department of 
Pension & Pensioners‟ Welfare and was meant to be a common platform for processing of 
pension cases by all civil Ministries/Departments of Government of India. 
Creating awareness on pensioners’ entitlements and Rules 
1.31 The Department spreads awareness amongst the targeted groups on instructions issued 
from time to time and entitlements through workshop and various available medium such as 
electronic, print and social media. Since Social Media has emerged as a powerful 
participatory medium of communication in recent times, therefore, DoPPW has adopted a 

 17 
gradual shift towards spreading awareness amongst the targeted groups through social media 
such as Facebook, Twitter and Documentary films, YouTube etc. The Department has als o 
been creating awareness through SMSs which are sent directly on the Mobile Phone of 
pensioners. This has resulted in creating greater awareness in the targeted group at minimal 
costs.   
Jeevan Pramaan 
1.32 Every year in the month of November a pensioner is required to produce  a life 
certificate for further continuation of his pension. Pensioners can submit  a life certificate by 
physically presenting themselves before pension disbursing authority i.e. banks or can send a 
certificate issued by a gazetted officer or the other designated authorities.  
1.33 Due to infirmity or other ailing elements of pensioners in old age, this manual system 
needed improvements. Pensioners have to wait outside the bank branches in long queues for 
submission of Life certificates. Sometimes due to non –updating of Life Certificate records in 
the banking system by the concerned staff, the pension is stopped even though the pensioner 
had visited the bank branch or submitted a Life Certificate. There was no mechanism for 
pensioners to get updated status and abruptly the pension stopped on account of non - receipt 
of Life Certificate.  Keeping in view the concerns of senior pensioners and discomfort faced 
by them in the manual process, it was felt necessary to streamline the process and  initiate 
Door Step Service for submission of Life Certificate.   
1.34 In November, 2014 , an Aadhar based scheme for online submission of digital life 
certificate Jeevan Pramaan was launched by the Hon'ble Prime Minister with the object ive to 
facilitate pe nsioners to submit life certificate s anytime and from anywhere. In October -
November 2019, this project was expanded to cover 24 cities. With a view to make Doorstep 
Services for submission of Life Certificate available to all pensioners across the country,  
DoPPW roped in the India Posts and Payment Bank (IPPB) under the Department of Posts for 
Digital Life Certificate.  
1.35 After the coordination with Public Sector Bank s (PSB) Alliance, the service for 
collection of Life Certificate s has been brought under  the umbrella of Doorstep Banking 
Service. Now pensioners can submit a Life Certificate by calling Banking agents at their 
home. This facility is presently available in 100 cities. 
- - - 
 
  

 18 
CHAPTER-II 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
2.0 The Demands for Grants for the financial year 2022-23 of the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to the Parliament under Demand No. 74.  The 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice considered the Demands for Grants for the Ministry in its meeting held on 
3rd March, 2022. Allocations made to the Ministry from financial year 2020-21 onwards are 
given as under: 
      Table No. 2.1 
Total Budget Allocation under Demand No. 74 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 (in Rs. crores) 
2020-21 (BE) 2020-21 (RE) 2020-21 
(Actuals) 2021-22 (BE) 2021-22 (RE) 2022-23 (BE) 
1754.54 1780.00 1647.95 2058.57 1950.00 2337.18 
 
2.1 The above demand consists of provisions for all the three Departments under the 
Ministry viz. (i) Department of Personnel & Training; (ii) Department of Administrative 
Reforms & Public Grievances; and (iii) Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare. 
Department-wise budget allocations are given in the following table:  
 
Table No. 2.2 
Department-wise Budget Allocation 
(in Rs. crores) 
Department 2020-21 
(BE) 
2020-21 
(RE) 
2020-21 
(Actuals) 
2021-22 
(BE) 
2021-22 
(RE) 
2022-23 
(BE) 
DoPT 1692.11 1727.44 1608.92 1995.90 1878.02 2245.18 
DARPG 49.66 41.39 29.27 49.46 60.00 80.00 
DoPPW 12.77 11.17 9.76 13.21 11.98 12.00 
Total 1754.54 1780.0 1647.95 2058.57 1950.00 2337.18 
 
2.2 A comparative chart depicting Department-wise budget estimate for the financial year 
2022-23 among the three Departments of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & 
Pensions is given as under: 
 
 

 19 
Chart No. 2.1 
Department-wise allocation for BE 2022-23 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES (DARPG) 
 
2.3 Details of Budget allocation made to the Department from the financial year 2020-21 
onwards are given as under: 
Chart No. 2.2 
 
  


 20 
Table No. 2.3 
DARPG 
Budget Allocations, Expenditure and Variation trends 
(in Rs. crores) 
2020-21 
 
2021-22 
 
Exp. as on 
31.01.2022 
Projections 
made to 
the MoF for 
BE 2022-23 
2022-
23 
BE 
 
Variation 
between RE 
2021-22 
and BE 
2022-23 
 
Variation 
between 
projections 
made to MoF 
for 2022-23 
and BE 2022-
23 
BE RE Actuals BE RE 
49.66 41.39 29.27 49.46 60.00 37.03 
(61.7%) 91.96 80.00 20.00 
(+33%) -11.96 
2.4 From the above it may be seen that the budgetary allocation for the Department has 
steadily increased during the past few years. BE for the financial year 2022-23 of DARPG is 
Rs. 80 crores, which is an increase of Rs. 20 crores (33%) over RE 2021-22. However, the 
BE 2022-23 is about Rs. 12 crores less than the projections made to the Ministry of Finance 
(MoF). The entire budget of the Department under BE 2022-23 is on the revenue side and 
there is no allocation on the capital side.  
2.5 From the above table, it can be inferred that the Department is able to spend 
only 61.7% of the budgetary allocation made under RE 2021-22 upto 31st January, 
2022, leaving 38.3% to spend in just 2 months. As per the instructions issued by the 
Ministry of Finance (MoF), expenditure in the last quarter has to be restricted to 33% 
ceiling and in last month (March) expenditure has to be restricted to 15% of ceiling. 
Thus, the performance of the Department in terms of utilization of funds needs 
considerable improvement. A focused planning and close monitoring of u tilization of 
funds is required on the part of the Department. As restrictions imposed due to COVID 
on expenditure are waning, the Department should have met the quarterly expenditure 
targets set by the MoF  without fail . The Committee, therefore, recommend s that the 
Department should identify the bottlenecks responsible for not being able to maintain 
the pace of utilization required as per the instructions of the MoF and take remedial 
measures to improve its performance in utilization of funds in future. 
 
Scheme(s) of DARPG 
2.6 The Department has only one Scheme namely “Scheme for Administrative Reforms”. 
This scheme has two main components (i) Modernization of Government Offices and (ii) 
Pilot Projects on Administrative Reforms. The components are for monitoring purposes only 
and the component-wise allocation is decided by the Department.  Budget allocations for the 
plan scheme of DARPG are given in the following chart: 

 21 
Chart No. 2.3
 
2.7 Component-wise budget allocation and utilisation for the above scheme is given in the 
following table: 
Table No. 2.4 
DARPG 
Scheme - Component-wise allocation 
(Rupees in Crores) 
Component 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
BE RE Actual Exp. BE RE Actual as 
on 9.2.2022  
(i) Modernisation of Govt. office 
30.00 15.00 
1.68 
15.00 12.00 
1.50 
40.00 
 
 (ii) 
 
 
 
 
Pilot 
Project on 
Administrative  
Reforms 
E-Governance 0.45 2.67 
e-Office 1.28 0.31 
Fostering Good Governance 4.04 2.37 
Learning from successes 2.35 0.84 
PG/CPGRAMS 
related activities 1.19 2.02 
Foreign Training and  Foreign 
Travel/International 
Cooperation 
0.05 0.00 
Total 30.00 15.00 11.04 15.00 12.00 9.71 40.00 
 
2.8 From the above table it can be gathered that the track record of the Department 
in terms of utilization of funds under the sch eme has been very poor. In 2020 -21 BE of 
Rs. 30 crores got reduced to Rs. 15 crores at RE stage , and the actual expenditure 
incurred was Rs.  11 crores only.  In 2021 -22, BE of Rs. 15 crores got reduced to                  
Rs.12 crores and the Department has been able to utilize only about 9.7 crores upto 
09.02.2022. The Department may furnish detailed reasons for such under -utilization of 
funds to the Committee with Action Taken Note.   


 22 
2.9 However, in-spite of such under-utilization of funds during the last two financial 
years, it is heartening to note that the allocation for BE 2022-23 under Scheme has been 
significantly increased by 239% in RE 2021-22. The Department in its written reply has 
justified the hike and has informed that the said hike has been made on account of the 
following new activities proposed for the ensuing year: 
(a) State Collaboration Initiatives  
(b) PM‟s Awards for Excellence in Public Administration 
(c) Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav  
(d)  District Good Governance Index (DGGI) in Gujrat, UP, J&K, Arunachal Pradesh 
etc. 
(e)  Vision India@2047 conferences 
(f)  Sevottam Capacity Building plan for Grievance Officers 
(g)  Data Governance Monitoring Unit (DGMU) 
(h)  Upgradation of CPGRAMS with new generation technology with the help of IIT 
Kanpur  
(i)  Regional language ability in CPGRAMS 
(j)  Feedback call centre for Grievance redressal  
(k)  Improving efficiency in decision making   
(l)  Developing framework for performance based working in the Ministries 
(m)  Setting up Data Strategy Unit to create evidence based policy input for systemic 
reforms   
(n)  Supporting grassroots organizations in developing capacity for efficient and 
effective service delivery 
(o)  National Good Governance Webinar Series 
(p)  Capacity Building of J&K Administrative Service officers etc.   
 
2.10 After considering the elaborate mandate of the Department, the number of 
schemes and funds allocated to it does not seem commensurate with each other . The 
Committee is therefore of the view that the Department should devise more  schemes 
and programmes aimed at improving the Human Resource potential and productivity 
of the government and project their funds requirements to the MoF accordingly.  
 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG) 
2.11 The National Centre for Good Governance is an autonomous institute under the aegis 
of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. The major objective 
and mandate of NCGG is to focus on action research, studies and capacity building on public 
policy and governance at both na tional and international level. Budgetary allocations for the 
NCGG are as under: 
 
 
 

 23 
Table No. 2.5 
NCGG 
Grants-in-aid 
                                                                                                                          (Rupees in Crores) 
2020-21 
 
2021-22 
 Exp. as on 
31.12.2021 
Projections made to 
the MoF for BE 2022-23 
2022-23 
BE 
 BE RE Actuals BE RE 
4.25 3.10 3.10 4.25 4.65 4.25 4.95 4.95 
 
2.12 Allocation in respect of NCGG has been steadily increasing over the years. However, 
the major expenditure is towards salaries only. No allocation has been made to the centre for 
creation of any capital assets since the year 2020-21. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE (DPPW) 
 
2.13 Details of Budget allocation made to the Department from the financial year 2020-21 
onwards are given as under: 
Chart No. 2.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 24 
Table No. 2.6 
DPPW 
 
Budget Allocations, Expenditure and Variation trends 
(in Rs. crores) 
2020-21 
 
2021-22 
 
Exp. as on 
31.01.2022 
Projections 
made to 
the MoF for 
BE 2022-23 
2022-
23 
BE 
 
Variation 
between RE 
2021-22 
and BE 
2022-23 
 
Variation 
between 
projections 
made to MoF 
for 2022-23 
and BE 2022-
23 
BE RE Actuals BE RE 
12.77 11.17 9.76 13.21 11.98 8.02 
(67%) 13.83 12.00 +0.02 - 1.83 
 
2.14 From the above, it may be seen that the budgetary allocation for the Department has 
remained stagnant during the past years. BE for the financial year 2022-23 of DPPW is Rs. 
12 crores, which is same as that of the amount allocated for RE 2021-22. However, the BE 
2022-23 is about Rs. 1.83 crores less than the projections made to the Ministry of Finance 
(MoF). The entire budget of the Department for BE 2022-23 is on the revenue side and there 
is no allocation on the capital side.  
 
Scheme(s) of DPPW 
 
2.15 The DPPW is administering only one scheme namely 'Pensioners‟ Portal'. The 
scheme serves as a one stop information source for the pensioners of Government of India 
and also facilitate redressal of their grievances through centralized mechanism i.e. 
CPENGRAMS. The main activities covered under the Scheme are: 
 
a) BHAVISHYA (an online pension processing and payment tracking system); 
b) ANUBHAV (a platform to share the experience of the retirees); 
c) SANKALP (a platform for channelizing energy, experience and skill of retired 
government personnel into meaningful voluntary work); 
d) Pensioners‟ Association; 
e) Pension ADALAT; and 
f) Mobile App for the pensioners.  
 
 
  

 25 
2.16 Budget allocations for the plan scheme of DPPW are given in the following chart: 
 
 
Chart No. 2.5 
 
 
* Actual expenditure figure for the year 2021-22 is upto 31.01.2022. 
 
2.17 From the above chart, it may be seen that during 2020-21 the BE allocation was 
Rs. 5 crores for the scheme, however, it got reduced to Rs. 3.03 crores at RE stage and 
at the end of the year only Rs. 2.54 crores could be spent. On a similar pattern the 
scheme allocation for the BE 2021-22 was again Rs. 5 crores, which was reduced to Rs. 
3.31 crores at the RE stage and the actual expenditure upto 31.01.2022 is Rs. 1.48 crores 
only. Not surprisingly, the BE for the Department under scheme for the year 2022-23 
has been pegged at Rs. 3.57 crores only, against their projection of Rs. 4.40 made to the 
Ministry of Finance. The Department should furnish detailed reasons for such under -
utilization of funds in the last two financial years to the Committee.   
 
--- 
 
 
 
 


 26 
CHAPTER - III 
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
(DARPG) 
 
Public Grievances 
 
Centralized Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS)  
3.0 CPGRAMS is an online system for grievance redress to facilitate citizens to lodge 
their grievances, for redress from anywhere and anytime (24x7) to 
Ministries/Departments/Organizations/State Governments/UTs who scrutinize and take 
action for speedy and favorable redress of these grievances. CPGRAMS also facilitates 
tracking grievances through a system generated unique registration number. The grievances 
received manually are also digitized and uploaded on the system. The system enables 
Ministries/Departments to take appropriate action and upload the Action Taken Report 
(ATR) on the system which can be viewed by the citizens online with the help of the unique 
registration number. 
 3.1 Public grievance mechanism of PMO, the President‟s Secretariat, the Directorate of 
Public Grievances (Cabinet Secretariat), Department of Administrative Reforms & Public 
Grievances (DARPG) and that of Department of  Pensioners‟ portal have been duly 
integrated through CPGRMS thus enabling grievances lodged to any of these entities to be 
transferred to the Central Ministries/Departments and State Governments online through 
CPGRAMS. The CPGRAMS interlinks 90 Central Ministries/Departments and 36 States 
/UTs. There are about 79828 subordinate offices created and linked in CPGRAMS.  
CPGRAMS Reforms 
3.2 Following are some recent reforms implemented in the CPGRAMS system: 
a) Version 7.0 was launched and implemented by DARPG on a pilot basis in the 
Department of Posts on 25.09.2019. This new version is being implemented in 
various other ministries in a phased manner. 
b) Introduction of an Appeal Mechanism/functionality in CPGRAMS - The Appeal 
Mechanism/functionality in CPGRAMS has been proposed in line with the 
recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice contained in their 100th Report. The 
recommendations were communicated to all Central Ministries/Departments with the 
request to nominate a Nodal (Appellate) authority. The Appeal provision has been 
made for redressal of dissatisfied grievances identified through a mandatory feedback 
rating to be given by the Citizen on disposal of the grievance by the Nodal Grievance 
Officers. Till date 84 Nodal Appellate Authorities have been mapped in CPGRAMS.  

 27 
c) CPGRAMs integration with state portal has also been taken up by DARPG. As of 
now while 15 States have been integrated with CPGRAMS, 4 States are in the process 
of integration and 14 States/UTs are using CPGRAMS for redressal of public 
grievances. One portal One Nation is the goal and towards this end Integration of 
CPGRAMS with State Grievance portals is being pursued further. 
d) A MoU has been signed with IIT, Kanpur for Introduction of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI)/Machine Learning (ML) tools in the CPGRAMS. One of the objectives and 
milestone of this MOU is creating a facility for filing grievance via speech to text. It 
would integrate multilingual speech-to-text capabilities to permit Citizens to record 
grievance as spoken text. 
e) DARPG has issued instructions on 22nd June, 2021 to revise the grievance disposal 
time from 60 days to 45 days. As per instruction the CPGRAMS grievances shall be 
resolved promptly as soon as they are received and maximum within 45 days. In case 
redressal is not possible within the prescribed time-frame due to the circumstances 
beyond the control of the Government such as sub-judice matters/ policy issues/ etc., 
an interim reply shall be given to the citizen. The grievances under COVID-19 
category shall continue to be taken up on high priority and resolved maximum within 
3 days. 
f) DARPG is in the process of preparing „Grievance Redressal Index‟ on the line of 
“Good Governance Index” to rank Organizations of Government of India and State 
Governments /UTs on parameters that are output and outcome-oriented. Two rounds 
of meetings were held with IIM, Ahmadabad, IIM Indore and Centre for Good 
Governance Hyderabad   to discuss contours of grievance Redressal Index. DARPG is 
in the process of finalizing as Knowledge partner to develop Grievance Redressal 
Index for Central Ministries and the States. 
g) As per the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the 
Department has undertaken translation of the public interface of CPGRAMS in 
regional languages in a phased manner. Presently, the CPGRAMS portal has been 
made live in three regional languages i.e.  Bengali, Gujarati and Marathi. Translation 
to other languages is in process.  
Table No. 3.1 
Disposal of Grievance through CPGRAMS 
 
Year Number of 
grievances 
received during 
the year (N) 
 
Total number of grievances redressed during the year Percentage of 
grievances received 
and disposed during 
the year 
G X 100 
N  
Grievances received 
during the year and 
redressed during the 
year (G) 
Grievances carried 
forward from previous 
years and redressed 
during the year 
2017 1866124 1517949 255066 81.34 
2018 1586415 1248767 257638 78.72 
2019 1867758 1447377 192475 77.49 
2020 2271270 1889769 429800 83.20 
2021 2000590 1665050 470873 83.23 

 28 
3.3 The Department has informed that a total of 15,61,344 grievances were disposed of 
within 60 days in 2021. As of December 2021 about 5 lakhs grievances in CPGRAMS are 
pending for over one year.  Ministries have been asked to close the old grievances on priority 
basis.  A facility to view time-wise grievances in order of oldest coming first has been created 
in CPGRAMS so that the older grievances are also handled on priority.  Average time taken 
in redressal of grievances during the last three years for the central Ministries/Departments is 
31 days.  
3.4 The Committee is of the view that no government can claim itself to be 
accountable, responsive and user-friendly unless it has established an efficient and 
effective grievance redress mechanism. In fact, the efficiency and effectiveness of any 
organization can be measured by its grievance redressal mechanism as it provides 
important feedback on its working. Thus grievance redressal should be one of the core 
components of good governance.  
3.5 The Committee also observes that CPGRAMS has become the mainstay of 
public grievance edifice of the country. The Committee notes that over the years the 
Department has made many significant improvements in the grievance redressal 
system. Citizens are now being able to benefit from the portal by getting their 
grievances redressed in a time-bound manner. The Department has brought to the 
notice of the Committee several instances where citizens have got redressal of their 
grievances promptly and timely through the portal during the lockdowns due to 
pandemic.  
3.6 The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has implemented most of 
its recommendations like reduction in redressal period from 60 to 45 days, introduction 
of appellate mechanism, integration of the portal with the portals of states and thus 
achieving one nation - one portal goal, making available the CPGRAMS website in 
regional languages, initiating preparation of a 'Grievance Redressal Index', creating a 
facility for filing grievance via speech to text method etc. The Committee therefore 
appreciates and lauds the efforts of the Department for continuously improving and 
bringing about thoughtful changes in the grievance redressal system.  
3.7  However, it has come to the notice of the Committee that a large part of 
grievances are being disposed off in a routine and ad-hoc manner and the complainant 
remains dissatisfied with the redressal. The Committee feels that the Public Grievances 
should be resolved in a professional and satisfactory manner. There is a need to fix 
accountability on the decision making authorities. In the event of unsatisfactory 
redressal of the grievances, the public usually tend to approach courts for redressal of 
their grievances which increases the burden of courts, so the Committee desires every 
endeavour should be made to resolve grievances to the satisfaction of the complainant. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends the department to develop mechanism to 
ensure accountability of the government officials dealing with the citizen's grievances. 

 29 
3.8 The Committee also takes note of the fact that a very large number of the public 
grievances are limited to some specific aspects of certain organizations/Departments. 
The Committee desires that all those areas where a large number of grievances are 
received,  should be examined and in those common areas of grievances, after analyzing 
the root cause, systemic changes wherever necessary should be brought without any 
delay which in turn will reduce the volume of grievances to a large extent.  
3.9 More and more people are becoming aware of the CPGRAMS, which may be 
gauged from the ever increasing number of grievances received every year on the 
portal. However, a large number of citizens are still not aware of the CPGRAMS; 
especially in the rural and semi-urban areas the awareness about it is very low or 
negligible. The Committee therefore recommends that every effort should be made to 
advertise on a large scale in mass media including newspapers, FM radio, social media 
etc. about CPGRAMS in the scheduled languages. 
3.10 Lastly, on the recommendations of this Committee, the Department has recently 
made available the CPGRAMS portal in three regional languages i.e.  Bengali, Gujarati 
and Marathi. The Committee recommends that the Department should make available 
the portal in other regional languages on priority basis.  
 
Time Bound Delivery of Services 
3.11 One of the core purposes of any democratic government is to improve the quality of 
life of its citizens by making available some basic goods and services in a hassle free and 
time-bound manner. However, the common citizen has to face many difficulties in public 
offices. Even getting some basic amenities from public offices becomes challenging and 
tough for a commoner. Thus the essential services should be streamlined and must be 
provided to all citizens in a time bound manner. 
3.12 The Committee, therefore, recommends the government to bring a scheme for a 
time-bound delivery of goods and services for citizens. Initially the scheme may be 
started by including a few basic services only, which may later be expanded to include 
other services also. The Scheme should include appropriate measures for reward and 
punishment of government functionaries so that it remains effective.  
E-Office - Mission Mode Project 
3.13 e-Office is one of the Mission Mode Projects (MMPs), under the National e-
Governance Plan (NeGP). The project is aimed at significantly improving the operational 
efficiency of Central Government Ministries and Departments through improvement in the 
workflow mechanisms and associated with office procedure manuals. The DARPG is the 
nodal agency for implementing the project "e-Office". The Department has informed that 
they are taking effective steps to expedite implementation of e-office in all Central 
Government Ministries / Departments.  

 30 
3.14 In their written submission, the Department has informed that on the basis of change 
requests suggested by this Committee and on the basis of feedback received from users, 
NIC/MeitY has introduced new version 7.0 of the e-Office application in May, 2021. The 
version has improved features and is more user-friendly. 
3.15 The Committee was further informed that the latest version of e-Office (v7.x series) is 
working on the latest supported version of browsers. Further due to continuous 
upgrades/patches released by browsers; the operating environment is extremely dynamic and 
continuous efforts are made to make the e-Office Product work on all the browsers. 
3.16 The Committee observes that e-Office is one of the key e-Governance reforms 
brought by the Department in the recent past. It has helped not only in making the 
government's work more faster and more efficient, but has also made a marked 
difference in the decision making process. It has proven its worth during the recent 
lockdowns due to COVID pandemic in the work-from-home scenario. 
3.17 The Committee is therefore of the view that the e-office should be implemented 
in all Central Government Ministries / Departments / organizations on priority basis. 
Proper training on e-Office should be imparted to the officials.  Every effort must be 
made to encourage officials to carry out their office work through e-office only. Further, 
at an appropriate time, it should be made binding for all Government 
Departments/organizations, in a phased manner, to carry out all their official work 
through e-office only.  
3.18 The Department, along with NIC/MeitY should also keep on improving the e-
office software based on the inputs received from all stakeholders, on a continuous 
basis. The e-office should also be made compatible with all widely used browsers. As e-
office has the potential for making lot of savings for the government in terms of office 
space, stationery etc., the Committee therefore, recommends the DARPG to approach 
the MoF, with proper justifications, and seek funds to implement the e-office project on 
a faster pace in all Ministries.  
Administrative Reforms 
3.19 Administrative Reforms is one of the key functions of the DARPG. In this connection 
the Department carries out following activities/functions: 
 Prime Minister‟s Awards for Excellence in Public Administration. 
 Organising Civil Services Day. 
 Development of case studies on best practices. 
 Promotion of Administrative Reforms through simplification of procedure. 
 Development of Good Governance Index. 
 
3.20 DARPG is also implementing SEVOTTAM which intends to improve service 
delivery capacity of Grass root organizations. The Committee has been apprised that the 
State   Administrative Training Institutes have been roped in to set up SEVOTTAM CELL in 

 31 
each Administrative Training Institutes (ATIs) to develop customized capacit y building 
modules according to the need of a  particular organization.   The scheme in 15 th Finance 
commission cycle   proposes to make the interventions more comprehensive by linking it to 
the data input from CPGRAMS analytics and accordingly develops  suitable intervention for 
attitudinal change and behavioural competency of civil servants. 
3.21 The Committee observes that apathy of civil servants in  implementation of 
Government schemes/programmes  is one of the major impediments in the 
implementation of gov ernment schemes and delivery of services and  therefore, 
recommends DARPG to make appropriate programmes and initiatives for inst illing 
right public service delivery attitude in civil servants by strengthening their behavioural 
competency.  
3.22 The work related to Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) is also dealt with the 
DARPG. The ARCs are commissions of inquiry meant to prepare a detailed blueprint for 
revamping the public administration system in the c ountry. The first ARC was constituted in 
the yea r 1966 under the Chairmanship of Shri Morarji Desai. The second Administrative 
Reforms Commission (ARC) was set up in the year 2005 under the Chairmanship of Shri 
Veerappa Moily. 
3.23 The Committee observes that more than a decade and a half has passed since the 
2nd ARC was constituted and there have been phenomenal changes in the governance of 
the country mainly on account of changes in the socio -economic structure and 
technological revolution and recommends that the Department should explore the need 
for setting up of 3rd ARC.  
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG) 
3.24 National Centre for Good Governance was established as an autonomous institute 
under the aegis of the Department of Personnel and Training by upgrading the erstwhile 
National Institution of Administrative Research, Lal Bahadur Shashtri National Academy of 
Administration, Mussoorie. DARPG is the Administrative authority for NCGG from 
08.11.2017.  
3.25 The Centre is envisaged to be the apex think-tank that would guide the Government 
and help in implementing good Governance reforms. It seeks to be a high-level institute for 
research and capacity building to deal with the entire gamut of governance issues from the 
National to State to the local level and in sectors across the Government.  
3.26 NCGG is governed by a Governing Body, under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet 
Secretary. The affairs of the Society are being managed under the overall superintendence, 
direction and control of the Governing Body. The other members include secretaries of 
various Departments of government of India. 
 

 32 
3.27 NCGG carries out the following activities as the Think Tank for Governance and 
Policy Reforms –  
a) Capacity Building Programmes at both National and International Level on Public 
Policy and Governance. 
b) Carrying out Studies on issues related to Public Policy and Good Governance. 
c) Organizing Consultation, Workshops, Webinars etc. to promote improved 
Governance.  
d) Undertaking initiatives for Citizen Centric Governance.  
 
3.28 The NCGG is envisaged to be the apex think-tank to guide the Government and 
help it in implementing Good Governance Reforms. The Committee feels that with such 
a significant mandate, the scope and activities of the Centre should be made broad 
based and then seek commensurate allocation to carry out the mandate.  The grant-in-
aid provided to the institution seems insufficient and accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the NCGG to work out a detailed future plan to effectively carry out its 
activities, on the basis of which, it should approach the government for necessary funds. 
In the long run, the Government should also evolve a mechanism to ensure that the 
Centre evolves into a result oriented organization of global excellence, which is self-
sustaining and does not remain dependent on Government grants.  
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE (DPPW) 
3.29 As per the Allocation of Business Rules of Govt. of India the Department of Pension 
& Pensioners' Welfare has been inter-alia allocated work pertaining to f ormulation of policy 
and co-ordination of matters relating to retirement benefits to Central Government employees; 
administration of – The Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972;  the Central Civil 
Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981; the Central Civil Services (Extraordinar y 
Pension) Rules, 1939; any other scheme relating to Central Government pensioners, pension 
structure and relief to pensioners; new facilities of fringe benefits to the Central Government 
pensioners; matters relating to amendment to, or relaxation of, Pens ion rules or any other rule 
concerning retirement benefits; Policy and co -ordination relating to welfare of Central 
Government Pensioners. 
 
3.30 From the above mandate of the Department, it may be seen that it is primarily 
concerned with the Pensioners (in cluding family Pensioners) of all Ministries / 
Departments under the Accounting jurisdiction of Controller General of Account s, 
MoF. However, a large chunk of pensioners including Defence pensioners, Railway 
pensioners, Telecom pensioners, and Postal pensi oners are governed by their own rules 
and are outside the jurisdiction of the DPPW.  
 
 
 
 

 33 
3.31 The Committee observes that though the name and the mandate of the 
Department suggest its jurisdiction over all Central Government employees, a large 
portion of p ensioners from Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal are o utside the 
purview of the DPPW. These organizations also implement similar rules and schemes on 
the lines of DPPW. However, this multiplicity of agencies and rules in matters of pension 
creates confusion and duplicity. The Committee further notes that recently the Railway 
Budget has been integrated with the General Budget and the CPENGRAMS portal has 
been made common for all these organizations. Thus , there seems to be an approach in 
the Government towards integration and non-duplicity for making optimal utilization of 
resources.  
 
3.32 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the 
feasibility of integrating pensioners of all other organizations of Central Government 
viz. Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal be brought in within the jurisdiction of the 
DPPW, by making it a single entity in the matters related to pension and pensioners' 
welfare. The Department may furnish a concept paper in this regard , to the Committee, 
within three months.  
Pensioners' Portal   
3.33 DPPW is responsible for formulating policy and for coordination of matters relating 
to retirement benefits of Central Government employees with a vision to ensure active and 
dignified life for pensioners. To achieve this objective the Department, inter-alia, has 
designed and implemented the 'Pensioners' Portal'. 
 3.34 Pensioners‟ Portal primarily aims at making the pension/retirement related 
information, services and grievance handling mechanism accessible online to the pensioners 
in addition to undertaking other activities for the welfare of pensioners. It therefore helps to 
bridge the communication gap between the pensioners and the Government. The website 
www.pensionersportal.gov.in has been created with following the features-  
 All updated orders/instructions with respect to pension/pensioners‟ benefits have been 
compiled. 
 Online calculator for calculation of pension, family pension, gratuity and 
commutation of pension incorporating the 7th CPC is also available on this site. 
 Generation of Personalized Pension Road Map. 
 PPO status enquiry for civil pensioners. 
 The portal has become immensely popular among pensioners.  The numbers of hits on 
the portal as on date are more than One Crore.  
   
Main Components of Pensioners' Portal  
I. CPENGRAMS (Centralized Pension Grievance Redressal and Monitoring 
System) 

 34 
3.35 All Ministries/Departments with their subordinate units are linked in CPENGRAMS 
with the objective to provide online resolution to the pensioners‟ grievances. Grievances can 
be registered online or sent through Post, Emails or with the help of the Department‟s Toll 
free Call centre. All such grievances of Central Government pensioners are registered into the 
CPENGRAM. This redressal system has been expanded with the objective to provide easy 
access to pensioners in registering their grievances by calling on a toll free number provided 
by the Department.   
Table No. 3.2 
CPENGRAMS - Grievances redressed over the past five years 
 
Financial 
Year 
Number of 
grievances 
received during 
the year 
(N) 
Total number of grievances redressed during the year  
Grievances 
received during the 
year and redressed 
during the year (G) 
 
Grievances carried forward 
from previous years and 
redressed during the year 
 
(G /N)* 100 
2021-2022# 52792 47622 3862/3856 90.20 
2020-2021 49784 46042 3617/3510 92.48 
2019-2020 39685 36281 3239/3057 91.42 
2018-2019 41592 38308 2686/2541 92.10 
2017-2018 34447 31662 2320/2277 91.92 
2016-2017 31005 27772 2271/2243 89.57 
# up to 24.01.2022 
 
3.36 The Department conducted an analysis of pensioners‟ grievances with the assistance 
of an independent third party to have a comprehensive review of the root cause of 
the pensioners‟ grievances. As a result of this exercise, the root causes of grievances were 
identified and several steps are being taken to streamline the process. Major systemic reforms 
initiated by the Department to eliminate root cause of grievances. Details of some of these 
reforms are given as under: 
a) Complete digitization of pension process - Around 25%-30% grievances are 
received due to delay in release of first pension/family pension. Therefore, DPPW 
took initiative to achieve complete digitalization of the pension payment process from 
start to finish, wherein the start is online filling of pension forms by the retiree and the 
finish is to issue of e-PPO which reaches the Digi locker of the Pensioner and credit 
of the first pension in pensioner‟s account.  
b) Improvements in submission of Life Certificate - The grievances 
analysis report has indicated that around 18%-20% grievances are received on 
account of discontinuation of pension. In the manual system for submission of life 
certificates the pensioners often file grievances stating that their pension was stopped 
due to non-submission of life certificate although they visited the banks or sent the 
certificate by post. In November, 2014 an Aadhar based scheme for online submission 
of digital life certificate Jeevan Pramaan was launched by the Prime Minister with the 

 35 
objective to ensure transparency in the system and facilitate pensioners to submit life 
certificates at their comfort.  
c) Awareness about Pensioners’ entitlements through Social Media - In order to 
keep grievances at the minimum, the Department set up an active Social media team 
in-house for greater Pensioner awareness. A series of subjects were posted on the 
Twitter handle of DoPPW including Facebook page and Youtube. Such awareness 
resulted in huge direct publicity at minimal cost due to the Budget restrictions 
imposed due to the pandemic. 
3.37 In their written submission the DPPW has informed that during the last two years 
almost all the Ministries / Departments have grievance cases whose resolution has taken 
beyond the stipulated time limit. The list of Ministry / Department / organization where 30% 
and above of total grievance disposal are beyond the stipulated time for calendar year 2021 
are placed below: 
Table No. 3.3 
Organizations where more than 30% and above cases disposed beyond stipulated time 
limit (1-1-2021 to 31-12-2021) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Organizations where more than 30 % and above cases 
disposed beyond stipulated time limit (1 -1-2021 to 31 -
12-2021) 
 
% of grievance 
disposed  beyond  
stipulated time 
limit 
1.  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 59% 
2.  Cabinet Secretariat, Secretary(R) 55% 
3.  Department of Legal Affairs 50% 
4.  Department of Economic Affairs ACC Division 43% 
5.  Department of Rural Development 40% 
6.  Department of Defence 36% 
7.  Department of Revenue 35% 
8.  Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 33% 
9.  Central Board of Direct Taxes (Income Tax) 30% 
10.  Ministry of Civil Aviation 30% 
11.  Department of Atomic Energy 30% 
12.  Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation 30% 
 
3.38 Further, the statistical details of the feedback (5 level grading from excellent to poor) 
submitted by pensioners / citizens available in the portal w.e.f  Financial Year  2018-19, 
2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 ( up to 24.1.2022) is as under: 
 
 
 
 
 

 36 
Table No. 3.4 
Ratings given by pensioners/citizens on grievance redressal on CPENGRAMS portal 
 
Year 
Rating (5 level grading from excellent to poor) No 
of Grievances Excellent Very 
Good Good Average Poor 
2018-2019 3271 
(43.10%) 
472 
(6.22%) 
512 
(6.75%) 
585 
(7.71%) 
2749 
(36.22%) 7589 
2019-2020 2463 
(41.42%) 
357 
(6.00%) 
409 
(6.88%) 
465 
(7.82%) 
2253 
(37.88%) 5947 
2020-2021 3561 
(43.98%) 
435 
(5.37 %) 
484 
(5.98 %) 
556 
(6.87 %) 
3060 
(37.80%) 8096 
2021-2022 # 3338 
(36.46%) 
530 
(5.79%) 
535 
(5.84%) 
760 
(8.30%) 
3992 
(43.60%) 9155 
# (upto 24.01.2022) 
 
3.39 The Committee notes that based on an independent third party comprehensive 
review of the root cause of the pensioners' grievances the DPPW has initiated key 
reforms like complete digitalization of pension process and improvement in submission 
of Life Certificate by pensioners. The Committee appreciates such initiatives being 
taken up by the Department based on their learning from pensioners' grievances. 
3.40 The Committee observes that as per last five years data provided by the 
Department on satisfaction ratings, about 40% of complainants have rated their 
grievance redressal as poor. Such ratings reflect poorly on the overall grievance 
handling by different organizations. Further, about twelve Ministries/Departments in 
the year 2021 and twenty two Ministries/Departments in the year 2020 have failed to 
resolve more than 30% of pensioners' grievances pertaining to them within the 
stipulated time. This shows apathy of those organizations towards handling of 
pensioners' grievances and the Committee feels dismayed over indifference shown by 
government officials to the grievances of their retired colleagues.  
3.41 The Committee accordingly recommends the DPPW to develop a 
mechanism/guidelines/policy to ensure accountability of the government officials 
dealing with the pensioners' grievances and suggest action against the erring officials. 
The appellate authority should be empowered to award monetary penalties and 
sanction disciplinary action against those officials who are habitually responsible for 
delayed action or summary disposal of grievances without any qualitative action.  
II. PENSION ADALATS 
3.42 This Department had started the unique experiment of holding Pension Adalats to 
resolve chronic grievances of Central Govt. Pensioners, falling within the four walls of extant 
policy. These Adalats, as the term might sound, do not have any judicial or quasi-judicial 
powers but have proved a highly successful mode of grievance resolution. All the stake-
holders of a particular grievance are invited on a single table viz. the concerned 

 37 
Ministry/Department, the Pay & Accounts Officer of the concerned Department, the CPAO 
(Central Pension Accounts Officer, Ministry of Finance), the concerned Bank and the 
Pensioner or his/her representative and they resolve the case across the table. 
3.43 The Departmental Parliamentary Standing Committee for Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances & Pensions in its 95th Report appreciated the system of holding Pension 
Adalats and suggested that a day may be dedicated to the Pensioners, as part of good 
governance, and efforts be made to minimize their grievances. The Committee suggested 
holding Pension Adalats, on a particular day, across Ministries, throughout the country, with 
this objective in view. 
3.44 The details of Nationwide Pension Adalats and the pension-related grievances which 
have been resolved across the table are juxtaposed as under: 
 
Table No. 3.5 
Pension Adalats held during last five years 
S. No Pension Adalat 
(date on which held) 
No of cases taken up 
during Adalat 
No of cases resolved 
during the Adalat 
Percentage of 
resolved cases 
1. Pension Adalat held on September 20, 
2017 
29 26 90% 
2. Pension Adalat held on  
February 9, 2018 
34 20 59% 
3. Pension Adalat held on September 18, 
2018 
13112 9582 73% 
4. Pension Adalat held on August 23, 
2019 
5277 3573 68% 
5. Pension Adalat held at Jammu on 
February 29, 2020  
342 319 93% 
6. Pension Adalat held through Video 
Conferencing during first week of 
January, 2021 
3692 2591 70% 
 
3.45 As per the data provided by the Department on disposal of pension grievances 
during Pension Adalats, their resolution rates are significantly high. This perhaps is due 
to the fact that all stakeholders of a particular grievance are invited on a single table, 
the grievances are resolved quickly. Considering this performance, as recommended by 
the Committee in its 106th report, the Committee once again reiterates that such Pension 
Adalats should be held more regularly and frequently. Further, the experience gained 
during COVID times, the practice of holding Pension Adalats through video 
conferencing should be promoted.  
III. SANKALP 
3.46 A number of pensioners feel the loss of a daily routine as well as of a feeling of not 
being wanted.  Keeping these factors in mind a new initiative of the Department, christened 
as Sankalp, has been taken up to prepare them for post-retirement life and channelize 

 38 
experiences and skill of retired Government servants towards meaningful interventions in 
Society.  
3.47 Under this initiative the Department is also conducting Pre-Retirement Counseling 
Sessions (PRCs) for employees retiring in near future. 47 PRCs have been conducted till date 
which benefited 5972 retiring/retired personnel of various Ministries and Departments of 
Government of India. PRC covers aspects relating to timely payment of pension and 
processing formalities, CGHS benefits available to pensioners, investment options, income 
tax incentives for senior citizens/pensioners, preparation of Will and post retirement 
voluntary effort. 
IV. ANUBHAV  
3.48 Anubhav is a platform for retiring government employees to share their experience of 
working with the Government.  It is envisaged that Anubhav will be nurtured as a tool for 
creating institutional memory. Till date 92 organizations have registered, 7320 write-ups have 
been published and 5401 write-ups which have been uploaded and are waiting to be 
published.  
3.49 An Annual Award Scheme to incentivize and encourage more retiring employees to 
submit their write-ups was introduced. Till date 4 award ceremonies have been organized in 
which 35 awardees was conferred appreciation for their Anubhav write-ups. 
V. PENSIONERS’ ASSOCIATIONS 
3.50 While initiating the Pensioners‟ Portal, it was envisaged to engage a large number of 
Pensioners‟ Associations in the successful implementation and continuing operation of the 
above mechanism, so as to make it largely self-sustaining. DoPPW has identified 46 
Pensioners‟ Associations from across the country and involved them for effective 
implementation of the Pensioners Portal.  These Associations help pensioners in filing their 
grievances online through CPENGRAMS, pursue the cases with the concerned authorities at 
various levels and also take up various activities for the welfare of pensioners besides 
increasing general awareness amongst retiring and retired Govt. servants about retirement and 
pension related matters.  
3.51 The Committee commends the overall performance of the Department of 
Pension and Pensioners Welfare and hopes that it will continue with its good work to 
bring about 'ease of living' for pensioners, especially for super senior citizens and family 
pensioners.  
--- 
 
 
 

 39 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-II - OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
(DARPG) 
 
1. The Department is able to spend only 61.7% of the budgetary allocation made 
under RE 2021-22 upto 31st January, 2022, leaving 38.3% to spend in just 2 months. As 
per the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance (MoF), expend iture in the last 
quarter has to be restricted to 33% ceiling and in last month (March) expenditure has 
to be restricted to 15% of ceiling. Thus, the performance of the Department in terms of 
utilization of funds needs considerable improvement. A focused p lanning and close 
monitoring of utilization of funds is required on the part of the Department. As 
restrictions imposed due to COVID on expenditure are waning, the Department should 
have met the quarterly expenditure targets set by the MoF without fail. Th e Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should identify the bottlenecks responsible 
for not being able to maintain the pace of utilization required as per the instructions of 
the MoF and take remedial measures to improve its performance in u tilization of funds 
in future. 
(Para 2.5) 
Scheme(s) of DARPG 
 
2. The track record of the Department in terms of utilization of funds under the 
scheme has been very poor. In 2020 -21 BE of Rs. 30 crores got reduced to Rs.15 crores 
at RE stage, and the actual  expenditure incurred was Rs. 11 crores only.  In 2021 -22, 
BE of Rs. 15 crores got reduced to Rs.12 crores and the Department has been able to 
utilize only about 9.7 crores upto 09.02.2022. The Department may furnish detailed 
reasons for such under-utilization of funds to the Committee with Action Taken Note.   
(Para 2.8) 
3. After considering the elaborate mandate of the Department, the number of 
schemes and funds allocated to it does not seem commensurate with each other. The 
Committee is therefore of the view that the Department should devise more schemes 
and programmes aimed at improving the Human Resource potential and productivity 
of the government and project their funds requirements to the MoF accordingly.  
(Para 2.10) 

 40 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE (DPPW) 
 
Scheme(s) of DPPW 
4. From the above chart, it may be seen that during 2020-21 the BE allocation was 
Rs. 5 crores for the scheme, however, it got reduced to Rs. 3.03 crores at RE stage and 
at the end of the year only Rs. 2.54 crores could be spent. On a similar pattern the 
scheme allocation for the BE 2021-22 was again Rs. 5 crores, which was reduced to Rs. 
3.31 crores at the RE stage and the actual expenditure upto 31.01.2022 is Rs. 1.48 crores 
only. Not surprisingly, the BE for the Department under scheme for the year 2022-23 
has been pegged at Rs. 3.57 crores only, against their projection of Rs. 4.40 made to the 
Ministry of Finance. The Department should furnish detailed reasons for such under -
utilization of funds in the last two financial years to the Committee.   
(Para 2.17) 
 
CHAPTER - III - POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
(DARPG) 
 
Public Grievances 
 
Centralized Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS)  
5. The Committee is of the view that no government can claim itself to be 
accountable, responsive and user-friendly unless it has established an efficient and 
effective grievance redress mechanism. In fact, the efficiency and effectiveness of any 
organization can be measured by its grievance redressal mechanism as it provides 
important feedback on its working. Thus grievance redressal should be one of the core 
components of good governance.  
(Para 3.4) 
6. The Committee also observes that CPGRAMS has become the mainstay of 
public grievance edifice of the country. The Committee notes that over the years the 
Department has made many significant improvements in the grievance redressal 
system. Citizens are now being able to benefit from the portal by getting their 
grievances redressed in a time-bound manner. The Department has brought to the 
notice of the Committee several instances where citizens have got redressal of their 
grievances promptly and timely through the portal during the lockdowns due to 
pandemic.  
(Para 3.5) 

 41 
7. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has implemented most of 
its recommendations like reduction in redressal period from 60 to 45 days, introduction 
of appellate mechanism, integration of the portal with the portals of states and thus 
achieving one nation - one portal goal, making available the CPGRAMS website in 
regional languages, initiating preparation of a 'Grievance Redressal Index', creating a 
facility for filing grievance via speech to text method etc. The Committee therefore 
appreciates and lauds the efforts of the Department for continuously improving and 
bringing about thoughtful changes in the grievance redressal system.  
(Para 3.6) 
8. However, it has come to the notice of the Committee that a large part of 
grievances are being disposed off in a routine and ad-hoc manner and the complainant 
remains dissatisfied with the redressal. The Committee feels that the Public Grievances 
should be resolved in a professional and satisfactory manner. There is a need to fix 
accountability on the decision making authorities. In the event of unsatisfactory 
redressal of the grievances, the public usually tend to approach courts for redressal of 
their grievances which increases the burden of courts, so the Committee desires every 
endeavour should be made to resolve grievances to the satisfaction of the complainant. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends the department to develop mechanism to 
ensure accountability of the government officials dealing with the citizen's grievances. 
(Para 3.7) 
9. The Committee also takes note of the fact that a very large number of the public 
grievances are limited to some specific aspects of certain organizations/Departments. 
The Committee desires that all those areas where a large number of grievances are 
received,  should be examined and in those common areas of grievances, after analyzing 
the root cause, systemic changes wherever necessary should be brought without any 
delay which in turn will reduce the volume of grievances to a large extent.  
(Para 3.8) 
10. More and more people are becoming aware of the CPGRAMS, which may be 
gauged from the ever increasing number of grievances received every year on the 
portal. However, a large number of citizens are still not aware of the CPGRAMS; 
especially in the rural and semi-urban areas the awareness about it is very low or 
negligible. The Committee therefore recommends that every effort should be made to 
advertise on a large scale in mass media including newspapers, FM radio, social media 
etc. about CPGRAMS in the scheduled languages. 
(Para 3.9) 
11. Lastly, on the recommendations of this Committee, the Department has recently 
made available the CPGRAMS portal in three regional languages i.e.  Bengali, Gujarati 
and Marathi. The Committee recommends that the Department should make available 
the portal in other regional languages on priority basis.  
(Para 3.10) 

 42 
Time Bound Delivery of Services 
12. The Committee, therefore, recommends the government to bring a scheme for a 
time-bound delivery of goods and services for citizens. Initially the scheme may be 
started by including a few basic services only, which may later be expanded to include 
other services also. The Scheme should include appropriate measures for reward and 
punishment of government functionaries so that it remains effective.  
(Para 3.12) 
E-Office - Mission Mode Project 
13. The Committee observes that e-Office is one of the key e-Governance reforms 
brought by the Department in the recent past. It has helped not only in making the 
government's work more faster and more efficient, but has also made a marked 
difference in the decision making process. It has proven its worth during the recent 
lockdowns due to COVID pandemic in the work-from-home scenario. 
(Para 3.16) 
14. The Committee is therefore of the view that the e-office should be implemented 
in all Central Government Ministries / Departments / organizations on priority basis. 
Proper training on e-Office should be imparted to the officials.  Every effort must be 
made to encourage officials to carry out their office work through e-office only. Further, 
at an appropriate time, it should be made binding for all Government 
Departments/organizations, in a phased manner, to carry out all their official work 
through e-office only.  
(Para 3.17) 
15. The Department, along with NIC/MeitY should also keep on improving the e-
office software based on the inputs received from all stakeholders, on a continuous 
basis. The e-office should also be made compatible with all widely used browsers. As e-
office has the potential for making lot of savings for the government in terms of office 
space, stationery etc., the Committee therefore, recommends the DARPG to approach 
the MoF, with proper justifications, and seek funds to implement the e-office project on 
a faster pace in all Ministries.  
(Para 3.18) 
Administrative Reforms 
16. The Committee observes that apathy of civil servants in implementation of 
Government schemes/programmes is one of the major impediments in the 
implementation of government schemes and delivery of services and therefore , 
recommends DARPG to make appropriate programmes and initiatives for instilling 
right public service delivery attitude in civil servants by strengthening their behavioural 
competency.  

 43 
(Para 3.21) 
17. The Committee observes that more than a decade and a h alf has passed since the 
2nd ARC was constituted and there have been phenomenal changes in the governance of 
the country mainly on account of changes in the socio -economic structure and 
technological revolution and recommends that the Department should exp lore the need 
for setting up of 3rd ARC.  
(Para 3.23) 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG) 
18. The NCGG is envisaged to be the apex think-tank to guide the Government and 
help it in implementing Good Governance Reforms. The Committee feels that with such 
a significant mandate, the scope and activities of the Centre should be made broad 
based and then seek commensurate allocation to carry out the mandate.  The grant-in-
aid provided to the institution seems insufficient and accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the NCGG to work out a detailed future plan to effectively carry out its 
activities, on the basis of which, it should approach the government for necessary funds. 
In the long run, the Government should also evolve a mechanism to ensure that the 
Centre evolves into a result oriented organization of global excellence, which is self-
sustaining and does not remain dependent on Government grants.  
(Para 3.28) 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE (DPPW) 
 
19. From the above mandate of the Departmen t, it may be seen that it is primarily 
concerned with the Pensioners (including family Pensioners) of all Ministries / 
Departments under the Accounting jurisdiction of Controller General of Accounts, 
MoF. However, a large chunk of pensioners including Defe nce pensioners, Railway 
pensioners, Telecom pensioners, and Postal pensioners are governed by their own rules 
and are outside the jurisdiction of the DPPW.  
(Para 3.30) 
20. The Committee observes that though the name and the mandate of the 
Department sugge st its jurisdiction over all Central Government employees, a large 
portion of pensioners from Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal are outside the 
purview of the DPPW. These organizations also implement similar rules and schemes on 
the lines of DPPW. However, this multiplicity of agencies and rules in matters of pension 
creates confusion and duplicity. The Committee further notes that recently the Railway 
Budget has been integrated with the General Budget and the CPENGRAMS portal has 
been made common for a ll these organizations. Thus, there seems to be an approach in 
the Government towards integration and non-duplicity for making optimal utilization of 
resources.  
(Para 3.31) 

 44 
21. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the 
feasibility of integrating pensioners of all other organizations of Central Government 
viz. Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal be brought in within the jurisdiction of the 
DPPW, by making it a single entity in the matters related to pension and pensioners ' 
welfare. The Department may furnish a concept paper in this regard, to the Committee, 
within three months.  
(Para 3.32) 
Pensioners' Portal   
22. The Committee notes that based on an independent third party comprehensive 
review of the root cause of the pensioners' grievances the DPPW has initiated key 
reforms like complete digitalization of pension process and improvement in submission 
of Life Certificate by pensioners. The Committee appreciates such initiatives being 
taken up by the Department based on their learning from pensioners' grievances. 
(Para 3.39) 
23. The Committee observes that as per last five years data provided by the 
Department on satisfaction ratings, about 40% of complainants have rated their 
grievance redressal as poor. Such ratings reflect poorly on the overall grievance 
handling by different organizations. Further, about twelve Ministries/Departments in 
the year 2021 and twenty two Ministries/Departments in the year 2020 have failed to 
resolve more than 30% of pensioners' grievances pertaining to them within the 
stipulated time. This shows apathy of those organizations towards handling of 
pensioners' grievances and the Committee feels dismayed over indifference shown by 
government officials to the grievances of their retired colleagues.  
(Para 3.40) 
24. The Committee accordingly recommends the DPPW to develop a 
mechanism/guidelines/policy to ensure accountability of the government officials 
dealing with the pensioners' grievances and suggest action against the erring officials. 
The appellate authority should be empowered to award monetary penalties and 
sanction disciplinary action against those officials who are habitually responsible for 
delayed action or summary disposal of grievances without any qualitative action.  
(Para 3.41) 
Pension Adalats 
25. As per the data provided by the Department on disposal of pension grievances 
during Pension Adalats, their resolution rates are significantly high. This perhaps is due 
to the fact that all stakeholders of a particular grievance are invited on a single table, 
the grievances are resolved quickly. Considering this performance, as recommended by 
the Committee in its 106th report, the Committee once again reiterates that such Pension 
Adalats should be held more regularly and frequently. Further, the experience gained 

 45 
during COVID times, the practice of holding Pension Adalats through video 
conferencing should be promoted.  
(Para 3.45) 
26. The Committee commends the overall performance of the Department of 
Pension and Pensioners Welfare and hopes that it will continue with its good work to 
bring about 'ease of living' for pensioners, especially for super senior citizens and family 
pensioners.  
(Para 3.51) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 47 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, 03 rd 
March, 2022 in Room No. '4', Block -'A', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
3. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
4. Shri P. Wilson  
5. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shrimati Veena Devi 
7. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
8. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
11. Shrimati Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri M. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 
WITNESSES 
(i) Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT); 
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Tripathi, Secretary(Personnel); 
2. Ms. Deepti Umashankar, AS & EO; 
3. Shri Rajit Punhani, AS & FA (H); 
4. Ms. Rashmi Chowdhary, Additional Secretary; 
5. Shri Asheesh Sharma, Joint Secretary; 
6. Shri Rahul Singh, Joint Secretary; 
7. Shri Satyajit Mishra, Joint Secretary; and 

 48 
8. Ms. Varsha Sinha, Joint Secretary. 
 
 (ii) CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI);  
1. Shri Subodh Kumar Jaiswal, Director; 
2. Shri Ajay Bhatnagar, Additional Director; 
3. Ms. Sampat Meena, Joint Director;  and  
4. Shri Amit Kumar, Joint Director. 
(iii) CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC) 
1. Shri P. Daniel, Secretary; and 
2. Shri A.K. Kanoujia, Additional Secretary 
(iv) CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT) 
 1.  Shri Sulabh Rashtogi, Joint Registrar; and  
 2.  Shri Surat Singh, Joint Registrar 
 (v) LOKPAL 
   Shri Bharat Lal, Secretary 
(vi) CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION (CIC) 
 1.  Ms. Juthika Patankar, Secretary; and 
 2.  Shri Rahul Rastogi, Joint Secretary 
(vii) UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC) 
 Ms.  Vasudha Mishra, Secretary 
(viii) STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION (SSC) 
 Shri S.Kishore, Chairman 
(ix) PUBLIC ENTERPRISES SELECTION BOARD 
 Shrimati Kimboung Kipgen, Secretary  
(x) LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF 
ADMINISTRATION (LBSNAA) 
 Shri Srinivasa R. Katikithala, Director 
(xi) INSTITUTE OF SECRETARIAT TRAINING & MANAGEMENT 
(ISTM) 
 Shri S.D. Sharma, Director 
(xii) INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (IIPA) 
 Shri Surendra Nath Tripathi, Director General 
(xiii) DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND 
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES (DARPG) AND DEPARTMENT OF 
PENSIONS AND PENSIONS WELFARE(DoPPW) 

 49 
 1.  Shri V. Srinivas, Secretary; 
 2.  Shri Sanjiv Narain Mathur, Joint Secretary, DoPPW; 
 3.  Shri Rajit Punhani, AS & FA; 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kumar Meena, Director, DARPG. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Co mmittee 
and the officials of the Department of Personnel & Training and organizations 
attached to it to the meeting convened to examine their Demands for Grants 
(2022-23). He then asked the Secretary, DoPT to give a brief overview of the 
functioning and bu dgetary allocations made to the Department and thereafter 
heads of the respective institutions/organisations to highlight the focus areas for 
the financial year (2022 -23), besides making outcome appraisal of the financial 
year (2021 -22).  He also asked the m to highlight the salient features of new 
schemes/programmes and to apprise the Committee whether the allocations 
made would be sufficient to achieve their targets during the ensuing fiscal year.    
3. The Secretary, DoPT in his opening remarks gave a bri ef overview of the 
Department, its structure, its attached offices and also informed about recent 
activities of the Department.  A presentation was made inter-alia highlighting 
the issues related to the budgetary allocations, recent initiatives taken by the 
Department and also details of budget utilization. 
4. While elaborating on some of these issues, the Secretary informed that 
the Capacity Building Commission set  up in April 2021, under the Mission 
Karmayogi has been operationalised. The Committee was also apprised that the 
Lokpal has been operationalised and a new Bench of Central Administrative 
Tribunal has been set up at Srinagar since November, 2021. The Committee was 
also apprised about the conduction of various exams by SSC and UPSC despite 
the Covid Pandemic. The Department of Personnel & Training also introduced 
e-office for digitization of receipts where e-file is a default option.  
5. After the presentati on, Members sought some clarifications in respect of 
such issues as procedure adopted by the Department for redressal of grievances 

 50 
and complaints of public, the time limit for disposing of such grievances, the 
reasons for delay, backlog of complaints, bud get allocations of the 
organizations, lateral entry,   vacancy position in various 
organisation/institutions under the ambit of the DoPT; backlog of reserved 
vacancies; cadre review; cadre structuring; non -filing of immovable property 
returns by civil serva nts; shortage of IAS officers; Impact assessment of the 
training imparted to Civil Servants; status of operationalisation of the National 
Recruitment Agency, roadmap for creation of more benches in CAT. The 
Secretary, DoPT replied to some of the queries of  the Members and assured the 
Committee to furnish detailed note/replies to queries which were not answered 
during the meeting within three working days. 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
6. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Director, Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI), Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC),  Joint 
Registrar, Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Secretary, Lokpal, and 
Secretary, Central Information Commission (CIC) and other officers related to 
these departments. 
7. The Director, CBI made a presentation before the Committee giving brief 
description about the Bureau, highlighting the work done in the year 2021. 
Thereafter, Secretary, CVC, Joint Registrar, CAT, Secretary, Lokpal and 
Secretary, CIC also made their presentations before t he Committee and 
informed about their mandate, functions, budgetary allocation and recent 
initiatives taken by them.   
8. After the presentations, some queries were raised by the Members 
relating to complaints against CBI officials, reasons for delay and non-filing of 
charge-sheets in many cases by CBI, disposing of cases in time -bound manner 
in CBI , CAT , CIC and CVC, vacancies in CBI, CVC and CAT, status of 
complaints and their disposal in CVC, CAT, Lokpal and CBI; pendency of 

 51 
cases and vacancies in CAT , clarity of superintendence of CVC over CBI, 
jurisdiction of Lokpal, clarity regarding the format of complaints in Lokpal, 
accountability of persons employed on contract basis in CIC. Replies to some of 
the queries were given by the respective officers. T he Chairman of the 
Committee asked them to furnish detailed note/replies in writing within three 
working days. 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
9.  Thereafter, the committee reassembled after lunch and  the Chairman 
welcomed the Secretary, UPSC, Chairman, SSC and Secretary, PESB and other 
officers of these departments. 
10. Secretary, UPSC made a presentation before the Committee giving brief 
description about the Commission, highlighting the work done by Commission 
in previous years and the budgetary demands for t he FY (2022-23). Thereafter, 
the Chairman, SSC and Secretary, PESB also made their presentations before 
the Committee and apprised about their mandate, functions, budgetary 
allocations and recent initiatives taken by them. 
11. After the presentations, some  queries were raised by the Members 
relating to reservation policy in recruitment of SC, ST and OBC vacancies in 
UPSC, Cadre -Review, Civil services reforms, status of disciplinary cases 
against civil servants pending with UPSC;  delay in Departmental Promo tion 
Committee (DPC) proposals and time bound promotion of officers of various 
services; etc. Some members raised the issue of allegations of malpractises 
against the SSC, issue of age -limit for candidates due to delay in  recruitment 
process and finalisat ion of results due to COVID; timeline to make NRA 
functional. Members also enquired about the reservation policy followed by 
PESB for appointment; backlog of vacancies; etc. Replies to some of the 
queries were given by the respective officers. The Chairman  of the Committee 
asked them to furnish detailed note/replies in writing within three working days.  

 52 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
12.  Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Director, Lal Bahadur Shastri 
National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Director, I nstitute of 
Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), and Director -General, Indian 
Institute of Public Administration  and other officers of these organizations. 
13. Director, LBSNAA made a presentation before the Committee giving a 
brief description abo ut the organization, highlighting the work done by 
organization in previous years and the budgetary demands for the FY (2022-23). 
Director, ISTM and Director-General, IIPA also made their presentations before 
the Committee and informed about their mandate,  functions, budgetary 
allocations and recent initiatives taken by them. 
14. After the presentations, some queries were raised by the Members viz. 
making the programme of LBSNAA more effective by taking feedbacks, 
Implementation of RTI Act in the training p rogrammes of ISTM, infrastructural 
issues in IIPA, backlog of vacancies, increasing sensitivity among trainees at 
LBSNAA. The Chairman and members gave some suggestions regarding the  
training programmes conducted at LBSNAA in the end. 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
15. Chairman, then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG) and Department fo Pensions and 
Pensions Welfare (DoPPW) and other officers of these Departments. 
16. Thereafter, the Secretary, DARPG and Do PPW made a presentation 
before the Committee giving a brief description about the organizations, 
highlighting the work done by organizations in previous years and the 
budgetary demands for the FY (2022-23). 
17. After the presentations, some queries were ra ised by the Members viz, 
giving of life certificates by the pensioners even at the age of 80 or 90 years, 

 53 
pendency of pension related cases before the CAT, High Courts or Supreme 
Court, monitoring of Lok Adalats, issue of CPGRAMS in regional languages, 
expansion of Jeevan Praman Portal  to all the cities,  right to time -bound 
delivery of services. The Chairman, then, thanked all the  members and 
witnesses of the Committee. 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
18. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
19. The meeting adjourned at 4.38 P.M. 
 
 
3rd March, 2022 P. NARAYANAN 
New Delhi Director 
 
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 54 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 22.03.2022 in Room 
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi – 110001.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
(v) Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 Lok Sabha 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari  
(xii) Shri A. Raja 
(xiii) Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri M. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 
           WITNESSES 
           *2      *     *  
 
                                                           
*** Relate to other matters. 

 55 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members about the agenda for 
the meeting, i.e., (i) consideration & adoption of draft 112 th, 113th, 114th, 115th 
and 116th reports of the Committee and (ii) *** 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 24 th March, 2022.  The 
Chairman nominated Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy and Shri Vivek K. Tankha for 
presenting the Reports in Rajya Sabha an d Shri A. Raja and Shri Raghu Rama 
Krishna Raju for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
 
4.   *      *     * 
5.   *      *     * 
6.   *      *     * 
7.   *      *     * 
8.   *      *     * 
9.   *      *     * 
10. *      *     * 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 04.26 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                             P. Narayanan 
22nd  March, 2022           DIRECTOR 
                                                                          
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
*** Relate to other matters. 