 
           
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana1944 (Sakya) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
121 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE 
ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23)"  
PERTAINING TO  
THE DEPARTMENTS 
OF 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND  
PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 

  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 

  3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                           6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                      9                    
                 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN          
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                   16 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                   23                                                                                   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
  5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. *Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
     Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
     Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
     Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
     Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary,  
     Shri Varun Chaturvedi, Secretariat Assistant 
________________________ 
* Nominated in place of Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary w.e.f. from 16.11.2022 
 

  5 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Twenty-First Report (121st) on Action Taken on One 
Hundred Thirteenth (113th) Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants (2022-23)" pertaining to 
the Departments of Administrative reforms & Public Grievances and Pension & Pensioners' Welfare 
(Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions) 
2. The One Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022.  
3. The Departments of Administrative reforms & Public Grievances and Pension & Pensioners' 
Welfare of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & P ensions furnished their Action Taken 
Replies on the One Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Committee on 06th July, 2022 and 13th June, 2022 
respectively. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Twenty-First Report and adopted the 
same in its meeting held on 22nd November, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
22nd November, 2022                      SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                                            Law and Justice 
 
  

  6 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AR Administrative Reforms 
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BE Budget Estimates 
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CC Client‟s Charter 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CPAO Central Pension Accounting Office 
CPC Central Pay Commission 
CPENGRAM Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CSD Civil Services Day 
DGGI District Good Governance Index 
DGMU Data Governance Monitoring Unit 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances 
DPPW Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare 
GoI Government of India 
HOO Head of Office 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IPPB India Posts and Payment Bank 
IT Information Technology 
J&K Jammu & Kashmir 
J&KAS Jammu & Kashmir Administrative Service 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MGMG Minimum Government - Maximum Governance 
ML Machine Learning 
MMPs Mission Mode Projects 
MoF Ministry of Finance 

 
 
 
 7 
MOUs Memorandum of Understandings 
NCGG National Centre For Good Governance 
NeGP National e-Governance Plan 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
O&M Organisation and method 
PAO Pay and Account Office 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PPO Pension Payment Order 
PRCs Pre-Retirement Counseling Sessions 
PSB Public Sector Bank 
RE Revised Estimates 
SMS Short Message Service 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UTs Union Territories 
 

 
 
 
 8 
R E P O R T 
  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Departments of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Pensions and Pensioners‟ 
Welfare on the recommendations/observations of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred 
Thirteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry, which was presented 
to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022. 
2. The Committee had made as many as 24 recommendations/observations in its One 
Hundred Thirteenth Report. Replies of the Departments of Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances and Pensions and Pensioners‟ thereto have been categorized and 
scrutinized under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. Out of 24 
recommendations where final replies have been received as many as 18 (75 percent) of total 
recommendations are satisfactory. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (09) which have been accepted by the 
Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 3.4, 3.7, 3.9, 3.10, 3.28, 3.30, 3.31, 3.3 2 
and 3.45 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry 
has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:   Recommendations/observations (09) which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministr y, i.e. in respect of 
paras 2.10, 2.17, 3.8 , 3.16, 3.17, 3.18, 3.21, 3.29 and 3.51 of the Report. 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the Ministry 
and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations ( 06) in respect of which Committee has 
not accepted the replies of the Minis try, i.e. with regard to paras 2. 5, 2.8, 
3.12, 3.23, 3.40, and 3.41 of the Report. The Committee does not accept 
the reasons given for not accepting its recommendations of the Committee 
and reiterates the same. 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. 
  

 
 
 
 9 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES 
CPGRAMS Reforms 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0 The Committee is of the view that no government can claim itself to be accountable, 
responsive and user -friendly unless it has established an efficient and effective grievance 
redressal mechanism. In fact, the efficiency and effectiveness of any organization can be 
measured by its grievance redressal mechanism as it provides important feedback on its 
working. Thus grievance redressal should be one of the core components of good 
governance.  (3.4) 
Action Taken 
1.1 The Government of India has operationalized CPGRAMS portal on which about 20 
lakh grievances are being redressed ev ery year.   In order to make the system from efficient 
and effective the Department has focussed on the following 10-point programme: 
1. One Nation - One Portal - Linking of all grievance portals of Central 
Government and States to CPGRAMS for ease of access to multiple   systems through 
single window of CPGRAMS.  
2. Operationalization of CPGRAMS in all 22 Scheduled Indian Languages.  
3.    Leveraging Common Service Centres (CSC) to provide access to the 
citizens   to CPGRAMS particularly to those who do not have access to internet. 
4.     A dedicated feedback call centre to know citizen satisfaction on redressal of 
their Grievance. Ministries and Departments have been directed to set apart a meeting 
free day for hearing Public Grievances 
5.      Universalization of CPGRAMS 7.0 in all Ministries / States by facilitating 
back end   mapping of grievance officers. This will enable direct transition of 

 
 
 
 10 
grievances to the authority responsible to act on grievances and thereby reducing 
redressal time and handling urgent Grievances on priority. 
6. Augmenting   capabilities of    CPGRAMS with latest technology in 
collaboration of IIT Kanpur.  
7. Developing Grievance Redressal Index to rank Ministries/ Departments on the 
quality of Grievance Redressal.  
8.        Training of Grievance officers under Sevottam. 
9.  Setting up of a DSU/PMU for developing analytics platform for the 
grievances received on CPGRAMS for deeper insightful analysis and systemic 
reforms.  
10.        Rebranding of CPGRAMS, advertisement and expanding outreach 
The abov e steps are expected to bring sweeping reform in grievance redressal system and 
make it core of the good governance.  
Further observation 
1.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee recommends 
the Department to furnish a status note on the 10 -point programme as Grievance 
redressal mechanism will not only improve the efficiency of organizations but also 
strengthen the foundations of 'Good Governance' which is one of the core target areas 
of the Government. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 It has come to the notice of the Committee that a large part of grievances are being 
disposed of in a routine and ad -hoc manner and the complainant  
remains dissatisfied with the redressal. The Committee feels that the Public Grievances 
should be resolv ed in a professional and satisfactory manner. There is a need to fix  
accountability on the decision -making authorities. In the event of unsatisfactory redressal of 
the grievances, the public usually tend to approach courts for redressal of their grievances  
which increases the burden of courts, so the Committee desires every endeavour should be 
made to resolve grievances to the satisfaction of the complainant. Accordingly, the 

 
 
 
 11 
Committee recommends the department to develop mechanism to ensure accountability of 
the government officials dealing with the citizen's grievances. (3.7) 
Action Taken 
1.4 In order to sensitize the grievance officers on handling public complains for timely 
and qualitative disposal, DARPG conducts periodical review meetings with Grievanc e 
Officers of the Ministries /Departments and States where maximum number of the unsatisfied 
feedback/appeal is received. To bring accountability in disposal of grievances the DARPG 
have taken the following measures: - 
(i) Appeal facility has been created in the CPGRAMS which gives option to citizens to file 
appeal to the next authority if they are not satisfied with the resolution of their grievances. 
(ii)  An Action Taken Report (ATR) is made mandatory before a grievance is closed in 
CPGRAMS. The ATR capt ures with granularity the attempts made by the Grievance officer 
to resolve the grievances and if not resolved then reason for the same. ATR would help to 
differentiate between the actual resolution and disposal of grievance. The ATR also provides 
for a matrix for assessment of quality of resolution and performance of Grievance Officers.    
(iii) A Feedback Call Centre is being set up to get citizens satisfaction on disposal of their 
grievances. If citizen is not satisfied with disposal, an appeal to the ne xt higher officer would 
be generated.   Disposed grievances will be treated closed only after satisfactory disposal of 
appeals. The satisfaction of Citizen will be given significant weightage on performance of 
Ministries under Grievance Redressal Index. 
Further observation 
1.5 The Committee appreciates the Department for the measures that the 
Department has taken to bring accountability in disposal of grievances. The Committee 
recommends the Department to expedite the process of forming Grievance Redressa l 
Index as the same will clearly indicate efficiency of Departments in redressing the  
grievances. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6  More and more people are becoming aware of the CPGRAMS, which may be gauged 
from the ever-increasing number of grievances rece ived every year on the portal. However, a 

 
 
 
 12 
large number of citizens are still not aware of the CPGRAMS; especially in the rural and 
semi-urban areas the awareness about it is very low or negligible. The Committee therefore  
recommends that every effort shoul d be made to  
advertise on a large scale in mass media including newspapers, FM radio,  social media etc. 
about CPGRAMS in the scheduled languages. (3.9) 
Action Taken 
1.7 DARPG is in the process to develop a logo and a new nomenclature for greater 
outreach of the CPGRAMS. For, this DARPG have invited the policy paper from National 
Institute of Design (NID) and also invited suggestions from public through MyGov platform.   
1.8 Availability of CPGRAMS in regional languages and engagement with Common 
Service Centres will also expand outreach of CPGRAMS. As recommended by the 
Committee, DARPG will also explore  mass media including  news paper 
advertisement on CPGRAMS.  
Further observation 
1.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is of the view 
that newspapers have far wider outreach to common people as compared to mobile 
applications and therefore suggestions for logo development and new nomenclature can 
be invited through newspapers also. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.10 On the recommendations of this Committee, the Department has recently made 
available the CPGRAMS portal in three regional languages i.e. Bengali, Gujarati and 
Marathi. The Committee recomm ends that the Department should make available the portal 
in other regional languages on priority basis. (3.10) 
Action Taken  
1.11 On the recommendation of 106th report of Parliamentary Standing Committee, the 
Department has taken initiative for regional language interface of CPGRAMS. In the 1 st 
phase the portal has been made available in three regional languages i.e.  Bengali, Gujarati 
and Marathi.  In phase II interface of CPGRAMS in all scheduled languages have been taken 
up in collaboration of C-DAC.  

 
 
 
 13 
Further observation 
1.12 The Committee unfeignedly appreciates the efforts of the Department to ensure 
the availability of CPGRAMS portal in all scheduled languages. 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.13 The NCGG is envisaged to be the apex think -tank to guide the Government and help 
it in implementing Good Governance Reforms.   The Committee feels that with such a 
significant mandate, the scope and activities of the Centre should be made broad -based and 
then seek commensurate allocation to carry out the mandate.  The grant-in-aid provided to the 
institution seems insufficient and accordingly, the Committee recommends the NCGG to 
work out a detailed future plan to effectively carry out its activities, on the  basis of which, it 
should approach the government for necessary funds.   In the long run, the Government 
should also evolve a mechanism to ensure that the center evolves into a result oriented 
organisation of global excellence, which is self -sustaining and does not remain dependent on 
Government grants. (3.28) 
Action Taken  
1.14 NCGG has emerged as centre for excellence in providing training on public policy 
and governance to international civil servants and diplomats.   Maldives, Gambia, Myanmar, 
Cambodia, Bangladesh have attended training programmes conducted by NCGG.    It also 
conducted workshops and webinars both for national and international participants on public 
policy and governance. However, as recommended by the Committee the NCGG    has been 
requested to work out a detailed future plan    with an aim to make the organization    self-
sustainable.  
Further observation 
1.15 The Committee appreciates the efforts of NCGG to emerge as centre for 
excellence in providing training on public policy and governan ce to International Civil 
Services and Diplomats. The Committee recommends the Department to include more 
countries in its training programmes. 
 

 
 
 
 14 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.16 From the mandate of the Department, it may be seen that it is primarily concerned 
with the Pensioners (including family Pensioners) of all Ministries / Departments under the 
Accounting jurisdiction of Controller General of Accounts, MoF. However, a large c hunk of 
pensioners including Defence pensioners, Railway pensioners, Telecom pensioners, and 
Postal pensioners are governed by their own rules and are outside the jurisdiction of the 
DPPW. (3.30) 
1.17 The Committee observes that though the name and the man date of the Department 
suggest its jurisdiction over all Central Government employees, a large portion of pensioners 
from Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal are outside the purview of the DPPW. These 
organizations also implement similar rules and schemes on the lines of DPPW. However, this 
multiplicity of agencies and rules in matters of pension creates confusion and duplicity. The 
Committee further notes that recently the Railway Budget has been integrated with the 
General Budget and the CPENGRAMS porta l has been made common for all these 
organizations. Thus, there seems to be an approach in the Government towards integration 
and non-duplicity for making optimal utilization of resources. (3.31) 
1.18 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the 
feasibility of integrating pensioners of all other organizations of Central Government viz. 
Defence, Railways, Telecom and Postal be brought in within the jurisdiction of the DPPW, 
by making it a single entity in the matters r elated to pension and pensioners' welfare. The 
Department may furnish a concept paper in this regard, to the Committee, within three 
months. (3.32) 
Action Taken  
1.19 The employees/pensioners of Department of Posts and Department of 
Telecommunications are governed by CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972/2021 as well. 
1.20 However, to explore the feasibility to bring the pensioners/employees of Department 
of Defence and Ministry of Railways within the jurisdiction of DoPPW, the comments/views 
of these two organizations  i.e., Ministry of Railways and Department of Ex -Servicemen 

 
 
 
 15 
Welfare, Ministry of Defence have been sought vide OM dated 27.04.2022. The reply is yet 
to be received. 
1.21 A reminder through email dated 09.06.2022 has been sent for early expedition. 
Further observation 
1.22 The Committee would like to be apprised of the comments/views of Department 
of Defence and Ministry of Railways and the consequent actions taken by the 
Department based on these comments. 
 
PENSION ADALATS 
 
Recommendation/observation 
1.23 As per the data provided by the Department on disposal of pension grievances during 
Pension Adalats, their resolution rates are significantly high. This perhaps is due  to the fact 
that all stakeholders of a particular grievance are invited on a single tabl e, the grievances are 
resolved quickly. Considering this performance, as recommended by the Committee in its 
106th report, the Committee once again reiterates that such Pension  Adalats should be held 
more regularly and frequently.  Further, the experience gained during COVID times, the 
practice of holding Pension Adalats through video conferencing should be promoted. (3.45) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.24 As per the recommendations of DRPSC, the department will conduct Pension Adalat 
more frequently. 
1.25 Accordingly, an All India Pension Adalat was held on 5 th May, 2022 at DAIC, 
Janpath, New Delhi under the Auspices of Hon‟ble MOS(PP). 
 Further observation 
1.26 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and recommends that 
Pensions Adalats should not only be held more regularly and frequently but also they 
should be carried out through video conferencing mode. 
  

 
 
 
 16 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE MINISTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 After considering the elaborate mandate of the Department, the number of schemes 
and funds allocated to it does not seem commensurate with each other.   The Committee is 
therefore of the view that the department should devise more schemes and programmes 
aimed at improving the Human Resource potential and productivity of the government and 
project their funds requirements to the MoF accordingly. (2.10)  
Action Taken  
2.1 The Department has undertaken several initiatives / programmes such as revamping 
of publi c Grievance system, setting up call center on public grievances, internal process 
reviews to increase efficiency in decision making in the government, reducing pendency in 
govt offices, regular swachhata campaign to build a healthy and clean work environme nt etc. 
These are new activities   aimed at improving the Human Resource potential and productivity 
of the government. The scheme for Administrative Reforms has accordingly been revised 
with enhanced outlay. However, M/ Finance has approved the scheme with  a total outlay of 
Rs 125 crore only for the time being. Therefore, depending upon the pace of implementation 
and requirements additional financial need may be projected to Ministry of Finance.  
Further observation 
2.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts  of Department to come up with new 
initiatives aiming to improve the Human Resources potential and productivity of the 
Government. 
 

 
 
 
 17 
CPGRAMS Reforms 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee also takes note of the fact that a very large number of the pub lic 
grievances are limited to some specific aspects of certain organizations/ Departments. The 
Committee desires that all those areas where a large number of grievances are received, 
should be examined and in those common areas of grievances, after analyzi ng the root cause, 
systemic changes wherever necessary should be brought without any delay which in turn will 
reduce the volume of grievances to a large extent. (3.8) 
Action Taken 
2.4 DARPG has set up data Strategy Unit (DSU) to develop in -house capacity to analyze 
grievances for root cause and suggest areas that requires systemic improvement through 
evidence based approach.   
Further observation 
2.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee further 
recommends the Department to apprise  the Committee about the suggestions made by 
DSU for systemic improvement of any Organization or Department. 
E-Office-Mission Mode Project 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6 The Committee observes that e -Office is one of the key e -Governance reforms 
brought by  the Department in the recent past. It has helped not only in making the 
government's work faster and more efficient, but has also made a marked difference in the 
decision making process. It has proven its worth during the recent lockdowns due to COVID 
pandemic in the work-from-home scenario. (3.16) 
 2.7 The Committee is therefore of the view that the e -office should be implemented in 
all Central Government Ministries / Departments / organizations on priority basis. Proper 
training on e -Office should be imp arted to the officials. Every effort must be made to 
encourage officials to carry out their office work through e -office only. Further, at an 
appropriate time, it should be made binding for all Government Departments/organizations, 
in a phased manner, to carry out all their official work through e-office only. (3.17) 

 
 
 
 18 
2.8 The Department, along with NIC/MeitY should also keep on improving the e -office 
software based on the inputs received from all stakeholders, on a continuous basis. The e -
office should also be made compatible with all widely used browsers. As e -office has the 
potential for making lot of savings for the government in terms of office space, stationery 
etc., the Committee therefore, recommends the DARPG to approach the MoF, with proper 
justifications, and seek funds to implement the e -office project on a faster pace in all 
Ministries. (3.18) 
  
 Action Taken 
2.9 e-Office has been implemented in all 77 Ministries / Departments along with their 
Attached / Subordinate/ Autonomous organisations. Training is imparted by National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) to the officers on various features of e office and their usages. As 
on date 180 organisations, 14 Apex Bodies and 56 PSUs are working on eOffice.  
 2.10 e-Office has kept on improving    based on the input and suggestion of users.   The 
latest version of e office 7.0 much advanced software with browser neutral 
capability.  However, due to continuous upgrades/patches released by browsers; the operating 
environment is extremely dynamic and continuous efforts are made to make the eOffice 
Product work on all the browsers.  
2.11 Currently NIC follows a subscription -based model for fina ncial sustainability of e 
office.  The respective Ministries have to meet the subscription from their budget.  
Further observation 
2.12 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in 
implementation of e -office. However, the Committee recom mends the Department to 
find the feasibility of making e -office binding for all Government 
Departments/Organizations in a phased manner. 
Administrative Reforms 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13 The Committee observes that apathy of civil servants in implementation of 
Government schemes/programmes is one of the major impediments in the implementation of 
government schemes and delivery of services and therefore, recommends DARPG to make 

 
 
 
 19 
appropriate programmes and initiatives for instilling right to public service delivery attitude 
in civil servants by strengthening their behavioural competency. (3.21)  
Action Taken  
2.14 The Sevottam  programme of DARPG envisages capacity building of officers for 
improving service delivery and redressal of  public grievances.  The training under 
SEVOTTAM   would suitably incorporate    modules for behavioural competency and 
attitudinal change in public servants towards service delivery and grievance redressal. 
2.15 Taking the citizen centric approach in service delivery forward   DARPG organized 
nationwide campaign “Prashashan Gaon ki Aur” from 20-25 December 2021 on the occasion 
of Good Governance Week (GGW). All Districts in the country participated in the campaign 
by holding camps at tehsils and panchayats. Total 380 citizen charters were updated, 621 new 
services have been added in Citizen charters, 6.67 lakh public grievances were attended to 
and 2.89 cr applications under service delivery were disposed of. 
Further observation 
2.16 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is contented 
to know the phenomenal success of the campaign "Prashashan  Gaon ki Aur" and 
recommends the Department to hold these types of campaigns more frequently.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 20 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION AND PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
OVERALL ASSESEMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17 It may be seen that during 2020 -21 the BE allocation was Rs.5 crore for the scheme, 
however, it got reduced to Rs.3.03 crore  at RE stage and  at the end  of the year only Rs.2.54 
crore could be spent. On a similar pattern the scheme allocation for the BE  2021-22 was 
again Rs.5 crore , whi ch was reduced to Rs.3.31 crore  at the RE stage and the actual 
expenditure u pto 31.01.2022 is  Rs.1.48 crore  only. Not surprisingly, the BE for the 
Department under scheme for the year 2022 -23 has been pegged at Rs.3.57 crore only, 
against their projection of Rs.4.40  crore made to the Ministry of Finance. The Department 
should furnish detailed reas ons for such under - utilization of funds in the last two financial 
years to the Committee. (2.17) 
*Actual expenditure figure for the year 2021. (Para 2.10) 
Action Taken 
2.18 The reasons for under -utilization of funds under Scheme (Revenue) in the last two 
Financial Years 2020-21 and 2021-22 are mentioned below. 
2.19 For Scheme (Revenue), the BE (2020 -21) was Rs.5 crore while it was reduced to 
Rs.3.03 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure was Rs.2.58 crore i.e. 85% of RE. 
Similarly, the BE (2021 -22) was kept Rs.5 crore and it was reduced to Rs.3.31 crore at RE 
state. The actual expenditure was Rs.3.06 crore i.e. 92.4% of RE. 
2.20 The major heads under Scheme (Revenue) for under -utilizing/saving the funds were 
„Domestic Travel Expenses‟ and „Advertising and Publicity‟.   


 
 
 
 21 
2.21 The Covid-19 and the nation-wide lock down affected the activities of the Department 
in the following ways which resulted in under -utilization of funds of BE for 2020 -21 and 
2021-22: -  
 Due to spread of Corona Pandemic and subsequent l ockdown, no physical 
workshops/conferences, a major expenditure item, were held for pensioners in 
order to abide by the Covid -19 pandemic protocols for the highly vulnerable 
population of age 60 plus. All workshops were conducted through video -
conferencing which resulted in nil expenditure for workshops/conferences. 
 Training on Bhavishya, Pensioners‟ Awareness Workshop, Pre -Retirement 
Counseling (PRC), Pension   Adalat outside Delhi and Digital Life Certificate 
(DLC) Scheme, involving domestic travel for co nducting these activities were not 
held due to COVID -19 Pandemic which resulted in under Utilization/Savings of 
the fund under “Domestic Travel Expenses”. 
 The awareness/advertising through print medium was also restricted as the 
Department moved towards awareness campaigns through social media apps with a 
greater outreach, which resulted in saving in the total expenditure. 
 This Department was actively utilizing various social media platform such as 
WHATSAPP, FACEBOOK, YOUTUBE and TWITTER for disseminating 
information/messages among pensioners. 
Professional Services: - On the basis of Office of Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA)‟s 
recommendations, there was a proposal to increase of 18 additional Technical staff at 
Bhavishya team of NIC and 10 additional supe rvisory staff in Pensioners‟ Portal for new 
Activities in 2021-22. The budget requirement for these posts was added in RE 2021 -22, due 
to which there will be an increase in Professional Service head of RE 2021-22. 
Further observation 
2.22 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that funds will be 
utilized more  efficiently in future as under utilization of funds leads to limiting of 
projections at the BE stage. 
 

 
 
 
 22 
Pensioners' Portal 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.23 The Committee notes that based on an independent third party comprehensive review 
of the root cause of the pensioners' grievances the DPPW has initiated key reforms like 
complete digitalization of pension process and improvement in submission of Life Certificate 
by pensioners. The Committee appreciates such initiatives being taken up by the Department 
based on their learning from pensioners' grievances. (3.39) 
Action Taken 
2.24 DoPPW conveys its regards for appreciating the Initiatives of DoPPW and will 
continue to initiate key reforms for resolving the Grievances of Pensioners. 
Further observation 
2.25 The Committee welcomes the reply of the Department and hopes that the 
Department will continue to take new initiatives for the betterment of Pensioners' in 
future. 
Pensioners' Association 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.26 The Committee commends the overall performance of the Department of Pension and 
Pensioners Welfare and hopes that it will continue with its good work to bring about 'ease of 
living' for pensioners, especially for super senior citizens and family pensioners. (3.51) 
Action Taken 
2.27 DoPPW has noted the appreciative remarks of the Committee with gratitude and will 
continue to work for „ease -of-living‟ for pensioners, especially for super senior citizens and 
family pensioners. 
Further observation 
2.28 The Committee welcomes the reply of the Department.  
 
 

 
 
 
 23 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN FOR 
NOT ACCEPTING ITS RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS. 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISETRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES 
Overall Assesement Of The Demands For Grants 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 Department is able to spend only 61.7% of the budgetary allocation made under RE 
2021-22 upto 31 st January, 2022, leaving 38.3% to spend in just 2 months.   As per the 
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance (MoF), Expenditure in the last quarter has to be 
restricted to 33% ceiling and in last month (March) expenditure has to be restricted to 15%  of 
ceiling.  Thus, the performance of the Department in terms of utilization of funds needs 
considerable improvement. A Focused planning and close monitoring of utilization of funds 
is required on the part of the Department.   As restrictions imposed due t o COVID on 
expenditure are waning, the Department should have met the quarterly expenditure targets set 
by the MoF without fail.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
identify the bottlenecks responsible  for not being able to mai ntain the pace of utilization 
required as per the instructions of the MoF and take remedial measures to improve its 
performance in utilization of funds in future. (2.5) 
Action Taken 
3.1 The Department achieved overall 95.50% utilization of RE budget    during the 
financial year 2021 -2022. The major activities of Department    are    usually taking place in 
the last quarter   towards Prime Minister‟s award for Excellence in Civil Services, National e 
governance conference and e-gov awards etc. Therefore, higher expenditure takes place in the 
last quarter of the financial year.  However, efforts have been made to improve expenditure in 
sync with quarterly expenditure target set by MoF. The activities have been outlined with 
clear milestones and expenditure a re reviewed regularly in Senior Officers Meeting. As a 
result   this financial year about 20% of BE has already been incurred as on 22 June 2022.  
 

 
 
 
 24 
Further observation 
3.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee recommends 
the Department to hold activities evenly throughout the year and not  to confine them 
over a particular period of time in a year , so that instructions issued by Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) are followed rigorously. 
Recommendation/Observation 
DARPG 
Scheme - Component-wise allocation 
(Rupees in Crores) 
Component 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
BE RE Actual Exp. BE RE Actual as 
on 9.2.2022  
(i) Modernisation of Govt. office 
30.00 15.00 
1.68 
15.00 12.00 
1.50 
40.00 
 
 (ii) 
 
 
 
 
Pilot 
Project on A
dministrativ
e  
Reforms 
E-Governance 0.45 2.67 
e-Office 1.28 0.31 
Fostering Good Governance 4.04 2.37 
Learning from successes 2.35 0.84 
PG/CPGRAMS 
related activities 1.19 2.02 
Foreign Training and  Foreign 
Travel/International Cooperati
on 
0.05 0.00 
Total 30.00 15.00 11.04 15.00 12.00 9.71 40.00 
 
3.3 From the above table it can be gathered that the track record of the department in 
terms of utilization of funds under the scheme has been very poor.   In 2020-21 BE of Rs. 30 
crore got reduced to Rs. 15 crore at RE stage, and the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 11 
crore only.  In 2021-22, BE of Rs. 15 cror e got reduced to Rs.12 crore and the Department 
has been able to utilize only about 9.7 crore upto 09.02.2022.   The Department may  furnish 
detailed reasons for such under -utilization of funds to the Committee with Action Taken 
Note. (2.8) 
Action Taken 
3.4 The expenditure in 2020 -21 was impacted due to COVID which forced the 
Department to defer several of its key activities. The expen diture was also restricted due to 
quarterly ceiling on expenditure   prescribed by M/ Finance in 2020 -21. However, the 
expenditure was picked up in 2021 -2022 when about 95.10% of the scheme budget was 

 
 
 
 25 
utilized. In order to improve expenditure management, t he physical and financial milestones 
of programmes are reviewed on weekly basis in Senior Officers Meeting. As a result, the 
Department could achieve   over 20% expenditure within the 1 st quarter of the Financial year 
2022-23. 
Further observation 
3.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is concerned 
over the Departments failure to completely utilise the funds allocated to it and 
recommends it to take corrective measures in this regard. 
Time Bound Delivery of Services 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6 The Committee recommends the government to bring a scheme for a time -bound 
delivery of goods and services for citizens. Initially the scheme may be started by including a 
few basic services only, which may later be expanded to include other services also. The 
Scheme should include appropriate measures for reward and punishment of government 
functionaries so that it remains effective. (3.12) 
 Action Taken 
3.7 The Government has so far adopted promotional approach to   strengthen   servic e 
delivery architecture in the country. More and more services are delivered online.  Services 
like pension, banking etc have reached door step delivery mode.  National e Service Delivery 
(NESDA) frame work has been introduced to assess the efficacy of var ious e service delivery 
platforms.  Under the scheme Prime Minister‟s Awards for excellence in Public 
Administration a separate category of award for Improving Service Delivery and Redressal of 
Public Grievances was introduced. The proposed grievance redre ssal Index would also rank 
the performance of Ministries on the basis of citizen satisfaction and other parameters of 
service delivery and grievance redressal.    
3.8 The DARPG has published the Good Governance Index 2019 & 2021 as an 
incentivise action taken towards effective service delivery. All the above measures effectively 
cover the recommendation of this committee towards time bound delivery of Goods and 
Services. However, scope of these schemes could be further reviewed to reflect the 
recommendations of the Committee. 

 
 
 
 26 
Further observation 
3.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. It can be observed that 
NESDA, 2021 has very limited scope as it covers only 13 Central Ministry Departments 
and 15 Departments of States and UTs. Moreover, the Co mmittee is of the view that in 
addition to awards and rankings, accountability of concerned officers dealing with the 
services should also be laid down to ensure delivery of services to common citizens in 
time-bound manner. 
Administrative Reforms 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.10 The Committee observes that more than a decade and a half has passed since the 2 nd 
ARC was constituted and there have been phenomenal changes in the governance of the 
country mainly on account of changes in the socio -economic struct ure and technological 
revolution and recommends that the Department should explore the need for setting up of 3rd 
ARC. (3.23) 
Action Taken  
3.11 While the suggestion on next ARC would be    taken up at appropriate level, in the 
meantime   government is in the process of formulating „Vision India @ 2047‟ in 
consultation with eminent persons from academia, Industry and   Civil Servants. an Advisory 
Committee headed by MOS (PP) and Working Group under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
DARPG has been set up for fin alizing vision document. Department of Administrative 
Reforms have taken up consultation for wider reforms in strategic areas in collaboration with 
IIT Madras. A brainstorming seminar was organized in research park of IITM involving 
Young Civil Servants, y oung faculty and Entrepreneurs.   10 thematic areas of governance in 
energy, healthcare, infrastructure, education, water, urbanization, Rural Development, 
Fintech and information security has been identified for   introducing larger reforms. 
Further observation 
3.12 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is of the view 
that ‘Vision India @ 2047’ and other reformative initiatives of the Department can have 
their own significance but no programme or scheme can deny the importance of 

 
 
 
 27 
constituting ARC  and therefore the Committee again recommends that the Department 
should scout the need for setting up of 3rd ARC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 28 
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE 
Pensioners’ Portal 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.13 The Committee observes that as per last five years data provided by the Department 
on satisfaction ratings, about 40% of complainants have rated their grievance redressal as 
poor. Such ratings reflect poorly on the overall grievance handling by different organ izations. 
Further, about twelve Ministries/Departments in the year 2021 and twenty two 
Ministries/Departments in the year 2020 have failed to resolve more than 30% of pensioners' 
grievances pertaining to them within the stipulated time. This shows apathy o f those 
organizations towards handling of pensioners' grievances and the Committee feels dismayed 
over indifference shown by government officials to the grievances of their retired colleagues.  
(3.40) 
3.14 The Committee accordingly recommends the DPPW to de velop a 
mechanism/guidelines/policy to ensure accountability of the government officials dealing 
with the pensioners' grievances and suggest action against the erring officials. The appellate 
authority should be empowered to award monetary penalties and sa nction disciplinary action 
against those officials who are habitually responsible for delayed action or summary disposal 
of grievances without any qualitative action. (3.41) 
Action Taken 
3.15 DoPPW has issued advisory to all Ministries/Departments vide OM dated 04.04.2022 
(copy enclosed). 
Further observation 
3.16 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee recommends 
the Department that particular Ministries/Departments which are failing to resolve 
more than 30% of pensioners grievances s hould be issued separate advisory to furnish 
reasons for not resolving a high percentage of grievances within the stipulated time. 
*** 
 
 

 
 
 
 29 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 02:00 PM on 22.11.2022 in 
Committee Room No. 4 , Block -A, Parliament  House Annexe Ext. Building, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shri Sanjay Raut 
(vi) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(vii) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(viii) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(ix) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(x) Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
(xi) Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
(xii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(xiii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xiv) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xvi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 30 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised that the Committee will first consider and adopt 
two reports followed by *                          *                                         * 
3. The Committee then considered and  unanimously adopted the 1 20th 
Report on Action taken on 11 0th Report of the Committee on 'Pensioner' 
Grievances - Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralised Pension Grievances 
Redress and Monitoring System and 121st Report on Action Taken on 11 3th 
Report of the Committee on Demand for Grants (2022 -23) pertaining to the 
Department of Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances & 
Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare. 
4. *                                                      *                                                   * 
5. *                                                      *                                                    * 
6. *                                                       *                                                   *  
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 8. The meeting adjourned at 04.05 PM.  
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
22nd November, 2022                                                                       DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*relates to other matters 