PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA   16 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE REPRESENTATION OF 
THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2006/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P&L)-31 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE REPRESENTATION OF  
THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
LITERAC 
Y(MINISTRY O 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2006/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA) 


CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................ (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... (i ii) 
3. R EPORT ……………………....................................................................................................... 1—20 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… 21—30 
5. A NNEXURES ................................................................................................................................ 31—63 
 A. The Representation of People (Amendment) Bill, 2006 ............................................ 33—34 
 B. The Comments of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and   
  Justice on the Views/Suggestions on the Provision of the Bill  
  Submitted to the Committee by Various Organisations/Individulas ........................... 35—52 
 C. The Reply of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice   
  to Questionnaire on the Bill ......................................................................................... 53—56 
 D. The Comments of Ministry of External Affairs on the Bill ........................................ 57 
 E. The Comments of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on the Bill ............................ 58 
 F. The comments of Election Commission of India on the Bill ...................................... 59—60 
 G. Information Regarding the Provisions Existing in other Countries   
  as made available by Ministry of External Affairs ...................................................... 61—63 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2005-06) 
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 *5. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 *6. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 *7. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
 **8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 9. Vacant 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 12. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
 13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar 
 14. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 15. Shri S .K. Kharventhan 
 16. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 17. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
 18. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 19. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
 20. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 21. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 22. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 23. Shri Harin Pathak 
 24. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 25. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 26. Shri Vishvendra Singh 
 27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 28. Vacant 
 29. Vacant 
 30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary  
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
* Nominated on the 2nd June, 2006.  
** Nominated on the 29th June, 2006. 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grieva nces, Law and Justice, having been authorised 
by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixteenth Report of the Committee on the 
Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006.* 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha re ferred** the Bill on 27 th March, 2006, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 17 th February, 
2006 and pending therein, to the Committee for examination and report. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill in 5 sittings held on 5 th June, 11th, 12th and 26th July and 2nd August, 2006. 
3.1 In its sitting held on 5 th June, 2006, the Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill. 
3.2 The Committee heard the views of the representatives of  the Ministries of Home Affairs; External Affairs; 
Overseas Indian Affairs; Law and Justice; and the El ection Commission of India at its meeting held on 11 th July, 
2006. 
3.3 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consid eration of the Bill in its sitting held on 12th July, 2006. 
3.4 The Committee further heard the views of the repr esentatives of the Legislative Department and the 
Department of Legal Affairs of Ministry of Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India on the clauses of 
the Bill in its meeting held on 26th July, 2006. 
3.5 The Committee considered and adopted the draf t Report on the Bill in its sitting held on 2nd August, 2006. 
4. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers/documents:- 
 (i) Background note on the Bill received from the Le gislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice; 
 (ii) The Representation of the People Act, 1950;  
 (iii) The Representation of the People Act, 1951; 
 (iv) Written comments received from the Ministries of External Affairs, Overseas Indian 
Affairs and the Election Commission of India; 
 (v) Written replies of the Legislative Depa rtment, Ministry of Law and Justice on the 
questionnaire on the Bill; 
 (vi) Memoranda received from a cross-section of the society; 
 (vii) Written comments of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the 
views/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill submitted to the Committee in the form of memoranda; 
and 
 (viii) The comments/replies rece ived from the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs, Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs, Election  Commission of India and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department, Department of Legal Affairs), on the points raised by the Chairman and 
Members in the sittings of the Committee. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
  E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN 
N
EW DELHI; Chairman, 
August 2, 2006 Committee on Personnel, 
 Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
  
* Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part-II, Section 2, dated the 27th February, 2006.  
** Published in the Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 42997) dated the 28th March, 2006. 

 
 
REPORT 
 The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006 (Annexure A) seeks to amend section 20 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) to make provision for enabling the Indian citizens, absenting 
from their place of ordinary residence in India owing to their employment, education or otherwise outside India, to 
get their names registered in the electoral rolls of the con cerned constituency of their place of ordinary residence in 
India, had they been in India, so that they would be in a position to cast their votes in the elections to the Lok Sabha 
and to the State Legislatures in case they happen to be in their constituency at the time of the polls. The Bill seeks to 
make an enabling provision for these c itizens to be able to contest the elections. The Bill has a legislative purpose so 
as to extend the right to vote to the Indian citizens residing abroad (colloquially known as “Non-Resident Indians” 
i.e. NRI). The Government feels that conferring such a right will enable them to participate in the democratic process 
of elections in their motherland and will also boost their involvement in the nation-building. Accordingly, following 
the persistent demand of Indian citizens residing outside I ndia and having considered all the aspects of their demand, 
the Government has proposed to make provision thro ugh this legislation by amending section 20 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, as the Government considers that it is a legitimate right of the Indian citizens 
residing outside the country. In the opinion of the Government, it cannot be ignored that the contribution by way of 
foreign exchange by the citizens of India employed outside India is considerable and it is the duty of the Government 
to safeguard their interests and the sense of belonging and to protect their legitimate democratic rights. 
2. In the Background Note on the Bill, the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice has informed the 
Committee that:- 
“.... the Legislative Department exam ined all aspects of the demand afresh in consultation with the other 
concerned administrative Ministries/Departments, name ly, the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and the Election 
Commission of India and decided to take steps to confer voting rights to the citizens of India absenting from 
their place of ordinary residence owing to their employment, education or otherwise outside India, by 
suitably amending the relevant law. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 20 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) so as to amplify the definition of ‘ordinarily resident’ contained therein 
for enabling non-resident Indian who have absented themselves from their place of ordinary residence 
owing to employment, education or otherwise to get th eir names registered in th e electoral rolls of the 
concerned constituency of their place of ordinary residence in India had they been in India so that they 
would be in a position to cast their votes in elections to the Lok Sabha and to the State Legislatures in case 
they happen to be in their constituency at the time of polls. 
***  *** ***  
 The amendment proposed in the Bill will entitle the eligible citizens of India who are absenting from 
their place of ordinary residence in India owing to their employment, education or otherwise outside India 
to get themselves enrolled in the electoral rolls and cast  their votes when they are in their constituency and 
thus fully participate in the democr atic process of nation building and uphold their pride and prestige as 
citizens of India. This will give the NRIs a sense of belonging to their motherland. 
 The detailed modalities of enrolment of the ne w category of electors would be worked out in 
consultation with the Election Commission at the time of amending the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 
after the proposed law is passed by Parliament.” 
3. To achieve these objectives, the proposed amendment seeks to insert a new clause under Section 20 ibid. - 
“(1AA) A person absenting himself from his place of ordinary residence owing to his employment, 
education, or otherwise, outside India, whether temporar ily or not, shall not, by reason thereof, cease to be 
ordinarily resident in India.” 
4. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons ap pended to the Bill it is stated as under:- 

“Section 19 of the Representation of the People Ac t, 1950 provides that every person who is not less 
than eighteen years of age on the qualifying date and is ordinarily resident in a constituency shall be entitled 
to be registered in the electoral ro lls for that constituency. The meaning of ‘ordinary resident’ is laid down 
in section 20 of the said Act. At present, a person who is absenting from his place of ordinary residence by 
reason of his employment, education or otherwise outside India is not qualified to get his name registered in 
the electoral rolls and thus cast his vote in elections to the Parliament and to the State Legislatures. 
There are a large number of citizens of India residing outside India due to their employment, education, 
etc. They have been persistently demanding for conferring them with voting rights. Though the issue of 
conferring voting rights to the citizens if they are absenting from their place of ordinary residence in India 
owing to their employment, education or otherwise out side India has been recei ving the attention of the 
Government for quite some time, yet the same could no t be acceded to owing to th e practical difficulties in 
enrolling them in the electoral rolls of the concerned constituency and allowing them to cast their votes 
outside India within the short span of time available in the election process. 
*** *** ***  
The Government has considered all aspects of th e demand and it has been decided to enable the 
Indian citizens absenting from thei r place of ordinary residence in India owing to their employment, 
education or otherwise outside India to get thei r names registered in the electoral rolls of the 
concerned constituency of their place of ordinary residence in India ........."  
5.  In the light of the above, the Re presentation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on the 17 th February, 2006. It was referred to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 27 th March, 2006 for examination with instruction to report 
within three months. 
6. However, while considering the B ill, the Committee felt that it would not be possible for it to complete the 
consideration of the Bill and Report thereon to Parliament within the stipulated time, keeping in view the importance 
of the Bill requiring the vast range of discussions, issues involved and the consideration of memoranda received from 
a cross-section of the society. Accordingly, the Committee sought an extension of time upto the last week of the 208th 
Session of Rajya Sabha or the Monsoon Session of the year  2006 from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, which 
was acceded to. 
7. Keeping in view the public impo rtance of the Bill, the Committee decide d to invite views/suggestions from 
various individuals/organisations thereon. It, accordingly, authorised the Secretariat to issue a press advertisement for 
inviting views/suggestions. 
7.1 In response to the press advertisement issued on the 20th April, 2006 which was published in the major English 
and Hindi dailies and vernacular news papers all over the country on the 25 th April, 2006, a number of 
representations/memoranda were received. 
7.2 The major points raised in the memoranda are as follows:- 
 (i) The proposed amendment clause is of very wide  amplitude having far reaching effects and may create 
non-resident representation if the NRIs are allowed to contest elections as well. 
 (ii) People who abandon their motherland and go to  other countries for education and employment may not 
be able to cast their votes in favour of the most suitable candidate, thus, conferring of such right may 
prove to be counter productive and will only add to the election complexities. 
 (iii) The proposed amendment is unjustified as the NR Is do not pay any tax and they will get the right to 
elect the Government. 
 (iv) It is a wrong notion that the right to vote to the NRIs will boost their involvement in the nation 
building, rather this futile action may jeopardize th e purpose of nation building as the NRIs will not be 
aware of the political climate of Indian States. 
 (v) Such a right if granted, may jeopardize the security and sovereig nty of the country and may result in 
catastrophy. 
 (vi) The proposed amendment does not sound logical and is against the principle of equality. Presently, at 
the time of revision of electoral rolls, the names of the persons who are not residing at the place of their 

ordinary residence continuously for 6 months irrespective of the fact whether they live outside India or 
within India, is deleted from the respective electoral rolls. This w ill create a legal priviledge in favour 
of the non-resident Indians. 
 (vii) Foreign funds will start playing a negative role in Government formation especially in case of split 
verdict. 
 (viii) On the face of it, it appears to be a noble idea to give voting right to the Indians living abroad but to 
give them the right to contest elections too appears to be uncalled for. They will enjoy all the privileges 
without any accountability. 
 (ix) Voting rights should be restricted to those NRIs who pay Income Tax in India and have valid PAN 
numbers in India to obviate the instances of fraud and electoral malpractice. 
 (x) The Bill will not create any ne w category of voters as once they ar e back in India they can get their 
names registered in India. Further, they have to be  physically present at the time of election to be able 
to cast their vote. 
 (xi) A person who is residing outside whether tempor arily or permanently cannot understand the needs of 
the people of his constituency. Hence NRIs should not be allowed to contest elections. 
 (xii) If the right to vote is allowed to the NRIs, th en the cost of canvassing and electioneering for the 
contestants will go up. Some mechanism needs to be devised for regulation of the right. 
 (xiii) Before according the right to vote to an NRI, hi s past record should be cons idered to find out whether 
he has clean antecedents as there is criminalization of politics and politicisation of criminals. Further, 
clear provisions for the procedure of casting votes by  the NRIs should be envisaged well in advance. It 
would be appropriate if such voters are provided with I-cards. Related rights, if accruing to them in any 
form must clearly be specified. 
 (xiv) Average NRI has a poor knowledge and understanding of the representatives and the economic, 
political and social problems of different regions of their native country, therefore focusing on their 
right would be futile, instead the target should be the optimization of local voter turn out rather than 
NRI turnout. 
7.3 The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received to the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and 
Justice for their comments. The comments of the Department were received on the 11th July, 2006. (Annexure-B) 
7.4 The Legislative Department was also forwarded a Ques tionnaire on the Bill, the replies to which were also 
received on the 11th July, 2006. (Annexure-C) 
7.5. The Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in their written reply/comments on the 
Questionnaire/memoranda mainly focussed on the following points:- 
 1. Summary of comments on the Questionnaire:- 
 (i) In a democratic set up, the citizens particip ate in the governance and this is achieved mainly 
through their legitimate political right to cast their votes. Under Arti cle 326 every person who 
is a citizen of India and who is not less than eight een years of age on such date as may be fixed 
in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate legislature and is not otherwise 
disqualified under the Constitution shall be entitled to be registered as a voter. 
 (ii) The privilege, to be registered as a voter, to  the citizens is conferred by virtue of being a citizen 
of our country and can be availed of by a pe rson moving from one place of his ordinary 
residence in India to another place of ordinary residence in India. 
 (iii) The Representation of the People Act, 19 50, at present do not allow persons who are not 
ordinary resident in a constituency in India to  register themselves as voters. To remove the 
discrimination meted out to the citizens of India solely on the ground of non-residence, it is 
proposed to confer the right to register their na mes in the electoral rolls of their constituency in 
India had they been in the respective constitue ncies but for their proceeding abroad owing to 
their employment, education or otherwise. 

 (iv) The voters list are prepared on the basis of territorial constituencies in India, it has become 
necessary that the citizens of India residing ab road owing to their employment, education or 
otherwise are allowed to enroll themselves in the electoral rolls in their respective constituency. 
This could be done only at the place of their ordi nary residence in India on the legal fiction that 
they would have continued to reside at the place of their ordinary residence in India but for 
their proceeding abroad. 
 (v) The proposed amendment seeks to allow all citizens of India living abroad to enroll themselves 
in the electoral rolls of their respective constitu ency in India irrespective of their period of 
residence abroad so long as they continue to be the citizens of India. 
 (vi) The expression “otherwise” as used in the proposed amendment covers the case of dependents 
of persons employed or otherwise staying outside India. The reasons for residence are only 
illustrative and not exhaustive. 
 (vii) It is proposed to insist for the passport and the permanent address in India shown in the 
passport as the condition to identify the cons tituency where the person concerned could get 
himself enrolled in the voters’ list. 
 (viii) The amending clause is intended to allow enro llment of their names in the electoral rolls of the 
concerned constituency of their place of ordinary residence in India, had they been in India. 
 (ix) They would thus be in a position to cast thei r votes in the election to the Lok Sabha and to the 
State Legislatures in case they happen to be in their constituency at the time of polls. 
 (x) They may also be able to contest the Pa rliamentary and Assembly elections if they are 
otherwise eligible as per law. 
 (xi) Conferring such voting right will enable them to participate in the democratic process of 
elections in their motherland and will also boost their involvement in nation building. 
 (xii) The citizens living abroad will come to Indi a along with their travel documents and passport 
and in case such person is found involved in anti -national or subversive activities, the security 
agencies of the country will keep a watch on them. 
 (xiii) The proposal is limited to allowing them to cast their votes in the concerned polling booth 
earmarked. 
 (xiv) There is no proposal to lay down any additiona l condition for contesting election in respect of 
the citizens of India living abroad owing to their employment, education or otherwise. 
 (xv) Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have  stated that USA, UK, China and Italy are some 
countries giving voting rights to their non-resident nationals. 
 2. Summary of comments on the Memoranda:- 
 (i) The proposal is to provide an enabling provision in the law so that a citizen of India living 
abroad in case he happens to be in India will have the opportunity to cast his vote. 
 (ii) Whatever provisions of law are applicable to the resident In dians would be equally applicable 
to the citizens of India living abroad also. 
 (iii) A Member of Parliament or of a State Legislature who remains absent without leave for more 
than a particular period may lose his membership. 
 (iv) After addition of name in the voting roll, the Indian citizen residing outside can cast his/her 
vote and also contest the election if he/she is otherwise eligible. 
 (v) The right of a citizen of India to vote is a po litical democratic right and the elector has a right to 
choose amongst the contesting candidate as per his conscience and judgment. 
 (vi) The name of the spouse of the citizens of Indi a living abroad will be allowed to be added in the 
electoral rolls only if such spouse is a citizen of India. 

 (vii) Income-tax is assessed for an assesssee as pe r the Income Tax Act, 1961. The citizens of India 
living abroad will exercise their voting right as per the provisions of the Constitution of India 
and the election laws. 
 (viii) The proposal is to involve the citizens of In dia living abroad to contribute in the process of 
nation building. 
 (ix) Indian citizens who are living abroad only will be given voting right under the proposed 
legislation. Constitution of India does not recognise dual citizenship of Indian citizens for the 
purpose of voting right. 
 (x) The resident Indians have the right to get themselves enrolled at the place of their ordinary 
residence which can be only at one place. The law does not allow to have the names enrolled in 
two different places at a time. The resident Indians can get their names changed from one 
constituency to another at their place of ordinary residence. 
 (xi) The proposal is to remove the discrimination  meted out to the citizens of India solely on the 
ground of place of residence. 
 (xii) It is not correct to say that  if an Indian citizen living abroad is conferred voting right, it would 
affect our sovereignty. 
 (xiii) The name of the citizens of India living outside India will be included in the voters list in India 
only if he continues to be a citizen of India and fulfils other requirements as per law. 
 (xiv) Once elected they will be governed by the rules made by the legislature for its Members. 
 (xv) The existing law is strong enough to check use of money power in elections. There are ceiling 
on election expenses. 
 (xvi) The right to cast vote could be considered as one of the primary privilege of a citizen of a 
sovereign democratic republic. The elected repr esentatives enjoy privileges and are bound by 
duties as are provided under the law and prescribed by the Houses of which a person is a 
Member. 
 (xvii) Only those persons will be allowed to vote who continue to hold Indian citizenship. There will 
be no change in the other legal requirements in respect of a resident Indian and a citizen of 
India living out of India. 
 (xviii) After getting the right to vote during elections the citizens of India living abroad will be treated 
equally with the citizens of India living in their constituency. 
 (xix) The voting right has to be exercised by the citizens of India living abroad in person by coming 
to his constituency. This way of casting of vote is  no doubt difficult but it is very simple and 
clear. It is not practically possible to allow them to cast their votes by proxy or postal ballot. 
There is no proposal to allow the citizens of India living abroad to cast their votes outside 
India. 
 (xx) Having regard to the number of days a person has to work as a legislator, there is no need of 
laying down any condition of residence in India. 
 (xxi) The average NRI may keep knowledge of representatives after getting the right to vote. 
 (xxii) The errors in voting list may not become hurdl e in conferring on the voting right to citizens of 
India living abroad. They will have clear identity by way of their passports. 
 (xxiii) There cannot be any time limit regarding the stay of NRIs abroad. It depends on what type of 
visa/permit such NRI is holding while staying abroad. 
 (xxiv) There is no need of any separate list State- wise. Only the name has to be added in the electoral 
rolls. 
 (xxv) No defence or security point is touched by extending the voting right to citizens of India living 
abroad. 

 (xxvi) The citizens of India are livi ng in various parts of the world. It is only because of the practical 
difficulties in arranging polling booth outside India safely and within the time limit, that the 
voting right would be exercised only in India. 
 (xxvii) The facility is not for dual citizens. It is only for the citizens of India living abroad owing to 
their employment, education or otherwise. 
8. The Committee took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on the 5 th June, 2006. It heard the 
presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministiy of Law and Justice in the same meeting. 
8.1 The Committee further heard the views of the Ministries  of External Affairs, Over seas Indian Affairs and the 
Home Affairs in its meeting held on the 11th July, 2006. 
8.2 The Committee also heard the views of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice and the 
Election Commission of India in its meeting held on the 12 th July, 2006. The Committee also took up clause-by-
clause consideration on the Bill in the same meeting. 
8.3 Having regard to the wide implications of the propos ed amendment sought to be effected through the present 
legislation, the Committee further held discussions with th e Secretaries of the Departme nt of Legal Affairs and the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Jus tice and the representatives of the Election Commission of 
India in its sitting held on the 26th July, 2006. 
8.4 The Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in his presentation briefly traced the 
background of the present Bill, the main provisions of the Act of 1950 as they exist, the reasons for the proposed 
amendments and amendment required in the Bill. 
8.5 He explained that at present, the Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) are not entitled to get their names enrolled in the 
electoral rolls for the reason that they are not ordinarily resident in India. There has been persistent demand for 
enabling the Indian citizens who are residing outside India, whether on employment, education or otherwise, to 
exercise their voting rights and the matter has been receiving the attention of the Central Government for quite some 
time. In a Writ Petition, being O.P. No. 19774 of 1998D filed in the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala by Shri K. 
Balachandran Nair, Chairman, Non-reside nt Indian Welfare Associa tion, Kochi, the Court in its judgment dated the 
14
th October, 1998 directed the Union of India to consider the request of the Non-Resident Indians for inclusion of 
their names in the voters list and to grant them right to vote, within three months from the date of receipt of the 
judgment. The issue has also been raised frequently in both the Houses of Parliament. 
9. During the course of th e deliberation in the Committee, apprehensi ons were raised by the Members of the 
Committee on the complexities in the nature of the amendm ent sought through the presen t legislation particularly 
concerning the issues of elections to the higher offices under the Constitution, mode of enrollment of the NRIs’ 
names, modalities relating to the casting of votes by  the NRIs and the position of the resident Indians vis-a-vis the 
non-residents in the matter of registration of names in the electoral rolls. 
AN OVERVIEW OF THE RIGHT TO VOTE-SIGNIFICANCE 
10. One of the most sacrosanct of all th e civil rights is the right to vote. In the democratic process the right to vote 
is a powerful tool in the hands of the citizens by which they elect their representatives for governance of the country. 
In a country like ours which has elected to be a direct participatory democracy, the right to vote acquires a special 
significance. 
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT CONFERRED TO THE CITIZENS 
11. Article 326 of the Constitution of India stipulates that:- 
“The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the 
basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person  who is a citizen of India and who is not less than 
eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the 
appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualif ied under this Constitution or any law made by the 
appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residenc e, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal 
practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.” 
 Evidently, under Article 326 of the Constitution of India the right to vote has been accorded a constitutional 
status. Article 326 stipulates that “every person who is a c itizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of 
age and is not otherwise disqualified under the Constitution or any law made by the appropriate legislature, is entitled 
to be registered as a voter.” As per the provisions of the Article, non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or 
corrupt or illegal practices have been listed as disqualifications for registration as a voter. 

PROVISIONS UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860 (IPC) 
12. The IPC also defines the candidate and the “Electoral Right” under Section 171A as:- 
 (a) “candidate” means a person who has been  nominated as a candidate at any election; 
 (b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from being a 
candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at any election. 
PROVISIONS UNDER THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
13.  Apart from the above provisions, the registration of electors for the parliamentary constituencies and for the 
Assembly and Council Constituencies and the qualifications and disqualifications for such registration, have been 
provided for in the Representation of the People Act, 19 50. The Act also contains provisions for preparation of 
electoral rolls and the period of currency and revision of su ch rolls from time to time. Section 16 of the Act deals 
with the disqualifications for registration in the electoral rolls on three grounds namely (i) not being a citizen of 
India, (ii) unsoundness of mind and (iii) disqualification fr om voting under the provisions of any law relating to 
corrupt practices and other offences in connection with elec tions. Section 19 of the Act prescribes the conditions of 
registration viz. (a) not less than eighteen years of age on the qualifying date and (b) “ordinarily resident” in a 
constituency. Section 20 of the Act deals with the term “Ord inarily resident”. Sub-section 1 thereof provides that “A 
person shall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in a constituency on the ground only that he owns; or is in 
possession of, a dwelling house therein. ” Sub-section 1A further stipulates that “a person absenting himself 
temporarily from his place of ordinary residence shall not by reason thereof cease to be or dinarily resident therein.” 
Sub-sections (1B) (2) (3) (4) (5) and (6) contain exceptions to the term “ordinarily resident” and clause (7) refers to 
that if in any case a question arises as to where a person is  ordinarily resident at any relevant time, the question shall 
be determined with reference to all the facts of the case an d to such rules as may be made in this behalf by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Election Commission of India. Thus, the Act only refers to the term 
“Ordinarily resident” and exceptions thereto but it does not  exactly define the term. The definition of the term has 
been left to be decided by the Central Government in consultation with the Election Commission of India under 
section 28 (2) (a) through notification in the official  gazette. Presently, under the directions of the Election 
Commission of India it has been left to the discretion of  the Electoral Registration Officers to decide about the 
ordinarily resident status of a person desiring to get his name enrolled in the electoral rolls. 
13.1 Accordingly, as per the provisions of the Constitu tion and the Representation of the People Act, 1950, to be 
registered as a voter a person has to be an elector al so. The definition of electo r has been specified in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 in section 2(1)(e) as  “a person whose name is entered in the electoral roll of 
that constituency for the time being in  force and who is not subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950”. Evidently, to be an elector and a voter, a person has to be a 
citizen of India necessarily apart from being above 18 year s of age and an “ordinarily resident” in a constituency. 
Who all will come under the category of the citizens of India has been specified in the Citizenship Act, 1955 which 
elaborates on the other modes of acquiring Indian citizenshi p. A plain reading of all the existing provisions conveys 
that a person who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country continues to be citizen of India irrespective of 
the fact whether he is residing in India or elsewhere or unless he is otherwise disqualified or debarred from being a 
citizen of India under any law for the time being in force. 
DIRECTION OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
14. Under Article 324(1) of the Constitution of India, the superintendence, direction and control of preparation of 
the electoral rolls for all the elections to the Parliament an d the Legislature of every Stat e is vested in the Election 
Commission. 
14.1 An independent Election Commission has been established under the Constitution in order to carry out and 
regulate the holding of elections in India. 
14.2 The Election Commission was established in  accordance with the Constitution on the 25 th January 1950. 
Originally, the Commission was headed by a Chief Election Co mmissioner, but later in 1989, and again in 1993, two 
additional Election Commissioners were appointed. 
14.3 The Election Commission is responsible for the conduct of elections to the Parliament and the State legislatures 
and to the offices of the President and the Vice-President. 

14.4 The Election Commission prepares, maintains and period ically updates the Electoral Rolls, indicating who is 
entitled to vote, supervises nomination of the cand idates, registers political parties, monitors the 
election campaign, including candidates funding. It also fac ilitates the coverage of the election process by the media, 
organises the polling booths where voting takes place, and looks after the counting of votes and the declaration of 
results. All this is done to ensure that elections can take place in an orderly and fair manner. 
14.5 There is only one genera l electoral roll for every territorial constituen cy for election to the House of the People 
(Lok Sabha) and the State Legislatures and no separate ro ll for different religious or ethnic or other groups are 
provided for. No person is ineligible for inclusion in any su ch roll or can claim to be included in any special electoral 
roll for any such constituency on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them. 
14.6 Every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than 18 years of age on such date as may be fixed in 
that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate legislature and is not disqualif ied under the Constitution or 
any law made by the appropriate legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt 
or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election (Article 326 of the Constitution). 
14.7 Parliament has been authorized by Article 327 of the Constitution to make provisions by law with respect to all 
matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to either  House of Parliament or to the House or either House of 
the Legislature of a State incl uding the preparation of electoral rolls. In ex ercise of such power, the Parliament has 
enacted the Representation of the People Act, 1950. Secti on 28 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 has 
conferred the power to make rules on the union Governme nt after consulting the El ection Commission for carrying 
out the purposes of the Act. In exercise of this power the union Govern ment has promulgated the Registration of 
Electors Rules, 1960. 
14.8 The Election Commission has issued various directions under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and 
the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 from time to ti me. In addition, the Commission has also issued different 
instructions and clarifications. All the above constitute  the framework of law under which the preparation and 
revision of electoral roll is carried out. 
PROVISIONS DEALING WITH VOTERS AND ELECTORAL ROLL 
15. Articles 325 and 326 of the Constitution deals with adult suffrage for elections to the Lok Sabha and to the 
Legislative Assembly of every State and accordingly every citizen who is not less than 18 years of age, provided he 
is not otherwise disqualified, has a right to be registered as a voter. 
15.1 Article 327 contemplates legislation by Parliament with  respect to all matters relating to or in connection with 
elections to either House of Parliament or to the State Le gislatures including the law relating to the preparation of 
election rolls. 
15.2 Article 328 stipulates that in th e field unoccupied by the Central legisl ation, the State Legislatures are given 
power to make laws with respect to all matters relating to, or  in connection with the elec tions to the House or either 
House of the State Legislature including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing 
the due constitution of each House or Houses. 
15.3 In view of the above it is evident th at the power relating to enactment on the preparation of electoral rolls is 
vested with the Parliament. 
15.4 Following legislations passed by the Parliament deal with the voters and the electoral rolls:- 
 (i) Sections 13 to 23 of the Repr esentation of the People Act, 1950. 
 (ii) Sections 2(e), 3 to 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
15.5 Articles 84(c) and 173(c) empower the Parliament to prescrib e some additional qualifications for candidate for 
elections besides being a voter. 
 In support of Article 84(c), Dr. B.R. Ambedkar,  Chairman, Drafting Committee observed as under:- 
 “The object of the Article is to prescribe qualifications  for a person who wants to be a candidate at an election. 
Generally, the rule is that a person who is a voter, becomes entitled to stand as a candidate for election. In this Article 
it is proposed that while being a voter is an essential qualification of a candidate, a voter who wishes to be a 
candidate must also satisfy some additional qualifications as laid down in this new article. 

 I think the house will agree that it is desirable that a candidate who actually wishes to serve in the legislature 
should have some higher qualifications than merely being a voter. The functions that he is required to discharge in 
the house require experience, certain amount of knowledge, and practical experience in the affairs of the world, and I 
think if these additional qualifications  are accepted, we shall be able to se cure the proper sort of candidates who 
would be able to serve the house better than a mere ordinary voter might be.” 
(Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VIII, Page 89) 
15.6 Representation of the People Act, 1950 and 1951 enables a voter to be a candidate if he is 25 years of age. 
Real issues before the Committee 
15.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that through th e proposed legislation, the Government, has sought 
to enlarge the scope of “ordinarily resident” as provided in Section 20 of the Representation of the People Act, 
1950, which is one of the requirement for registration as  a voter so as to include those citizens also who are 
residing out of the country for the reasons of educatio n, employment or otherwise. The Bill appears to be an 
enabling provision seeking to  give effect to two things namely crea ting exemption from the requirement of 
“ordinary residence” in the case of the Indian resid ents residing outside India for certain reasons and 
subsequently enabling them to be registered as voters in the electoral rolls while they are still outside India. 
What is the definition of “ordinarily resident” 
15.8 Sub-Sections 1A and 7 of Section 20 of the Repr esentation of the People Act, 1950 provide as under:- 
 “1A A person absenting himself temporarily from his pl ace of ordinary residence shall not by reason thereof 
cease to be ordinarily resident therein. 
 7 If, in any case, a question arises as to where a pe rson is ordinarily resident at any relevant time, the 
question shall be determined with reference to all the facts of the case and to such rules as may be 
made in this behalf by the Central Government in consultation with the Election Commission.” 
 Beside, Section 23 provides for inclusion of na mes in the Electoral Rolls which reads as under:- 
 “(1) Any person whose name is not included in th e electoral roll of a constituency, may apply to the 
Electoral Registration Officer for the inclusion of his name in that roll. 
 (2) The Electoral Registration Officer shall, if satisfied  that the applicant is entitle d to be registered in the 
electoral roll, direct his name to be included therein: 
   Provided that if the applicant is registered in the electoral roll of any other constituency, the 
Electoral Registration Officer shall inform the Elect oral Registration Officer of that other constituency 
and that officer shall, on receipt of the information, strike off the applicant’s name from that roll.” 
 Further section 28 states that:- 
 “(1) The Central Government may, after consulting th e Election Commission, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for 
all or any of the following matter, namely:- 
  (a)  the determination of ordinary residence under sub-section (7) of Section 20.” 
15.9 Election Commission has issued direction to the Electoral Registration Officers regarding the definition of 
“ordinarily resident” as under:- 
 “A person is said to be ordinarily resident in a place if  he uses that place for sleeping. He need not be eating in 
that place and may be eating from a place outside. Temporary periods of absence from this ordinary place of stay can 
be ignored. It is not necessary that the period of stay should be continuous for any particular length of time and 
should be without any break. Temporary absence on account of  duty or employment or even  for pleasure should not 
be considered to interrupt the concept of ordinary residenc e. It is purely a question of  fact whether a person is 
ordinarily resident at a particular place or not. Mere absence for some time will not deprive a person of the 
qualification of ordinary residence if he possesses ability to  return and has inte ntion to return to that place. Persons 
who have gone out of the country for business or employment should be treated as having moved out of that place. 

Mere ownership or possession of a building or other immovable property will not bestow on the owner, the 
residential qualification. On the other hand even persons living in sheds, and persons living on pavements without 
any roof are eligible for enrolment provided they are ordina rily resident in the sheds or on pavements in a particular 
area, do not change the place of residence and are otherwise identifiable. 
 Members of Parliament and the State Legislatures are en titled to be registered in  their home constituencies 
notwithstanding the fact that they are away from their norma l place of residence in connection with their activities as 
legislators. Persons having service quali fications and persons holding declared  offices are also entitled to be 
registered in their home constituencies. But they have to file applications in the prescribed forms. 
 Inmates of jails, hospitals, beggar homes, asylums etc. should not be included in the electoral rolls of the 
constituency in which such institutions are located as th ey are staying in these ins titutions only for a temporary 
period. However, eligible inpatie nts of sanitaria, leprosaria, etc., where they undergo prolonged treatment may be 
taken as ordinary residents of these areas where such sanitaria etc. are located. 
 Care has to be taken in the case of students living in hostels as all such cases cannot be dealt with in an 
identical manner nor can any uniform rule be laid down to cover all such cases. Generally speaking, the principles are 
that a person should not be enrolled at an address where he  is staying temporarily; but on the other hand, he is to be 
enrolled at his normal place of residence even though he may be temporarily absent from  there. Where an eligible 
student lives in a hostel or mess or lodge more or less continuously, going back to his normal home or place of 
residence only for short periods, it can be held that he is or dinarily resident in the place where the hostel or mess or 
lodge is situated. On the other hand, if he lives in a hostel or mess or lodge for short periods, for example, during the 
term and vacate the accommodation whenever he goes back to his native place, it may be held that he is living in the 
hostel or mess or lodge only temporarily for the purpose of his study and is not ordinarily resident therein.” (From 
the website of the Election Commission of India) 
15.10 It has been ascertained that since 1
st January of each year has been taken as qualifying date for inclusion of 
names in the electoral rolls, the Election Commission of India takes into account the fraction of one year for deciding 
a candidates residency. The Commission during the meeting of the Committee held on the 11 th July, 2006 stated as 
under:— 
 “Section 20 deals with the meaning of ordinary resident. The definition of ordinarily resident has been 
debated in many legal forums and courts. The fact remains th at an all inclusive interpretation or definition has not 
been given so far. It is basically left to the judgem ent of the Electoral Registra tion Officer on the facts and 
circumstances of individual case. However, there are judicial pronouncements that act as a guiding principle in taking 
appropriate decision in the matter. 
 In this connection we have written to the Ministry also about multiple registration as well as getting 
themselves enrolled in their native places and in such a situation the Commission’s view is that if the proposed 
enrolment of the NRI is sought to be achieved through these means, then there would be immediate request or 
demand for a similar kind of accommodation to be provided for those people who migrated within the country and 
working in places other than the native place. That will create a lot of confusio n and will lead to a lot of electoral 
malpractices also. The Commission is of the view that the same objective can be achieved by making certain legal 
provisions in the law and making the NRIs eligible to be enrolled. It can be done by putting a clause in Section 19 of 
the same Act or it can be done by making some other appropri ate provision so that they can be directly enrolled. The 
Commission is not opposed to the idea of enrolling them as voters. But in the Commission, we would like to submit 
that while taking decision in this matter, it is likely to  have implications with regard to the resident Indians 
particularly those who are working outside or are migrating fr om one city to another or from one metropolitan city to 
another, that will certainly come to picture ........... .”  
15.11 In the circumstances the main issu e for treating Indians residing abroad as residents or non-residents lies in 
the definition of “ordinarily resident” (Sub-section 1A of Section 20 of Representation of the People Act, 1950). 
 In Union of India Vs. Dudhnath Prasad (AIR 2000 SC 525), it was held that the term “ordinarily resident” 
would mean that a person must have an intention to stay at that place for a considerable long time and does not mean 
to have a flying visit or a casual visit. 

15.12 Recently, there have been instances where the Election Commission of India removed from the electoral roll 
the names of persons against whom a Non-Bailable Warrants were pending implementation for six months 
considering that for most of the period of one year those person were not ordinarily resident. Section 14 (b) of 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 defines the qua lifying date for the preparation and revision of electoral roll 
to be the Ist day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised. 
15.13 In Lakshmi Charn Sen Vs. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman (AIR 1985 SC 1233), it has been held that the directions 
of the Election Commission is not a law. In this connection the Hon’ ble Supreme Court in A.C. Jose Vs. Sivan Pillai 
(AIR 1984 S.C. 921) had observed that the power of the Election Commission is subject to Acts passed by the 
Parliament and Rules made thereunder. Summing up the legal and constitutional position it observed the 
following:— 
 (a) when there is no Parliamentary legislation or ru le made under the said legislation, the commission is 
free to pass any order in respect of the conduct of election. 
 (b) where there is an Act and express Rules made ther eunder, it is not open to the Commission to override 
the Act or the Rules and pass orders in direct disobedience to the mandate contained in the Act or the 
Rules. In other words the powers of the Commission ar e meant to supplement rather than supplant the 
law (both statute and Rules) in the matter of superintendence, direction and control as provided by Art. 
324. 
 (c) where the Act or the Rules are silent, the Commission has no doubt plenary power under Art. 324 to 
give any direction in respect of the conduct of election, and 
 (d) where a particular direction by the Commission is submitted to the Government for approval, as 
required by the Rules, it is not open to the Commi ssion to go ahead with implementation of it at its 
own sweet will even if the approval, of the Government is not given. 
15.14 In Mohinder Singh Vs. Chief Election Commissioner (AIR 1978 SC 851), the Apex Court while construing 
Article 324 of the Constitution of India observed as under :- 
 “........ there are two limitations laid on the Election Commission’s plenary character in exercise of its power. 
Firstly, when Parliament or any State Legislature has made valid law relating to or in connection with elections, the 
Commission shall act in conformity with, not in violation of, such provisions but where such law is silent Article 324 
is a reservoir of power to act for the avowed purpose of, not divorced from, pushing forward a free and fair election 
with expedition. Secondly, the Commission shall be responsible to the rule of law, act bona fide and be amenable to 
the norms of natural justice in so far as  conformance to such canons can reasonably and realistically be required of it 
as fair play, in action, is a most important area of the Constitutional order, viz., elections laws.” 
15.15 In view of the above, it is ev ident that since the present laws have not defined the term “temporary absence” 
under Section 20 of 1950 Act, the Election Commission has drawn inferences by clubbing Sections 14(b) and 
21(2)(b) of 1950 Act which read as under:- 
 “14(b) ‘qualifying date’ in relation to the preparation or revision of every electoral roll under this part means 
the first day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised.” 
 “21(2) the said electoral roll 
 **  ** **  
 (b) shall be revised in any year in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date if such 
revision has been directed by the Election Commission.” 
 In view of the foregoing it is understood that the Elec tion Commission orders revision of the electoral rolls in 
January of every year so as to include the names of the eligible voters who atta in majority. But by content or intent, 
the law did not envisage to give scope for defining the term ‘ordinarily resident’ by splitting the period of stay in 
terms of ‘months’ of one year and thereby concluding that  if the Non-Bailable Warrants are pending implementation 
against a person for six months, that person is treated as ‘ not ordinarily resident’ for the purpose of removal of his 
name from the electoral roll. 
 This state of things exists due to the fact that neit her the term “ordinarily reside nt” nor the term “temporary 
absence” have been defined precisely under the existing laws therefore, it has been left to the total discretion of the 
Election Commission of India to decide about the ordinarily resident status of a person. As part of the practice and 

procedure, under the direction and instruction of the Election Commission it is the Electoral Registration officer who 
actually decides about both the issue as per his discretion. Thus, in the process of preparation and revision of rolls 
thousand of names are deleted without proper verifications of the facts or simply on account of counting of period of 
absence in term of the months in a year. 
En-Masse Deletion of Names from the Electoral rolls 
16.0 The Committee observes that the pr actice of the Election Commission to revise the rolls, taking into 
account the 1 st day of January of the year in which the revision is carried out, has caused a large number of 
electors names being deleted from the electoral rolls without any prior information. Most of the times, the 
electors come to know about this fact only when they go to vote. The Committee notes that this has been 
happening continuously for quite some time in spite of the clear provisions/direction existing with regard to 
the inclusion and deletion of names in the electoral rolls. 
 Section 22 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 provides:— 
 “22. Correction of entries in electoral rolls - If the electoral registration officer for a constituency, on 
application made to him or on his own motion, is satisfied af ter such inquiry as he thinks fit, that any entry in the 
electoral roll of the constituency:— 
 (a) is erroneous or defective in any particular, 
 (b) should be transposed to another place in the roll* on the ground that the person concerned has 
changed his place of ordinary residence within the constituency, or 
 (c) should be deleted on the ground that the person concerned is dead or has ceased to be ordinarily 
resident in the constituency or is otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll, 
the electoral registration officer shall, subject to such gene ral or special directions, if any, as may be given by the 
Election Commission in this behalf, amend, transpose or delete the entry:— 
 Provided that before taking any action on any ground under clause (a) or clause (b) or any action under 
clause (c) on the ground that the person concerned has ceased to be ordinarily resident in the constituency or that he 
is otherwise not entitled to be registered in the electoral roll of that constituency, th e electoral registration officer 
shall give the person concerned a reasonab le opportunity of being heard in respect of the action proposed to be taken 
in relation to him.” 
16.1 Further Section 21A of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 provides that:— 
 “21A.  Deletion of names. —If it appears to the electoral registrati on officer at any time before the final 
publication of the roll that owing to inadvertence or error or otherwise, the names of dead persons or of persons who 
have ceased to be, or are not, ordinarily residents in the constituency or of persons who are otherwise not entitled to 
be registered in that roll, have been included in the roll and that remedial action should be taken under this rule, the 
electoral registration officer, shall:— 
 (a) prepare a list of the names and other details of such electors;  
 (b) exhibit on the notice board of his office a copy of  the list together with a notice as to the time and 
place at which the  question of deletion of these names from the roll will be considered, and also 
publish the list and the notice in such other manner as he may think fit; and 
 (c) after considering any verbal or written objections that may be preferred, decide whether all or any of 
the names should be deleted from the roll: 
 Provided that before taking any action under this rule in respect of any person on the ground that he has 
ceased to be, or is not, ordinarily resi dent in the constituency, or is otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll, 
the registration officer shall make every endeavour to give him a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the 
action proposed should not be taken in relation to him.” 
16.2 Clearly, the provisions listed above provide for following a definite procedure before taking action for 
removal of names from the electoral rolls. It has been specifie d in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the 
Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 that in case a person’s  name is to be deleted from the electoral rolls, a notice of 
the action contemplated alongwith an opportunity of reasonable hearing is supposed to be given to the person. 

However, in actual practice, in spite of the directions and provisions existing, this proc edure is not followed and the 
names of the persons are deleted from the electoral rolls without any notice to the aggrieved person, suo-motu. There 
have been numerous instances, compla ints by the persons whose names have been deleted on account of “ordinarily 
resident requirement” arbitrarily. This, in fact, is a breach of the statutory provisions contained in the Act and the 
rules framed thereunder and an infringement of the constitutio nal right of the people. It is to be noted that neither the 
act nor the rules so framed have conferred unfettered po wers on the Election Commission to delete the names of the 
people from the electoral rolls as a matter of fact. The pr ovisions rather appear to be inclusive than exclusive i.e. the 
emphasis is on to include and retain the names of the electors  as far as possible rather than to exclude their names on 
one or the other ground. This fact is further fortified by  another provision under section 23 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950. The proviso to Section 23 stipulates that:- 
 “Provided that if the applicant is registered in the electoral roll of any other constituency, the electoral 
registration officer shall inform the electoral registration offi cer of that other constituency and that officer shall, on 
receipt of the information, strike off the applicant’s name from that roll.” 
16.3 Evidently, all the provisions indicate certain pre-requisites to be followed by the Electoral Registration 
Officers before striking off a person’s name from the electoral rolls. 
17. After taking into consideration the views/suggesti ons received from the interested persons and the 
proposed amendment to the Principal Act, the Committee finds it necessary to address the issues, that arise 
out of the proposed amendment, which have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs:— 
 (a)  Whether, the proposed amendment intends to place the NRIs at par with the resident Indians 
with regard to registration as a voter; 
 (b) Whether, the amendment as a necessary corollary to  the right to vote will make the NRIs eligible 
to contest the elections also with out any additional conditions/crite ria especially with regard to 
continued residence for a specified period, bein g imposed or without an y corresponding changes 
under Articles 84(C) and 173(C) of the Consti tution of India or other existing relevant 
provisions; 
 (c) What other allied/incidental rights will accrue to the NRIs in case they are allowed to register 
their names in the electoral rolls; 
 (d) How the claim of the resident Indi ans, whose names are struck off from the electoral rolls on the 
ground of not being ordinarily resident if they  migrate from their native place to some other 
place within the country for education/job, etc. will be satisfied; and 
 (e) What modalities have been envisaged for enabli ng the Non- Resident Indians to get themselves 
enrolled as voters; what shall be the mode of casting of vote by the NRIs. 
(A) The Status of Resident Citizens, Recognition and Protection of Civil Rights of the People 
 residing abroad.  
18.0 In the current era of globalization,  it is seen that the people of a country do go to other countries for education, 
employment or various other reasons. There has been a recent  trend world over that the countries, whose citizens are 
residing in other countries, have been acknowledging the existence of their citizens and coming forward to protect 
their interests in the country of their origin. In the process they have gone to the extent of protecting their social, 
economic, cultural and political rights. So me of the countries have granted dual citizenship to their citizens, some 
have recognised their voting rights and some have even given them the right to represent i.e. to contest elections in 
the country of their origin. The United States of America, United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, South 
Africa, Australia etc.  are the countries that have recognised political  rights of their citizens residing in other 
countries. However, they follow different practices in this regard and have imposed different conditions or laid down 
different criteria while allowing them the right to vote an d to contest elections in the country of their origin. The 
Government of India also in the year 2003 and thereafter in 2005, in order to recognize the rights of the Indian 
citizens living abroad, amended the Citizenship Act 1955 to grant dual citizenship to the Overseas Indians residing in 
16 specified countries. A number of other facilities includ ing fiscal concessions have been extended to the Indian 
nationals residing abroad. 

18.1 The Committee recognises the fact that the Indians living ab road take keen interest in the affairs of the 
country and are participating in the nation buildin g through various methods and are also helping in 
mobilization of the resources for the country. The Legi slative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, while 
elaborating on the need for conferring the voting Rights to the NRIs, stated as under:- 
 “The Indian citizens living in foreign countries are taking keen interest in the affairs of the 
country. Their interests in various development schemes including their contribution in the 
mobilization of resources is commendable. The estimated number of persons absent outside India due 
to employment is 5 million and the conferment of vo ting rights will boost their involvement in nation 
building.” 
18.2 However, the Committee feels that th e proposed amendment, in its present form, seeks to create a very 
valuable political right in favour of the people living abroad. This has got far reaching consequences and may 
create some problems for a conservativ e society like India. Duri ng, the course of the deliberations on the Bill, 
the Committee came across the apprehension of, not only  of the general public and other organisations but 
also of Hon’ble Members that such a right might create a privileged class of citizens vis-a-vis the resident 
citizens. As the Chairman of the Committee observed th at “there is a strong feeling from certain sections 
saying that if you allow a person, who is all along living  in a foreign country and coming here only at the time 
of election to vote, may create some  disturbance in the environment of el ections”. Although, a citizen has been 
defined constitutionally and other categories of citizens  in the Citizenship Act, 1955, the term NRI is not 
statutorily/legally defined anywhere and is understood in common  parlance. Though, the term Non-resident 
Indians has been referred to in the Income Tax Act, 1961 but only for the purposes of giving tax exemptions to 
them. Section 5 clause (6) of the said Act defines the term “not ordinarily resident” as under:- 
“an individual who has been a non-resident in India in nine out of the ten previous years 
preceding that year, or has during the seven previo us years preceding that year been in India for a 
period of, or periods amounting in all to, seven hun dred and twenty-nine days or less; or (b) a Hindu 
undivided family whose manager has been a non-resi dent in India in nine out of the ten previous 
years preceding that year, or has du ring the seven previous years prec eding that year been in India 
for a period of, or periods amounting in all to, seven hundred and twenty-nine days or less.” 
However, the Committee opined fo r giving exemption which is of the political nature the term NRI 
needs to be defined precisely. 
18.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that the G overnment has amended the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 frequently  uptill now and all the amendments were  necessitated by various circumstances. 
However in order to bring about an amendment as important as the Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Bill, 2006, it would have been more appropriate if its implications were comprehended 
beforehand. The Committee notes that Section 20 of th e Representation of the People Act, 1950 already 
contains a number of exemptions to the term “ordinarily resident”. The Chairman of the Committee observed 
on the issue as under:— 
“I feel that we have to go through the entire  exemptions which you have given. About seven 
exemptions were given in section 20. If one amen dment can satisfy all other exemptions, why don’t 
you bring a simple amendment by which you can carry out all the seven exemptions. Instead of 
increasing the number of exemptions and making  the law complicated, you can make a simple 
amendment which can take care of the entire situatio n. This is one of the legal reforms we would like 
to suggest.” 
 It would have been more appropriate if all the exempt ions were provided at a single place in a single 
exemption clause. 
18.4 Further, the Committee feels that the wording of the proposed amen dment Bill would sound better in 
the following words:- 
“A citizen of India, who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country, shall be deemed to 
be resident in India in any constituency of his choice notwithstanding his residence outside India 
whatever its duration.” 

18.5 Another Hon’ble Member observed if the proposed amendment clause is read along with the preceding sub-
section of section 20 i.e. 20(1 A) then, the proposed amendment clause appears to be anomalous to the previous sub-
section as it appears to be a rider on the provisions of s ub-section 20(1A) which itself stipulates temporary absence. 
The proposed clause is seeking to create a class of citi zens amongst the temporarily absenting class itself without 
defining the term “temporarily absent” and by implication conveying that temporary absence can be of any duration. 
18.6 The members of the Committee were of the view th at the amendment appears to be creating a separate 
category of citizens rather than conferring voting rights to the Indian national residing abroad. 
(B) Question of Contesting Elections by the NRIs  
18.7 During, the discussions, the ques tion that came to be debated most, was the question of the NRIs 
contesting elections once being registered as a voter. The Members were of the opinion that the present Bill 
being a simple amendment would allow the NRI of any category to become an elector and in turn be eligible to 
contest elections for different posts in the legislat ures. The words and phrases used in the amendment 
“otherwise” and “temporarily or not” were thought to be subject to wide interpretation enabling any NRI to 
have recourse to this route and automatically contest elections  for any post in any legislature as under the 
existing constitutional and other provisions, a mere  registration of NRI as an elector will make him 
automatically eligible to contest elections unless some cr iteria is laid down in their case by Parliament. The 
Committee notes that there are certain offices specific ally mentioned in the constitution to which certain 
people are not entitled to contest viz  post of the President, the Vice-President etc. Members observed that once 
the right to vote was granted, the NRI would automatically become entitled to the right to contest elections. 
Some of Members even made a distinction between the ri ght to vote and the right to represent the people. The 
apprehensions of Members were not unfounded as the Chairman of the Committee observed that “allowing a 
person, who has been living in a foreign country for long , to come back and contest elections might lead to a 
situation where he is free to contest fo r the office of President or Vice Pres ident of India. This can lead to an 
extreme situation also and the other offices may become  open for contest for which we need to find an 
answer”. The Committee desired the Ministry to take a stand on this particular issue and lay down some 
additional qualifications for contesting certain offi ces so that the extreme contingencies in future were 
prevented. The Committee further noted the fact that th e Citizenship Act, 1955 as amended in the years 2003 
and 2005, has placed certain restrictions on the rights of the overseas Indians while  granting dual Citizenship 
to them. Section 7B(2) of the Citizensh ip Act, 1955 enumerates the rights to which an Overseas Indian citizen 
is entitled to. The section specifically excludes the rights  under Articles 58, 66, 124 of the Constitution, section 
16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and sections 3, 4, 5, 5A and 6, of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951. The above provisions clearly stipulate th at an Overseas Indian citi zen is not eligible for the 
posts of the President, Vice President,  Judge of the Supreme Court and the High Courts and further he is not 
eligible to be registered as a voter or being a Member of  the House of the people or the Council of States or be 
a Member of the Legislative Assembly  or a Legislative Council. The Ci tizenship (Amendment) Acts of 2003 
and 2005 specifically stated the rights of the overseas Indians and also the rights to which they shall not be 
entitled. The Representation of the Pe ople (Amendment) Bill, 2006 however does not appear to be specific in 
content even though it is specific in intent. 
(C) The Question of incidental/allied rights accruing to the Non-Resident Indians  
18.8 The Committee during the course of its deliberations on the Bill received divergent views form the people on 
the question of incidental/allied rights accruing to the Non-Resident Indian once they are allowed the right to vote. 
There cannot be any doubt that the Non-Resident Indians are one category of the people who are upwardly mobile in 
terms of financial and social strength. Even though, th e Ministry of law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
categorically stated in their reply to the questionnaire on the subject that the proposed amending clause is intended to 
remove the disability arising on account of  the requirement of ordinary residenc e so as to enable the Non-Resident 
Indians to get their names registered in the electoral rolls, the fact remains that the people in general are apprehensive 
of the social, financial and political influence of the Non- Resident Indians especially, the use of money power in the 
elections. As observed by the Chairman of the Committee that “so, you can see that in a particular territory, a voter 
can change the representative character of an individual or a territory, where lakhs of people are living. As a result of 
this provision, the choice of the territori al voters prevailed over the choice of the lakhs of permanent residents. So, a 

person sitting in Japan can change the fate of a partic ular constituency. A person wh o is living here with his 
electorate will not be elected but a person who is not living here will be elected”. 
(D) The problem of removal of names of the resident Indians in cases of migration within the 
 country  
18.9 Under the provisions of the Representation of the Peopl e Act, 1950 and the Registration of the Electors Rules, 
1960, a person has to be registered as a voter in the electoral rolls at one place only i.e. at the place of his ordinary 
residence. In this system th e citizens, who migrate from one place to anot her place, face difficulty in retaining their 
names in the electoral rolls of their nati ve place. There have been persistent complaints/instances of removal of the 
names from the electoral rolls in large numbers at the tim e of revision of the rolls without any intimation to the 
people concerned on the ground of non-residency. This is done on the basis of the physical verification only. In such 
a scenario, the public perception that such a right, if granted, to the NRIs  will amount to discrimination against those 
citizens who are resident of one State but have migrated from one place to another place for education, employment 
or otherwise, cannot be ignored. Even, though the Regist ration of Electors Rules, 1960 provides for a notice and a 
reasonable opportunity to be heard, before a person’s name is deleted, but in actual practice, it is not followed and 
their names are deleted suo-motu. This situation places the resident Indians to disadvantageous position. 
18.10 The Committee feels that when the provisions are there to be followed before deleting a person’s name, 
it should be strictly adhered to in order to obviate even a single instance  of surprise deletion. The Committee 
feels concerned that from almost all the quarters the complaints of deletion of names were continuously 
coming. The Committee feels that a person’s name should not be deleted from the electoral rolls till the time it 
is ensured that his name appears in some other place. This could be done under the existing provisions itself as 
the proviso to section 22 and 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 clearly stipulate a mandatory 
responsibility on the part of the Elect oral Registration Officer to take pre-cautionary action before deleting a 
name from the electoral rolls. The prov iso to Section 21A of the Registrati on of Electors Rules, 1960 dealing 
with deletion of names also envisage the same responsibility on the part of  the Electoral Registration Officer. 
Thus, the onus is on the of ficer to ensure that an eligible person’s name is included and retained in the 
electoral rolls and even if his name is to be deleted, it should be after proper verification of the facts and not in 
a casual manner. 
(E) Modalities for enrolment and the mode of voting by the NRIs  
18.11 Once an NRI is allowed to get his name registered in the electoral rolls the issues relating to the procedure to 
be followed in registering an NRI’s name in the electoral rolls and the manner in which an NRI would be facilitated 
to vote would necessarily arise. The Committee notes that  as per the present practice  followed by the Election 
Commission, in registering the names of the voters in th e electoral rolls, the enumerators go door to door for the 
purpose, take down the details of the people living in a particular area and then an electoral roll is prepared. This is 
the normal procedure followed in respect of the resident In dians. For the NRIs, evidently, a different procedure is to 
be followed. The Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative Department, in their reply on the issue, informed the 
Committee as under:- 
“It is proposed to insist for the passport and the perm anent address in India show n in the passport as the 
condition to identify the constituency where the person concerned could get himself enrolled in the voter’s 
list.” 
18.12 Another issue that received consideration of the Committee at length was the issue relating to the mode of 
casting of votes by the NRIs. The proposed amendment Bill in its present form envisaged the physical presence of an 
NRI, at the time of voting, in Indi a. The Committee feels that such a cond ition would only lead to a minimum 
number of votes being cast by the NRIs. On this matter, the Ministry of External Affairs were requested by the 
Committee to inform it of the existing practices followed by  different nations with regard to voting rights and 
contesting elections by their overseas nationa ls. As per the information made available (Annexure-G) to the 
Committee - Australia, Canada, Germany, Italy, France, UK and USA allow their overseas nationals to cast their 
votes through postal ballot or through their Embassies/Consu lates. A Kuwaiti national can vote but has to come to 
Kuwait for voting. South African overseas citizens may not be  able to vote if they are availing work permit or have 
emigrated. As regards contesting in elections, oversea s nationals of USA, UK, , Kuwait, Australia, Canada, 
Germany, Italy and France can contest elections. Italian ov erseas nationals have separate seats earmarked for them 

formed in four Districts viz. (a) Europe (b) South America (c) North a nd Central America and (d) Africa, Asia, 
Oceania and Antarctica. Bangladesh and South African overseas national cannot contest elections. 
 The Committee would like the Mini stry to explore various modes/opti ons available in order to achieve 
the purpose for which the Bill is intended i.e. enabling the NRIs to participate in the democratic process of the 
country in a meaningful manner. 
18.13 In the light of the facts mentioned in the preceding paras, the Committee observes that it agrees with the 
letter and spirit of the amendment. 
“However, as listed in the foregoing paragraphs, there are certain ambiguities that need to be 
addressed. Section 20 of the Representation of th e People Act, 1950 contai ns seven exemptions. The 
Committee feels that instead of amending the Ac t repeatedly and making the provision ambiguous 
and complicated, it would be more appropriate if  a comprehensive amendment is brought about in 
the Act containing all the exemptions. The Committee would like the Ministry to take note of the 
following observation of the Chairman of the Comm ittee “section 20 stipulates one condition, ‘where 
a person ordinarily resident...’; this need not be th ere. It says, ‘a person absenting himself from his 
place of ordinary residence owing to his employment , education, or otherwise, outside India’ - we 
may include ‘outside the State’ along with ‘outside India’ - ‘whether temporarily or not, shall not, by 
reason thereof, cease to be ordinarily resident in Indi a.’ That definition is suff icient to look after all 
the exemptions, which were given in the other respective clauses.” 
18.14 Under the existing provisions there are already four categories of citizens who have been exempted from 
the requirement of ordinary residence. They include (i) the armed forces (ii)  the para military forces (iii) the 
armed police forces serving outside and (iv) the officials posted in the foreign missions. Now, through the 
proposed amendment another category viz. the Non Resident Indians is sought  to be added to the category of 
exemptions. The Committee is of the considered opinion that  instead of adding on to the list of exemptions it 
would be appropriate that  the terms “ordinarily resident” and “temporary absence” are defined 
appropriately and comprehensively. Further, the ambiguity regarding the mode of casting of votes needs to be 
resolved and made uniform in case of all the exempted categori es. Presently, the armed forces and the 
paramilitary forces have been granted proxy voting wh ereas the forces deployed outside the States and the 
officials deployed in the foreign missions have been given postal ballot voting. For the Non-Resident Indians it 
has been proposed that they have to be physically present in their constituency to be able to vote. 
19. In view of the above, the Committe e recommends for a comprehensive Bi ll on the subject containing all 
the details regarding the manner of enrolment of the Non-Resident Indians, the mode of voting and the 
conditionalities for contesting elections. 
20. The Committee further invites Ministry’s attention to the issue of mass deletion of the names of the 
resident Indian’s from the electoral rolls solely on the basis of physical verification of the persons and calls for 
immediate corrective and remedial steps in the light of the provisos to sections 22 and 23 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950 and under section 21A of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960. 
21. Finally the Committee proceeds to adop t the clauses of the Bill as under :- 
Clause 2 
 21A. Clause 2 of the Bill was adopted subject to the recommendations made thereon in foregoing 
paras of this Report. 
 21B. Clause 1, the enacting formula and title of the Bill were adopted without suggesting any 
amendments. 
 

 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONAL PUBLIC  
GRIEVANCES LAW AND OUTSIDE  
 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 5 th  June, 2006, in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 4. Dr. P. C. Alexander 
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK SABHA  
 6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 7. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar 
 8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
 10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 12. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Si ngh, Joint Secretary  
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  (i)  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)  
   1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
   2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
   3. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary 
  (ii)  Representatives of Ministry of Pe rsonnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
   1. Shri Pratyush Sinha, Secretary 
   2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
   3. Shri Budh Prakash, Director 
  (iii)  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)  
   1. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
   2. Shri Ishwar Sharma, Assistant Legislative Counsel. 
2. The Committee first heard a presentation by the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law and Justice on the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006, as introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha and referred to the Committee for examination and report. The Secretary (Legislative 
Department) while, briefly explaining the background lead ing to the introduction of the Bill, deposed upon the 
constitutional, legal and administrative issues that are likely to arise as a result of the introduction of the Bill. He also 
replied to the queries raised by Members. 

3.  * * * 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.15 P.M. to meet again on the 14 th June, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
Relates to other matters. 
 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11 th July, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 4. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
  LOK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 7. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
 8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  (i)  Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs  
   1. Shri Sharat Sabharwal, Additional Secretary 
   2. Shri Yogesh Kumar, Joint Secretary 
   3. Shri R. R. Dash, Joint Secretary 
  (ii) Representatives of Ministry  of Overseas Indian Affairs 
   1. Shri Nirmal Singh, Secretary 
   2. Shri Malay Mishra, Joint Secretary 
  (iii) Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs  
   1. Shri V. K. Duggal, Secretary 
   2. Dr. P. K. Seth, Joint Secretary 
  (iv) Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department)  
   1. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
   2. Shri R. C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary 
  (v) Representatives of World Bank (Delhi Office)  
   1. Shri Kapil Kapoor, Sector Manager 
   2. Shri Dipak Dasgupta, Lead Economist 
   3. Shri Vikram K. Chand, Sr. Public Sector Management Specialist 
  (vi) Representative of Ministiy of Parliamentary Affairs  
   1. Shri P. Gopalakrishnan, Joint Secretary 
  (vii) Representative of Election Commission of India  
   1. Shri K.F. Wilfred, Secretary 
  (viii) Representatives of Indian Law Institute  
   1. Prof. S. Sivakumar, Research Professor 
   2. Shri P. Puneeth, A ssistant Research Professor. 
2. Initiating the discussions on the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006, the Chairman of the 
Committee briefly addressed the issues that might arise as a consequence of the introduction of the Bill leading to 

disturbance in the election environment in India. The Chairman expressed the apprehension of the Members and of 
the people in general, that allowing the right to vote to those who have been living in a foreign country all along 
earning money for that country instead of for India but holding Indian passports, might negatively influence the 
society and the country’s election environment. 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of External Affair s explained the background leading to the introduction of 
the Bill and also informed the Committee that the Ministry  has collected information on this issue about the other 
countries who had granted this right to their nationals residing in other countries. He elaborated on the examples of 
the United States, United Kingdom, France, Canada, Austra lia and Itlay alongwith the practices followed by them. 
He further stated that his Ministry was in favour of enabling the NRIs to be entitled to vote but the modalities in this 
regard needed to be arranged carefu lly. The Secretary, Ministry of Overse as Indian Affairs also apprised the 
Committee of his Ministry’s view on the issue and stated th at there were a large number of NRIs who should not be 
denied this opportunity. Therefore, his Ministry considered it  as a good initiative. He furt her clarified that at present 
it was a good idea to ask the NRIs to be physically present,  at the time of the elections, to cast their votes. The 
Members of the Committee while agreeing with the letter and spirit of the Bill voiced their concern about the right to 
contest elections, particularly to the of fices under the Constitution of India without any further qualifications being 
imposed. The Members were apprehensive that this could amount to throwing the gates wide open for anyone to 
contest for the highest posts in the co untry. The Members desired constitutional safeguard against such a situation 
and desired the Ministry of Law and Justice to take a specif ic stand on the issue. The Secretary, Home Affairs, while 
clarifying that his Ministry was also in favour of the amendment, stated that there were different Acts which govern 
election to different political offices. However, the Members desired the Ministries to be specific on the point of 
contesting elections and also regarding the mode of facilitating voting by the NRIs. 
4. * * * 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. to meet again on 12 th July, 2006 for further discussions on the 
Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
Relates to other matters. 
 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committe e on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 12 th July, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 3. Shri Krishan Lai Balmiki 
 4. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
  L OK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 7. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 8. Shri Harin Pathak 
 9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  (i)  Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)  
   l. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
   2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
   3. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary 
   4. Shri R. Sreenivas, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
  (ii) Representatives of the Election Commission of India  
   1. Shri R. Balakrishnan, Deputy Election Commissioner 
   2. Shri K.F. Wilfred, Secretary 
  (iii) Representatives of the Mi nistry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
   1. Shri Alok Tandon, Director 
   2. Shri Prabhakaran, Under Secretary 
  (iv) Representative of the Central Admi nistrative Tribunal Bar Association 
   Shri A.K. Behera, President 
  (v) Representative of the Central Secretar iat Services Section Officers Association 
   Shri D.N. Sahoo, Convenor and General Secretary 
2. The Chairman request ed the representative of the Elect ion Commission of India for  a 
presentation  on  the  Representation  of th e  People (Amendment) Bill,  2006. Thereafter, the 
representative put forth the views of the Election Commission, stating that if the proposed enrolment of the 
NRI was allowed through the amendment, then there would be immediate request or demand for a 
similar kind of accommodation for those people who migrate within the country and work in places 
other than their native place. He informed the Co mmittee that the Commission was of the view that the 
enrolment of NRI could be achieved by making certa in legal provisions in the law or by putting a 
clause in Section 19 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 or by providing for their direct 
enrollment. He further clarified that the right to vote could not be seen in isolation and the modalities for 
facilitating that right needed to be specified. 

3. During the deliberations, one of the Hon’ ble Members pointed out that the phrasing of the 
proposed amendment was not specific and suggested a rephrasing of the amendment clause. The Members again 
desired to know the manner in which the NRIs would be able to cast their votes thr ough postal ballot 
or by proxy or by being physically present at the time of election. The Representative of the 
Election Commission observed that by asking them to be physically present the number of people coming all 
over India for casting their votes would be minimal. He further stated that providing for postal votes would be creating logistic 
problems because that required completion of process within 14 days. In his opinion proxy and online voting were 
the best options available. The Chairm an of the Committee observed that in a scenario where 100 votes or even 2 
votes could change the entire election fortunes of a particular candidate, proxy voting might not be acceptable to the 
citizens. The Representative of the Ministry of Law and Ju stice categorically stated that the views of the Election 
Commission on the proxy voting could not be subscribed to. Members of the Committee specifically desired to know from the 
M i n i s t r y  o f  L a w  a n d  J u s t i c e  w h e t h e r  a  p e r s o n  h o l d i n g  a  d u a l  c i t i z e n s h i p  would be entitled to vote. The Representative 
clarified that the amendment was meant for a citizen of I ndia only, and a person holdin g dual citizenship was not 
entitled to be registered as a voter. 
4. Thereafter,   the   Committee   took   up   the   clause   by   clause consideration of the Bill. The Chairman of the 
Committee observed that section 20  of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 already contained a 
number of exemptions which made the law complicated and as such suggested a comprehensive exemption clause to 
take care of all the intended exemptions. 
5. * * * 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7. The Committee adjourned at 12.57 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
Relates to other matters. 
 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26 th July, 2006, in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 4. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
  LOK SABHA  
 6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 7. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 9. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 10. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 11. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 12. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Si ngh, Joint Secretary  
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  (i)  Representative of Minist ry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)  
   Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary 
  (ii) Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)  
   1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
   2 .  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
   3. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary 
  (iii) Representatives of the Election Commission of India  
   1. Shri S.K. Mendiratta, Legal Adviser 
   2. Shri K.F. Wilfred, Secretary 
2. The Committee took up further disc ussions on the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The 
Committee desired the Secretaries, Department of Legal Affa irs and the Legislative Department to consider the draft 
suggested by one of the Hon’ble Members, in place of th e proposed amendment. The Committee further desired to 
know from the Election Commission the basis by which the names of quite a large number of people were being 
deleted from the electoral rolls without proper verification of the facts and without due recourse to the requirement of 
notice as envisaged under sections 22 and 21A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Registration of 
Electors Rules, 1960 respectively. 
3. The Representatives of the Electio n Commission clarified that every end eavour was made to ensure that the 
names were not deleted without notice. However, the Me mbers of the Committee unanimously pointed out to the 
irregularities occurring on this issue and persistent compla ints of deletion of names coming from the electorate. The 
Members desired the Election Commission to take corrective steps to facilitate the inclusion of names in the electoral 
rolls without any difficulty to the electors. 

4. Thereafter, one of the Hon’ble Member on the issue of contesting elections by the NRI suggested that there had 
to be a non-obstante provision clarifying that all those falling under sub-section (1AA) could be elector but could not 
contest. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee adjourned at 4.50 P.M. 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2 nd  August, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 5. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
  LOK SABHA  
 6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 7. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 11. Shri Harin Pathak 
 12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 13. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Si ngh, Joint Secretary  
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
(i) * *  *  
(ii) * *  *  
2. *  * * 
3. *  * * 
4 .  * * *  
5 .  * * * 
6. The Committee then considered the draft Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justi ce on the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 
2006 and unanimously adopted the same and authorised Dr. Radhakant Nayak and in his absence, Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki, 
Members of Parliament to present the Report in Rajya Sabh a. It also authorised Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his 
absence, Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq, Members of Parliament to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The meeting adjourned at 3.55 
P.M. 
 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-A 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON 27th February, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bill No. XV of 2006
 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2006 
A 
BILL  
further to amend the Representation of the people Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:— 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Act, 2006. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
     (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
 2. In section 20 of the Represen tation of the People Act., 1950 
after sub-section (1A),  the following sub-section. shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
Amendment of 
section 20 of Act  
43 of 1950. 
 “(1AA) A person absenting himself from, his place of ordinary’ 
residence owing to his employment, education, or otherwise, outside 
India, whether temporarily or not, shall not by reason thereof, cease 
to be ordinarily resident in India.”. 
 
  

 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 Section 19 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 provides that 
every person who is not less than eighteen years of age on the qualifying date 
and is ordinarily resident in a constituen cy shall be entitled to be registered in 
the electoral rolls for that constituency . The meaning of “ordinary resident” is 
laid down in section 20 of the said Act. At present, a person who is absenting 
from his place of ordinary residence by reason of his employment, education or 
otherwise outside India is not qualified to get his name registered in the 
electoral rolls and thus cast his vote in elections to the Parliament and to the 
State Legislatures. 
2. There are a large number of citizens of India residing outside India due to 
their employment, education, etc. They have been persistently demanding for 
conferring them voting rights. Though the issue of conferring voting rights to 
the citizens of the absenting from their place of ordinary residence in India 
owing to their employment, education or otherwise outside India has been 
receiving the attention of the Government for quite some time, yet the same 
could not be acceded to owing to the practic al difficulties in enrolling them in 
the electoral rolls of the concerned constituency and allowing them to cast their 
votes outside India within the short sp an of time available in the election 
process. 
3. It is noted that the right to vote as demanded by the non-resident Indians 
is their legitimate right. Conferring such right will enable them to participate in 
the democratic process of elections in their motherland and will also boost their 
involvement in the nation building. The Government have considered all 
aspects of the demand and it has been decided to enable the Indian citizens 
absenting from their place of ordinary residence in India owing to their 
employment, education or otherwise outside India to get their names registered 
in the electoral rolls of the concerned constituency of their place of ordinary 
residence in India hade they been in India so that they would be in a position to 
cast their votes in elections to the Lok Sabha and to the State Legislatures in 
case they happen to be in their constitu ency at the time of polls. They may also 
be able to contest the elections. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend section 20 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 
NEW DELHI;  H.R. BHARDWAJ 
The 17th February, 2006 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-B 
COMMENTS OF THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE ON THE 
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM VARIOUS INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS 
Sl. Name of Organisation/ Comments/ Suggestions Response of Government 
No. Individual   
1. Dr. Haridas Karmakar 
(Memorandum No. 1) 
He has supported the amendment. No 
new suggestion has been given. 
No comments are required. 
2. Shri Ashok Jay Parmar 
Dhabad, Bhawat, 
Gujarat 
 (Memorandum No.2) 
(a) Journey expenditure to be borne by 
Government. 
(a) The law does not provide for 
reimbursement of the Journey 
expenditure incurred by the 
voter in connection with casting 
of his vote. The Government 
does not have any proposal to 
bear such expenditure. 
  (b) With the addition of the names of 
NRIs in the voting list they will get 
the right to vote in different 
elections which take place at short 
intervals. It is doubtful whether a 
NRI will be allowed to visit India 
second time within a period of two 
years. If he can not come again in 
the constituency for voting, the 
addition of names of NRIs will 
only increase the number of 
electors and serve no other 
purpose. 
(b) The proposal is to provide an 
enabling provision in the law so 
that a citizen of India living 
abroad in case he happens to be 
in India will have the 
opportunity to cast his vote. 
  (c) By giving such right to NRI the 
peaceful relation between the two 
countries may not be disturbed. 
(d) Such decision may not disturb the 
existing agreements already signed 
between the two countries. 
(c) and (d) This is only an 
apprehension. Hence, no 
comments are required. There 
could be no agreement, which 
will be against conferring 
voting rights to Indian citizens 
by Parliamentary legislation. 
  (e) Such voting right being given to 
NRIs may not be objected to by a 
country where the NRIs staying. 
(e) The question of any country 
objecting grant of voting rights 
to Indian citizens by India by 
law does not arise. 
  (f) Such NRIs whose names are being 
included in the list should follow 
the provisions of Indian 
Constitution properly and they 
should support unity. 
(f) The fundamental duties of 
every citizen of India include a 
duty to abide by the 
Constitution of India. 
  (g) There may not be disturbance 
because of casteaism and religion. 
These aspects should be examined 
at a suitable level. 
(g) There does not seem to be any 
reason for such view. 
  (h) The NRIs whose names are being (h) Whatever provisions of law are 

added in the voting lists should not 
be a member of any particular 
group and he should not have been 
punished under law of that country. 
applicable to the resident 
Indians would be equally 
applicable to the citizens of 
India living abroad also. 
  (i) Such NRI if elected will not be 
able give sufficient time in the 
service of the nation because at the 
time of election he will be in India 
and after that he will go to outside 
country and stay there. The 
responsibility of this situation will 
be of the Government, which is 
providing such right. 
(i) A Member of Parliament or of 
a State Legislature who remains 
absent without leave for more 
than a particular period may 
lose his membership. 
3. Shri Ram Prasad 
Bhawal and Shyam 
Sunder Agrawal, 
Kondi, Chhattisgarh 
(Memorandum No. 3) 
The proposal will create inferiority 
complex and hate in the resident 
Indians. The new Act will help the 
terrorism to easily enter in India 
through politics. It is feared that a new 
community will come up. In case the 
NRI contests elections the resident 
Indian will not have full information 
about him. It is also  feared that if NRI 
is elected he can pass on the secret 
information to the other countries 
easily. Economic offences may 
increase and money power will be 
misused. Corruption may enter in the 
conduct of fair elections. 
The proposal of the Government is 
to give right of participation in the 
election process by the citizens of 
India living abroad. After getting his 
name included in the electoral rolls, 
he can contest elections if he is, 
otherwise qualified under the law. 
4. ili@ilidelhi.org
 Delhi 
(Memorandum No. 4) 
We are of the unanimous view that 
such people should be given only the 
right to vote but not to contest 
elections. Allowing such people to 
contest elections may have far reaching 
consequences of creating ‘non-resident 
representatives’ 
After addition of name in the voting 
roll, the Indian citizen residing 
outside can cast his/her vote and 
also contest the election if he/she is 
otherwise eligible. 
 Shri Rahul Agrawal, 
69-A, Udit Mahanagar, 
Pilivith Bypass Marg, 
Bareli, Uttar Pradesh. 
(Memorandum No. 5) 
The persons who have left their mother 
country because of money should not 
be given such facility. The highly 
educated people get education in India 
and after getting the education they go 
to the foreign country for service and 
help that country in development. 
Further, an NRI will not be able to vote 
to the best candidate since he will not 
been having complete information 
about all the contesting candidates. 
This will increase the danger of the 
non-deserving candidate being elected. 
In addition, to it ha s been feared that 
terrorism may increase. The terrorist 
groups may put their persons for 
contesting the elections. In this way the 
The right of a citizen of India to 
vote is a political democratic right 
and the elector has a right to choose 
amongst the contesting candidate as 
per his conscious and judgment 

enemies of the country will become the 
policy makers. 
  The life partner of foreign nationality 
of those NRIs who have got married 
will also get enrolled in the electoral 
rolls. This is wrong. It will be 
beneficial that this facility may be 
extended to the NRIs who intend to 
settle in India. 
The names of the spouse of the 
citizens of India living abroad will 
be allowed to be added in the 
electoral rolls only if such spouse is 
a citizen of India. 
6. Prof. U.H. Koppar 
GHARKUL,  
Mumbai-Goa Road, 
Shivaji Nagar,  
Chiplun-415605. 
(Memorandum No. 6) 
Since the NRI is not paying tax to the 
Indian Government they should not be 
allowed to vote. Some of them may 
also have got voting right in the 
country of their residence. 
Income-tax is assessed for an 
assessee as per Income Tax Act, 
1961. The citizens of India living a 
broad will exercise their voting right 
as per provisions of the Constitution 
of India and the election law. 
7. Shri V.J. George,  
3/B-804, Blue Galaxy, 
C. S. Road, Dahissar 
(East), Mumbai-400068. 
(Memorandum No. 7) 
This futile action may jeopardize the 
purpose of nation building for the 
simple reason that the so-called non-
resident Indians are not aware of the 
political climate of Indian States. 
The proposal is to involve the 
citizens of India living abroad to 
contribute in the process of nation 
building. 
8. Shri Anupam Sonawane, 
IV-23-135, RCF Colony, 
Chembur, Mumbai - 
400070. 
 (Memorandum No. 8) 
Any Act which will give right to vote 
to the overseas citizens of India will be 
unconstitutional and the basic purpose 
for which Dual citizen has been granted 
to these citizens which was projected at 
the time of amending the Citizenship 
Act, 2003 and the statements made in 
the House of Parliament will be 
nothing but a farce and will amount to 
mislead the entire nation thus a breach 
of trust and unconstitutional. 
Indian citizens who are living 
abroad only will be given voting 
rights under the proposed 
legislation. Constitution of India 
does not recognize dual citizenship 
to Indian citizens. 
9. Shri Ram Das,  
9/112, Indira Nagar, 
Lucknow, U.P. 
(Memorandum No. 9) 
If we see provisions of section 20(7), 
section 21 and section 22, that living 
outside India does not mean that a 
person is disqualified for being elector 
in any Assembly or Parliamentary 
Constituency of India. At the time of 
revision of electoral rolls, the name of 
persons who absent continuously for 6 
months from their place of residence 
whether they live outside India or 
within India their name is deleted from 
the respective electora l rolls. Therefore 
the proposed amendment does not 
sound logical and is against the 
principle of equality before law. 
The names of Indians residing 
outside India are not registered in 
the electoral rolls for the reason that 
at present the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 stipulates the 
requirement of residence in India for 
registration as voters. Once this 
restriction is removed by the 
proposed amendment, their names 
could be got registered in the 
electoral rolls of the concerned 
constituency. 
  If the NRIs are given such legal 
privilege the Resident Indians should 
also be given the same privilege i.e. 
that if Resident Indians move out from 
The resident Indians have the right 
to get themselves enrolled at the 
place of their ordinary residence 
which can be only one place. The 

their ordinary residence temporarily or 
permanently to other places in India to 
seek employment or for other reasons 
their name should not be struck off 
from the electoral rolls. 
law does not allow to have the 
names enrolled in two different 
places at a time. The resident 
Indians can get their names changed 
from one constituency to another as 
their place of ordinary residence. 
  The people of Indian Diaspora 
estimated to be 20 million are rich 
people and if they are allowed right to 
vote and contest elections in India then 
Indian Parliament and State Assemblies 
will be NRI M.P./M.L.A. controlled 
and their presence will effect framing 
of laws in favour of rich people, horse- 
trading, political defe ctions, change of 
governments and frequent elections. 
At this stage, the assumption seems 
to be speculative. 
  We may say that additional safeguards 
may be created but the existing 
safeguards do not work. The S-20(2) of 
R.P. Act, 1950 does not recognize the 
jailed persons and persons in legal 
custody to be the jailed persons and 
persons in legal custody to be ordinary 
residents yet these detenues contest 
elections for which Patna High Court 
objected and matter went to Supreme 
Court where it is still pending for final 
decision. The Election Commission of 
India and Returning Officers allow 
such people to contest elections. Thus 
safeguards are not respected by the 
election authorities. 
The citizens of India living abroad 
will be allowed to contest election 
only if they are eligible to contest. 
The only proposal is to remove the 
discrimination meted out to the 
citizens of India solely on the 
ground of place of residence. 
  Knowing that this provision is just like 
opening Khayber Pass through which 
more bad people will come than good 
people, we are going to undermine the 
political authority of India and it may 
boost the morale of extremist of 
different categories. 
Do not agree. 
10. Shri K. Krishna Daja, 
Neduman Gad 
(Memorandum No. 10) 
In case the law of the foreign country 
does not allow the NRI to come to 
exercising the voting right a critical 
study in this cause of them is essential. 
 
11. Shri D.N. Bhutt, 
(Memorandum No. 11) 
It will affect the sovereignty of India. 
Foreign country through NRI can 
interfere in Ruling of Indian 
Government. 
It is not correct to say that if Indian 
citizen living abroad is conferred 
voting rights it would affect our 
sovereignty. The elected person will 
work as per the provisions of the 
Constitution. 
  Moreover when Indian Citizens accept 
the citizenship of other country their 
The name of the citizens of India 
living outside India will be included 

Indian citizenship will end as per 
Constitution. This will also require 
modification and there will be list of 
dual citizenship. 
in the voters list in India only if he 
continues to be citizen of India and 
fulfils other requirements as per 
law. 
12. Shri Rajinder Gupta,  
31-C, Reshma, Off. 
J.P. Road, 7-bunglows, 
Versova, Mumbai- 
400061. 
(Memorandum No. 12 
and 15) 
The purpose of contesting elections is 
to be accessible and serve the people, 
who will vote for them, participate in 
house proceedings, etc. but not to 
virtually run away after winning. 
These are only presumptions. Every 
elected candidate whether NRI or 
permanent resident is required to 
work for, his electorate and the 
country. The electe d candidate will 
certainly try to maintain his winning 
spree by working hard for the 
people. He has to attend the 
legislatures and in case he remains 
absent from the proceedings of the 
House for more than sixty days 
without leave of the House, his seat 
shall become vacant as per the 
provisions of the Constitution. 
  Once elected, they will enjoy all 
privileges, may even rule while staying 
out of country without any 
accountability. They may take oath but 
will be reasonably governed by law of 
land of their country of stay. 
Once elected they will be governed 
by the rules made by the legislature 
for its members. 
  The average income of an Indian 
outside India is much higher and hence 
may influence the outcome of election 
and policies. 
The existing law is strong enough to 
check use of money power in 
elections. There are ceiling on 
election expenses. 
  Even a non-Indian with an ulterior 
motive may get a passport and then 
migrate to a country of his choice with 
a capacity to create trouble. 
No comments. 
  To give the right to contest election is 
uncalled for because- 
(a) An Indian should better think to 
serve the country in which they 
live 
(b) The purpose of contesting elections 
is to be accessible and serve the 
people who will vote for them, 
participate in house proceedings, 
etc. but not to virtually run away 
after winning 
(c) Once elected, they will enjoy all 
privileges; may even rule while 
staying out of country without any 
accountability. They may take oath 
but will be reasonably governed by 
law of land of their country of stay. 
(a) to (c) The right to cast vote 
could be considered as one of the 
primary privilege of a citizen of a 
sovereign democratic republic. The 
elected representatives enjoy 
privileges and are bound by duties 
as are provided under the law and 
prescribed by the Houses of which a 
person is a member. 
13. Shri V.Y. Ghaskadbi Voting rights may be restricted to only The voting rights is based on adult 

(Memorandum No. 13) those NRIs who pay Income Tax in 
India (for incomes credited to their 
NRO a/cs), and have applied and got 
valid PAN numbers. This would reduce 
the possibility of fraudulent use of 
names of NRIs for inflating the 
electoral rolls, and subsequent rigging 
of polls. 
franchise irresp ective of any 
requirement such as payment of 
income-tax etc. 
14. Shri Sarman 
Akkarachittor,  
A-2, Shiv Kirti CHS, 
Chincholibunder Road, 
Malad West, Mumbai-  
400064. 
(Memorandum No. 14) 
Those ex-Indians settled in countries 
like UK, USA, Canada etc. where they 
can seek or secure citizenship of the 
country of stay, they get voting right in 
such countries in elections held there. 
So, these categories of NRI as 
commonly known should not be 
allowed to take part in any elections in 
India at any cost. The reason behind 
my stand is it should be reciprocal in 
all respects with Indians settled 
permanently in other countries with 
citizens of other countries settled in 
India and no exception should be 
allowed. 
Only those persons will be allowed 
to vote who continue to hold Indian 
citizenship. There will be no change 
in the other legal requirements in 
respect of a resident Indian and a 
citizen of India living out of India. 
  So long as they hold Indian Citizenship 
and (not relinquished it in favour of 
citizenship of their country of stay) 
they should be permitted to vote in 
India, being their own country. 
Agreed. 
15. Dayananda Kamath K. 
Manager (Porex) 
Corporation Bank,  
Shopping Area,  
Sector-14,  
Gurgaon-122001. 
(Memorandum No. 16) 
(a) As on date the names from 
electoral rolls are removed only at 
the time of actual verification of 
electoral rolls. Hence all those 
NRIs whose name is included in 
the electoral role continues to 
remain and he can vote if he is in 
the constituency during election 
even today. 
(a) The names of the citizens of 
India living abroad will be 
allowed to be added to the 
electoral rolls if it has been 
deleted because of absence due 
to his stay in foreign country. 
This will be done as per rules to 
be framed. 
  (b) If the new category of voter is to 
be created then only the new bill 
will be of any use. Further to vote 
they have to come to the 
constituency to vote during 
election. How many NRI can 
afford the time and cost to vote in 
the election. 
(b) After getting the right to vote 
during elections the citizens of 
India living abroad owing to 
their employment, education or 
otherwise will be treated 
equally with the citizens of 
India living in their 
constituency. The voter has to 
bear the expenses of the 
journey to be undertaken for 
casting his vote irrespective of 
the fact whether he lives in 
India or abroad. 
  (c) Regarding allowing them to (c ) If the name exists in the voters 

contest election, it may be noted 
Sri Vijay Mallya , MP of Rajya 
Sabha is supposed to be an NRI for 
tax purpose and was allowed to 
contest election and become a 
Member of Parliament also. I don’t 
think he has changed his NRI 
status for tax purpose to contest 
MP seat as he will loose huge tax 
benefit under such circumstances. 
Since there is a live case before us 
no purpose will be served by 
bringing a new Bill as it is already 
allowed as explained above. 
list, the person can vote as well 
as contest in the election, if he 
is otherwise qualified. 
  (d) It has been suggested that separate 
NRI constituencies may be carved 
out. The Indian passport voters 
may have to register with the 
respective embassies and may be 
allowed to vote for their 
representative from their 
constituencies. The elected 
representative should have been in 
the region for at least 3 years in the 
past or present so that he can 
represent their aspirations and 
familiar with their issues. 
(d) As the Constitution provides 
for only territorial 
constituencies, the proposal 
cannot be accepted. 
16. Chunavana Kavalu 
Samithi C/o Padi 
Opp. Coloso Hospital, 
Bendoorwell, 
Mangalore. 
(Memorandum No. 17) 
If such person is allowed to register in 
voter roll, he will be eligible to contest 
to parliament or assembly. If they 
become MP or MLA they can become 
Minister or Prime Minister or Chief 
Minister. Do we want this where the 
very purpose of democracy is defeated. 
Hence no to the said amendment. 
See that only voting right is given and 
NOT THE RIGHT TO CONTEST 
FOR ELECTION. 
With the addition of name in the 
voters list, the citizens of India 
living abroad will get both the rights 
i.e. right to vote and contest the 
election as per law. It may not do 
any harm to democratic set-up. The 
place of working or studies has 
nothing to do with the allegiance of 
a person to his home land. 
17. G.L. Verma, Secretary 
Apex Society of Legal 
Awareness, Mayur 
Vihar Phase-I,  
Delhi-91. 
(Memorandum No. 18) 
Suggestion is that some ways and 
means have to be devised in such a 
manner that they are allowed to cast 
their votes in their respective countries 
or through proxy or through some 
mechanism without any flaw and 
agreeable to all parties. Some foolproof 
method has to be devised. 
The voting right has to be exercised 
by the citizens of India living 
abroad in person by coming to his 
constituency. The way of casting of 
vote will no doubt be difficult but it 
will be very simple and clear. It is 
not practically possible to allow 
them to cast their votes by proxy or 
postal ballot. There is no proposal to 
allow the citizens of India living 
abroad to cast their votes outside 
India. 
  Canvassing and electioneering for the The maximum limit of expenditure 

contestants may swell up. for elections is already there. 
  Adequate measures should be adopted 
to prevent any possibility of NRIs 
spending money directly or indirectly 
for the purpose of electioneering inside 
the country or in the country wherever 
they are residing. Otherwise it will 
open the floodgates for all sorts of 
unfair practices. 
Sufficient safeguards in the existing 
laws are already there. 
  No honest person in spite of 
competence and impeccable record of 
service would be able to even think of 
contesting elections for want of huge 
finances. 
No comments. 
  No political party or the contestant in 
election should be allowed to carry the 
flags of election campaign outside the 
Indian territory. 
Canvassing will be allowed as per 
the domestic law of the country. 
18. (Memorandum No. 19) Objective should be very clear.  
  Citizens shall be debarred of the voting 
right if he is found indulged in any 
illegal activity or is/was sentenced 
imprisonment for two years or more or 
has any past record of unlawful activity 
under the law of the country he is 
residing presently. 
The proposed legislation is limited 
to remove the restriction imposed on 
citizens of India living outside India 
in getting themselves enrolled in the 
electoral rolls of their home 
constituency. Such persons who are 
eligible to vote as per rules will be 
given the right to vote. 
  The following procedures might be 
given place for consideration for the 
aforesaid category of Indian citizens to 
cast their vote: 
 
  a. Through Internet: The Government 
of India can consider the use of 
Electronic Mode of casting vote by 
the aforesaid category of Indian 
citizens. The technicality and 
detailed feasibility study on 
“voting through internet” might be 
considered. 
A citizen of India abroad will be 
able to cast vote in person when he 
is in his constituency in India at the 
time of election. 
  b.  Voting at related Indian 
Embassies: Indian Embassies 
located in different countries can 
be established as the poling booth 
for the aforesaid category of Indian 
citizens. 
 
  c.  In India only: Indian citizens of 
aforesaid category can cast their 
vote in India only. 
 
  But I personally feel that to gain 
maximum relevance of and have 
 

optimum involvement of the aforesaid 
category of Indian citizens in the 
electoral process, FORMER TWO 
PROCEDURES are more workable and 
feasible in which the first can be 
considered the best way out. For all the 
above procedures so me structural and 
functional reforms in the Election 
Commission of India will be essential. 
Therefore, related changes in the 
working procedure of the Election 
Commission of India are also 
mandatory. 
  Citizenship Card as Voter identification 
card.  
 
  Related rights must be explicitly 
defined. 
 
  I personally feel that there must be a 
provision for the aforesaid category of 
Indian citizens that they will be given 
right to contest election for any of the 
legislatures that is, the Parliament or 
the State Legislature only when he has 
been living in India for last five years 
as an ordinary resident and it should 
be binding on him to reside in India 
during their tenure as Member of 
Parliament/State Legislature. 
If a citizen of India is living in India 
the question of his being living 
abroad does not arise. Having 
regard to the number of days a 
person has to work as a legislator, 
there is no need of laying down any 
condition of residing in India. 
  If he is given eligibility to become 
member of the Parliament and/or the 
State Legislature then he will be very 
much able to become member of the 
council of ministers in the concerned 
Government. It is an important 
question for the secrecy and high 
authority. The post of the Minister is 
of high importance for the secrecy, 
sovereignty and integrity of the nation. 
The suggestion is under a wrong 
notion that a citizen of India living 
abroad will lose his allegiance to the 
Constitution of India and the 
country. 
  In this regard, I personally feel that the 
aforesaid category of Indian citizens 
should not be giving right to contest 
election for Indian democratic 
institutions at this point of time. Later 
on in the phased manner this provision 
can be taken under consideration. 
Do not agree. 
  Even if later, any person from the 
aforesaid category of Indian citizens is 
given right to contest election, he must 
be declared ineligible for the same if 
he is already the member of the 
democratic institution of the country 
he is residing in at the time of his 
nomination for the candidature for 
As per the proposed amendment, a 
citizen of India living abroad owing 
to employment, education or 
otherwise would be able to vote if 
he continues to be a citizen of India 
and is not otherwise disqualified. 

Indian democratic institutions. This 
provision will confirm the loyalty of a 
Member of Indian Parliament or the 
State Legislature. 
  There must be a provision for 
Negative Voting. 
The issue does not relate to the 
proposed legislation. 
19. (Memorandum No.20) By giving voting right to the NRI 
there can be danger to the security and 
unity of Nation. 
Do not agree. This is only an 
apprehension. 
20. (Memorandum No.21) Average NRI don’t know who is the 
representative of Member of 
Parliament from there region and who 
is the influential leader who is 
contributing to what development. 
The average NRI may keep 
knowledge of representatives after 
getting the right to vote. 
  Most of the NRI returns to India for a 
short visit where in their concentration 
is only on the family and relatives, 
they hardly contribute to any social 
and development activities during 
their stay in India. 
There are not more than 3-5% of NRI 
who are creative by nature and like to 
develop themselves in India along 
with the foreign country of their 
residence. These people are purely 
professionals who use the local 
manpower for development. 
The fact has nothing to do with 
voting right. 
  Most of the NRIs second generation is 
hardly aware of the changes happening 
in the India. Their knowledge is limited 
and based on myths so it is difficult to 
say whether they will contribute to the 
nation. 
No comments. 
  Strategically, the average voter turnout 
on an average for national and State 
election is never more than 60%, in 
other words 37% of the local presents 
do not cast their votes because of 
various difficulties and errors and 
balance 3% is the NRI population who 
are residing abroad. 
The errors in voting list may not 
become hurdle in conferring on the 
voting right to citizens of India 
living abroad. They will have clear 
identify by way of their passports. 
  Secondly do we have excess of 
resources because of which today we 
find a need to rope in all NRI in 
election process, When the optimum 
need of resources is in other 
infrastructure development areas. 
No special resources are considered 
necessary as electronic voting 
machines are being used. 
  Ideally the target should be the 
optimization of local voter turnout 
rather than optimization of NRI voting. 
Voter turnout may not be treated as 
hurdle in passing on the voting right 
to citizens of India living abroad. 

  What mechanism we will have to 
develop to monitor the NRI voting cell 
and what is the financial impact of the 
same on the common taxpayer that also 
need to be studied. 
The manner is very simple. Only the 
names of citizens of India living 
abroad are to be added in the voting 
list. It is not so expensive. 
  If our vested interest is only to impress 
international community and NRI by 
offering them this facility then 
strategically it is not a correct move at 
this point of time. 
The voting right may keep them 
associated with the country and its 
democratic process. 
  The Indian democratic process is so 
dynamic that 2-3 per cent of deflection 
in the voting can make or brake the 
Governments. Under such situation 
taking help of NRI voting right means 
we are indirectly allowing foreign 
powers to have direct access our 
government. Which strategically is a 
suicidal move. 
It is good that voting by citizens of 
India living abroad carries 
importance. Benefit is not 
monopolized. It can go to any party. 
  We also have a rich experience of 
ineffectiveness of postal balloting 
which is used from years, which 
provides the option of voting to 
migrants with in the territory of union 
of India. So we feel that if offered this 
system will also follow the same route. 
And WEB based information is not a 
true pictures. 
The proposal is limited to allowing 
casting of vote in person in the 
relevant constituency. 
  The right of voting for NRIs should be 
linked with the financial contribution 
that the NRI has done in India in the 
past and that too in the projects of 
national interest. 
The right to vote is a political right 
enjoyed by a citizen of a sovereign 
democratic country. It should not be 
linked to money. 
  Such voting rights should be given only 
on request and with a commitment that 
they will actively participate in the 
development process of this nation. 
Voting right is based on adult 
franchise. However, any condition 
of commitment would not be valid 
and enforceable. 
21. (Memorandum No.22) It is necessary to categorise and find 
out the number of NRI:- 
(1) who want to participate in voting 
(2) who want to contest election 
(3) the name of their country should be 
clear. 
The desired figures are changing 
rapidly. The desire to contest 
election can come at any time. 
Hence, not practicable. 
  -  Government should make it clear 
whether the resident of only some 
countries can get this benefit. 
The right to vote is to be given to all 
the citizens of India residing outside 
India as they can cast votes only if 
they visit their constituency at the 
time of elections. 
  -  The NRIs should it clearly indicate There cannot be any time limit. It 

that for how long time will stay abroad. depends on what type of visa / 
permit such NRI is holding while 
staying abroad. 
  -  There need to be a State-wise list of 
NRIs. 
There is no need of any separate list 
State-wise. Only the name has to be 
added in the electoral rolls. There 
could be a separate portion in every 
part of the electoral rolls. 
  Suggestions 
(1)  A report may be taken from 
census Commissioner regarding the 
information that how many NRIs have 
got permanent residence. In which 
states the population has increased and 
in which state it has decreased. 
 
  (2) The opinion of Defence Ministry 
and Security Commission about 
this Bill should be taken. 
No defence or security point is 
touched by extending the voting 
right to citizens of India living 
abroad. The clearance from Ministry 
of External Affairs is already taken. 
  (3) The view of Border States like 
Assam, Punjab, Jammu and 
Kashmir and Uttaranchal should 
also be taken. 
No separate consultation now is 
considered. 
  (4) Complete details about the NRI 
where he lives. 
The details based on the entries in 
the passport in voters list alongwith 
his name are enough. 
  (5) Government will have to care that 
there had been continuous 
amendments in Fundamental 
Rights from 26
th January, 1950 to 
1963, 1971, 1978 to 1984. What 
will be their effect on Indian 
Constitution and the Security of 
the country? Will the Government 
make further amendments or 
increase the scope of restrictions? 
No further amendment in this 
connection seems to be required. 
  (6)  Nation Security Law, TADA, 
POTA which have been scrapped 
in 2004 by Prime Minister Shri 
Manmohan Singh, MISA like laws 
can be continued to be effective if 
there are terrorism incidents 
because the people who want to 
harm the country will not miss any 
chance. 
The existing laws are strong enough 
to handle any type of terrorism 
incidents. 
  (7) First take the measures that keeping 
in view the Security of the country 
there is no increase in Terrorism, 
infiltration of border, Hawala, 
Not a related matter. Hence, no 
comments. 

Mafia, Communal disturbance 
which harm the country. 
  (8) There will be single citizenship or 
dual citizenship. In 2003 dual-
citizenship has been granted in 
America, Britain, Canada, 
Mauritious, Australia, Newzealand 
etc. It should be made clear. 
Only the citizens who continue to be 
citizens of India will be given the 
right to vote. All conditions for 
becoming a voter will apply. The 
only change would be that he need 
not be ordinarily resident in the 
constituency if he happens to be 
living outside India owing to 
employment, education or 
otherwise. 
  (9) What will be the effect of the bill 
on the States like Jammu and 
Kashmir where Article 370 is 
effective. 
It seems there will not be any 
negative effect on any State. 
22. (Memorandum No.23) The bill is welcome. The immigration 
issued may be made available to be 
spent on returns from abroad. 
The request does not have any link 
with proposed Bill. 
23. (Memorandum No.24) Non-residents are mostly involved in 
employment and profession in abroad. 
So, if they will involve in election 
process it will be very difficult for 
them to get into it. 
The citizens of India living abroad 
will be having the option to vote or 
not to vote in the election in India. 
24. (Memorandum No.25) He has supported the amendment. The 
non-resident Indian will think himself 
75 per cent of Indian in place of 25 per 
cent. 
It may be true. 
25. (Memorandum No.26) He has supported the Right to Vote to 
NRIs. He is ready to give evidence 
before the committee. 
 
26.  Care should be taken that:  
  1.  Our leaders sh ould not go abroad 
in the name of canvassing and 
create nuisance abroad by rallying 
etc. 
Canvassing will be allowed as per 
law. 
  2.  Canvassing abroad should be done 
mostly Electronic & print media 
and Indian Cultural Centres only. 
No comments. 
  3.  Dirty campaign and mud slinging 
by parties should not take place 
abroad putting India in poor light. 
No comments. 
  4. The election process should not 
hinder working of NRIs and 
wastage of their man-days. 
The election is not so long which 
may hinder the working of citizens 
of India abroad. 
  5. The more halla-bulla can take 
unnecessary attention of foreign 
Governments and consequently 
Since the number of voters in the 
native country will not be very 
large, the halla-bulla will not be of 

lead to reduction of Indian 
Manpower in respective countries. 
any use in outside the country. 
  6.  If any one of the NRIs want to 
contest then also the same 
guidelines may be followed. In no 
case he/she should take extra 
advantage of being NRI and 
campaigning abroad at his/her will. 
The majority of voters are in India. 
More campaigning is required in the 
constituency. Therefore, 
campaigning abroad will be useful. 
  7.  Parties should not orient their 
focus on NRIs just for vote and 
want to bring influential NRIs to 
India by shared means at the time 
of election. 
Having regard to the meagre 
number of persons who may visit 
India to cast their votes, the 
proposal is only imaginary thinking. 
It will be difficult for the political 
parties to adopt a costly method 
when they are not sure of whom the 
citizens of India living abroad will 
vote. 
  In case, bill wants to allow NRIs to 
vote from abroad by postal/electronic/ 
voting arrangement done abroad then: 
 
  1. The process should be started as a 
Pilot Project only in one or two 
countries. Based on the experience 
gained and corrective measure 
taken then only other countries 
should be included for the Election 
Process. 
The Indian citizens living abroad 
will be able to vote the person only 
and that too in their home 
constituency. 
  2.  The role of Indian Embassies 
abroad should be made as 
watchdog agencies for the process 
abroad. 
 
27. (Memorandum No.28) The voting right should be extended to 
NRIs. 
The Bill extends voting rights to 
NRI. 
28. (Memorandum No.29) It is, th erefore, necessary that these 
brothers and sisters have their names 
registered in the electoral rolls of the 
concerned constituency of their place 
of ordinary residence in India, so that 
they would be in a position to cast their 
Votes in elections to the Lok Sabha, 
State Legislature, or Panchayat 
Elections in case they happen to be in 
their constituency at the time of polls. 
 
29. (Memorandum No.30) (1) With this bill the NRIs will not feel 
the decrease in Democratic 
Fundamental  Rights.   
Agreed. 
  (2)  It will be beneficial for the country 
to allow NRIs to contest election. 
 
  (3)  It will increase their love for their  

own country. 
30. (Memorandum No. 31) If this decision is only limited to those 
(expatriate) present in India at the time 
of election is not good. This means it is 
allowed only few Upper-class people to 
utilize this option. Even though most of 
the (middle class and lower class) 
expatriates will not be able to vote 
during the election period. Because 
vacation period of these peoples are in 
different periods (such as Onam, Eid, 
X-mas and school holidays). So 
majority of the votes are missing. 
If you allow through embassy it will be 
better and feasible , for the procedure 
and arrangements voting through 
embassies, Indian Government can 
adopt the procedures from Philippines, 
Italian and US Embassies who already 
successfully having expatriates votes 
from abroad. 
The citizens of India are living in 
various parts of the world. It is only 
because of the practical difficulties 
in arranging polling booth outside 
India safely and within the time 
limit, that the voting right could be 
exercised only in India. 
31. (Memorandum No. 32) The proposed Amendment does not 
make it clear that the persons with dual 
citizenship will be able to exercise their 
electoral rights or not. According to the 
present situation if an NRI having dual 
citizenship wishes to contest an 
election, he can and if he goes out of 
the country and does not return before 
his five year tenure, there is no law to 
prevent him from doing it. 
Not related to voting rights of 
citizens of India living abroad. 
  The moneyed NRIs may also be able to 
manage horse-trading and the majority 
of the seats in the upper houses of the 
Parliament and Assemblies will be 
filled by the NRIs. If this kind of a 
situation is allowed to prevail then the 
main losers will be the poor people of 
India. And it going to be a grand party 
for the moneyed NRIs. 
 
  If absurdities make things more clear 
then after this amendment are we not 
heading towards a si tuation where the 
Prime Minister of another country may 
also be allowed to become the Prime 
Minister of India? 
 
32. (Memorandum No. 33) It would be excellent of your 
Amendment bill 2006 would allow 
Indian people with Dual citizenships to 
be able to contest in the elections in 
India and thereby given the opportunity 
The facility is not for dual citizens. 
It is only for the citizens of India 
living abroad owing to their 
employment, education or otherwise 
and if they happen to be in their 

in holding decision making posts in 
India. 
home constituency at the time of 
elections. 
33. (Memorandum No. 34) He has supported the amendment. No comments required. 
  The workers should go door to door for 
entering names of electors in the 
electoral list. 
 
  Thus I feel they maybe given the right 
to vote but not the right to contest in 
the elections. 
 
34. (Memorandum No. 35) The security deposit of Rs. 10,000/- of 
contesting election should not be there. 
The amount of security has been 
fixed to keep the non-serious 
candidates away from election. 
  There should be graduation as 
minimum qualification for contesting 
the elections. 
It has no relevance with the 
proposed amendment. 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-C 
COMMENTS OF THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF   
LAW AND JUSTICE ON THE QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE BILL 
 
No. Question Reply 
1 2 3 
1. Clause (I AA) of the proposed Amendment to 
the Bill seeks to give reside ntial status to non-resident 
Indians and thus confer voting right to the non-resident 
Indians, in effect, it means that it seeks to bridge the 
gap between the resident Indians and the non-
resident Indians as far as the voting right is 
concerned. Would it not create a privileged 
class of voters vis-a-vis the resident Indians as the 
resident Indians are likely to feel that the non-
resident Indians are being meted out with 
special treatment? 
In a democratic set up, the citizens participate in the 
governance and this is achie ved mainly through their 
legitimate political right to cast their votes. Article 326 
of the Constitution clearly provides that elections to 
the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assembly of every State shall be on the basis of adult 
suffrage, this is to say, every person who is a citizen of 
India and who is not less than  eighteen years of age on 
such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under 
any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not 
otherwise disqualified under the Constitution or any 
law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground 
of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or 
corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be 
registered as a voter at any such election. This 
privilege of the citizens conferred by virtue of being a 
citizen of our country can be availed of by a person 
moving from one place of his ordinary residence in 
India to another place of ordinary residence in India. 
However, the Representation of the People Act., 1950, 
at present do not allow persons who are not ordinary 
resident in a constituency in India to register himself as 
a voter. In order to remove the discrimination meted 
out to the citizens of India solely on the ground of non-
residence, it is proposed to confer the right to register 
their names in the electoral rolls of their constituency 
in India had they been in the respective constituencies 
but for their  proceeding abroad  owing to their 
employment, education or otherwise. Hence, it is 
considered that no discrimination as apprehended is 
involved in the proposed amendment to section 20 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
2. At present “ordinarily resident” is one of the 
requirements or condition for being eligible for 
voting in an election. This condition is being 
waived off in the case of the non-resident 
Indians, whereas a resident Indian’s name is 
deleted from the electoral rolls if he/she is not 
residing continuously in his/her place of ordinary 
residence for a period of six months. In what 
manner the Government propose to ensure 
parity between the resident Indians and non-
resident Indians in this particular aspect? 
If the citizens of India resi ding in India change their 
place of ordinary residence, they have the facility to 
get their names enrolled in the new place of their 
ordinary residence. As the voters list are prepared on 
the basis of territorial constituencies in India, it has 
become necessary that the citizens of India residing 
abroad owing to their employment, education or 
otherwise are allowed to enroll themselves in the 
electoral rolls in their re spective constituency. This 
could be done only at the place of their ordinary 
residence in India on the legal fiction that they would 

have continued to reside at the place of ordinary 
residence in India but for their proceeding abroad. 
Hence, the position of citizens of India residing in 
India cannot be compared with the citizens living 
abroad in the matter of place of residence. 
3. As per the language of the proposed clause I AA, 
absence from the place of ordinary residence 
is envisaged due to (i) employment (ii) education & 
(iii) “otherwise” whether “temporarily” or “not”. 
The words “otherwise” and “not” as used in the 
clause appear to be of wide connotation. The word 
“otherwise” conveys that a person who is residing 
outside India may become entitled to vote for 
reasons other than employment and education. 
Similarly, the word “not” conveys the idea that a 
person who is permanently outside India can 
also become eligible to vote. Thus, the words 
“otherwise” and “not” are subject to wide 
interpretation. What are the Ministry’s 
comments in this regard? 
The proposed amendment seeks to allow all citizens of 
India living abroad to enroll themselves in the electoral 
rolls of their respective constituency in India 
irrespective of their period of residence abroad so long 
as they continue to be citi zens of India. Since the right 
to vote is considered as an important legitimate 
political right which a citizen may enjoy in a 
democratic set up, there is no proposal to make any cut 
off date in the matter. Th e expression “otherwise” 
covers the cases of dependents of persons employed or 
otherwise staying outside India. The reasons for 
residence is only illustrative and not exhaustive. 
4. What modalities have been envisaged by the 
M i n i s t r y     f o r     e n a b l i n g    t h e    n o n - r e s i d e n t  
Indians to get themsel ves enrolled for the 
v o t i n g   r i g h t s    i n    I n d i a ?       A r e    t h e r e    a n y  
conditions laid down for the same or can they 
simply get their names enrolled?   Does the 
M i n i s t r y    f e e l    t h a t    s o m e    n o r m s    m a y   b e  
formulated to enable the NRIs to get enrolled in the 
electoral rolls?    Electoral rolls are revised 
from time to time in one part or the other and 
enumerators go door to door for the purpose and 
the roll is signed by the head of the  family 
or any other member. What procedure will be 
followed in respect of NRI voters? 
Once the proposed amendment is enacted, appropriate 
steps will be taken to frame the rules in consultation 
with the Election Commission of India. It is proposed 
to insist for the passport and the permanent address in 
India shown in the passport as the condition to identify 
the constituency where the person concerned could get 
himself enrolled in the voters’ list. 
5. Is the proposed amending clause meant only for the 
exclusive purpose of giving voting rights or 
is it that some incidental/allied rights shall 
also accrue to the non -resident Indians by 
virtue of the right to vote? 
The amending clause is meant to - 
(i)  enable those citizens of India who are absenting 
from their place of ordinary residence in the 
country owing to employment, education or 
otherwise, outside India, to get their names 
registered in th e electoral rolls of the concerned 
constituency of their place of ordinary residence 
in India, had they been in India. 
(ii)  It is intended that they would thus be in a position 
to cast their votes in the elections to the Lok 
Sabha and to the State Legislatures in case they 
happen to be in their constituency at the time of 
polls. 
(iii) They may also be able to contest the 

Parliamentary and Assembly elections if they are 
otherwise eligible as per law. 
(iv) In this manner, the Government feels that 
conferring such voting right will enable them to 
participate in the democratic process of elections 
in their motherland and also boost their 
involvement in nation building. 
6. Whether the Ministry would put in place any 
mechanism to verify the antecedents of the person 
who is to be enrolled under the proposed 
amending clause so that the common 
perception, that such a right, if granted, 
would result in threatening the security and 
integrity of the nation, is dispelled? 
The citizens living abroad will come to India along 
with their travel documents and passport and in case 
such person is found involved in anti-national or 
subversive activates the security agencies of the 
country will keep a watch on them. However, as 
suggested by the Ministry of  Overseas Indian Affairs, 
the Legislative Department is  consulting the Ministry 
of Home Affairs. 
7. How can voting by the non-resident Indians be 
ensured, as the proposed amending clause itself 
stipulates the requirement of the physical 
presence of the non-resident Indian in the 
constituency, at the time of the election. If, this 
condition remains, the implementation/object of the 
amending may be defeated. What are the 
modalities envisaged to ensure voting by the 
nonresident Indians? 
(i) In view of the practical difficulties in allowing 
citizens of India living abroad on employment, 
education or otherwise to caste their votes in time 
without visiting the relevant constituency, the proposal 
is limited to allowing them to cast their votes in the 
concerned polling booth earmarked. 
8. By having the right to vote whether the nonresident 
Indian would become eligib le to contest elections 
ipso facto or the Ministry intends to lay down some 
further eligibility/conditions/criteria in this regard? 
(i) There is no proposal to lay down any additional 
condition for contes ting elections in  respect of the 
citizens of India living abroad owing to their 
employment, education or otherwise. 
9. Which are other countries in the globe where 
non-resident nationals have been given voting 
rights and right to contest elections? 
(i) Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated that 
USA, UK, China and Italy are some countries giving 
voting rights to their non-resident nationals. 
 

ANNEXURE-D 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(Coordination Division) 
***** 
Submission on Representation of the People (Amendment ) Bill, 2006 to give right to NRIs to vote in the 
elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislatures and contest these elections  
 Ministry of External Affairs has considered the proposed amendment to Section 20 of the Representation of 
People Act, 1950 to give right to NRIs to vote in the elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislatures 
and to contest these elections. 
 While the Ministry of External Affairs welcomes the proposal in principle to give voting rights to 
NRIs, it is felt that the modality to allow the NRIs who happen  to be in their constituencies at the time of elections to 
the Lok Sabha and State Legislatures will enable only some NRIs wh o are in a position to travel at their own cost to 
cast their votes in these elections. Considering that there are about 5 million NRIs, few NR Is will be able to exercise 
their voting rights through this modality and it may also be  open to abuse as some political elements may be tempted 
to finance travel of Indians in neighbouring countries to Stat es in India to participate in  these elections and vote in 
their favour. 
 Ministry of External Affairs wishes to point out that  other countries have adopted different modalities to allow 
their citizens overseas to exercise their voting right s. The USA have allowed their citizens overseas to 
participate in elections through absentee ballot; it is u nderstood that UK is also considering such a modality. Italy 
allows their nationals living abroad to participate in elec tions through ballots sent to the Missions. In case these 
modalities were to be adopted, the administrative arrangemen ts for inclusion of NRIs in the voters list, sending the 
ballot papers in time to our Missions, getting these back to the electoral constituencies either through the Missions or 
other mechanisms for counting etc. will need to be carefully considered. 
 Ministry of External Affairs also wants to point out that  the provision relating to NRIs to contest elections to the 
Lok Sabha or State Legislatures is new which few countri es have implemented. Some countries like Italy have 
reserved few seats in the Parliament which can be contes ted by citizens overseas and have not allowed them to 
contest general seats. If NRIs are allowed to contest general seats, questions may be raised about the 
‘representative’ character of NRIs, ‘level playing field’, ‘foreign’ sources influencing our electoral process and so on. 
 It is felt that the provision relating to NRIs contesting elections to Lok Sabha and State Legislatures needs to be 
examined carefully by various Ministries, including MEA, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, MHA, Election 
Commission and others; adequate time should be given for this purpose. 
This issues with the approval of Foreign Secretary. 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-E 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
*** 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Pubic Grievances, Law and Justice - 
examination of the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006 - regarding. 
1. With specific reference to the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2006 which has been introduced 
in the Rajya Sabha a new sub-section 1 (AA) after section 1(A) in section 20 of the Repres entation of the People Act, 
1950 has been inserted which reads as follows:- 
“(1AA) A person absenting himself from his place of ordinary residence owing to his employment, 
education, or otherwise, outside India, whether temporar ily or not, shall not, by reason thereof, cease to be 
ordinarily resident in India”. 
2. As mentioned in the “Statement of Objects an d Reasons” accompanying this Bill, it seeks to; 
 (i) enable those citizens of India who are absenting fr om their place of ordinary residence in the country 
owing to employment, education or otherwise, outside India, to get their names registered in the 
electoral rolls of the concerned constituency of their place of ordinary residence in India, had they 
been in India. 
 (ii) It is intended that they would be thus in a posit ion to cast their votes in the elections to the Lok Sabha 
and to the State Legislatures in case they happen to be in their constituency at the time of polls. 
 (iii) They may also be able to contest the elections. 
 (iv) In this manner, the Government feels that conferri ng such right will enable them to participate in the 
democratic process of elections in their motherland and also boost their involvement in nation 
building. 
3. While the precise modalities would have to be spelt out in the Registration of Electoral Rules 1960 which 
would have to be suitably amended for the purpose, it is apparently the intention that these modifications would 
include asking for particulars and production of passport to establish proper identity. These would have to be worked 
out by the Ministry of Law and Justice in consultation w ith the Election Commission. Further, as it would ultimately 
be for the Election Commission to arrange for voting by su ch Indian citizens resident outside India, their views on 
various procedural aspects apart from legal aspects would be relevant. 
4. The Bill in its present form does not provide for any vo ting facilities abroad in respect of elections in India for 
an Indian citizen resident ab road for the purpose of employment, education or otherwise. Physical presence in the 
constituency, on polling day on the part of such Non-Resident 
3.Indians registered in their constituency is essential, in order to vote after giving proof of identity in such manner as 
provided for under rules. An important factor in opting for such a procedure involving physical presence in the 
constituency on polling day is to obviate the possibility of a vigorous political campaign among the large number of 
Indian citizens living in various countries. It is felt that there could be such campaigns by prospective candidates 
contesting in India either to Parliament or Legislative Assemblies, if one or more forms of voting are provided for 
either abroad or in India, such as postal balloting or proxy voting, for instance. In many foreign countries where a 
large number of Indian citizens reside, such political campaigns may be undesirable for a variety of reasons, for 
example, in the Gulf or Malaysia. In this manner, it is felt that the proposed Bill, while affording Indian citizens 
stationed abroad with an opportunity to vote or participate in Indian elections, requires them to be physically present 
in the concerned constituency on polling day. 

ANNEXURE-F 
COMMENTS OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
(a) The Bill proposes to amend Section 20 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 dealing with meaning of 
‘ordinarily resident’, by providing for an exception in th e case of NRIs in the matter of interpretation of the 
term ‘ordinarily resident’ for the purpose of enrolment in the electoral roll. The Commission is of the view that 
an amendment of this nature in favour of the NRIs may lead to demand for similar concession in the case of 
the citizens living within the country, who are required to reside outside their native place in pursuit of 
employment, etc. It may not be easy to ignore such a demand as a question of discrimination can be raised 
legitimately even if a justifiable legal fiction is put forw ard. It may be pointed out that lakhs of people migrate 
to urban centers and stay and work there while maintaining tenuous contact  with their native places. When a 
person stays in another place and only occasionally visits  his native place, then he would be enumerated at the 
place of his stay and not in his nativ e place. This entire concept which has been understood well and has been 
implemented well all these times would go for a spin with disastrous consequences if the definition of the term 
‘ordinarily resident’ is interfered with, even albeit, it is done for the benefit of another set of people namely the 
NRIs. It would only be a matter of time when a question wo uld be raised as to why a resident Indian is not 
given a deal which is as good as the one for a non-resident Indian. If and when raised, it would be too difficult 
to resist apart from legally not being justifiable. Any general concession or liberal interpretation of the term 
‘ordinarily resident’ could directly re sult in the electoral rolls getting manipulated as it would be difficult to 
check multiple enrolment of names of same persons in the electoral rolls of different constituencies. The 
Commission, therefore, would like to sound a note of caution, nay even an alarm, in this proposed amendment. 
(b) While the Commission is not in favour of the propos ed amendment of Section 20 , for the reasons mentioned 
above, the Commission is not totally opposed to the prop osal of enrolment of NRIs in electoral rolls. In the 
Commission’s view, it would be more appropriate if th e end is sought to be achieved by making a special 
provision in the law for enrolment of the NRIs at the place of home address as mentioned in the Passport of 
the person concerned. For this purpose, there could be a separate application form for enrolment of NRIs in the 
electoral rolls with provision for attestation/verification of the application by the Indian Embassy/High 
Commission, in the country where the NRIs are living. It may be noted that there are analogous provisions for 
enrolment of service voters/special voters. Such a pr ovision, without resorting to amendment of the meaning 
of ‘ordinarily resident’ would be more appropriate and less likely to be objected and may not lead to any 
manipulation in the preparation of electoral rolls. 
(c) The Commission also desires to point out that the entire question of enrolment of NRIs requires to be 
examined in depth on the following issues before this facility is given to them.  
 There can be no doubt that enrolment in an electoral roll is always with a purpose, the purpose being to enable 
the person to participate in the election and exercise his franchise. In the case of NRIs, tremendous logistic 
problems would be there in providing access for voting to them which have to be thoroughly examined and 
sorted out before it is irrevocably committed to by ame nding the law. Firstly, the NRIs will not be located at 
one place but would be living in differ ent places in any given country. Secondly, they would be hailing from 
different constituencies in their native states. Asking them to come to a central place for the purpose for voting 
may be considered churlish. Distributing postal ballot pa pers of many constituencies at many centers in many 
countries, receiving them from all those places abroad in time in the respective constituencies and getting them 
included in the counting will pose enormous logistic pr oblems. These need to be examined in depth before 
they are empowered to be enrolled, as enrolment without corresponding facility to vote will prove to be a 
mirage and would be resented by the intended beneficiaries. 
3.The Commission desires that the views mentioned above may be taken into consideration and also placed before 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee which is examining the Bill. 
 

ANNEXURE-G 
INFORMATION MADE AVAILABLE BY THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS REGARDING 
PROVISIONS EXISTING IN OTHER COUNTRIES 
As desired by the Parliamentary Standing Co mmittee on Personnel. Public Grievances, Law and  Justice, 
the existing practices prevailing in the following countries with regard to voting rights and contesting 
elections by their overseas na tionals are detailed below:- 
 
S.No. Name of Country Voting Ri ghts Right to c ontest Elections 
1. US The US allows its overseas nationals 
to vote in elections through ballot by mail. 
While US nationals can theoretically run 
for elections, in practice it is difficult 
since they have to establish residency and 
physical presence to be able to campaign 
in the run up to those elections. 
2. U.K. Overseas nationals are permitted to 
vote provided they are over 18 years 
of age and have been registered to 
vote in the UK within the last 15 
years. Any overseas voter can vote in 
elections in the UK and European 
Parliaments but not to UK local 
Government elections or elections for 
the Scottish Parliament, the Welsh 
Assembly or the Northern Ireland 
Assembly. 
Any person who is British, or Irish 
Republic citizen registered as a voter in 
the UK can contest the elections to the 
British and European Parliament only. 
3. Canada Non-resident Canadians are allowed 
to vote in elections to National and 
State Legislatures subject to the 
condition that they have been 
residing outside Canada for less than 
five consecutive years. An 
application for registration and 
special ballot is required to be made by 
an elector to the Chief District Electoral 
Officer. 
There is no bar for overseas Canadian 
nationals to contest el ections to National 
and State Legislatures subject to 
conditions shown in for Voting Rights. 
There is no reservation of seat for non-
resident Canadians. 
4. Germany All overseas Germans are entitled to vote 
provided they reside in an EU state 
and prior to leaving Germany had 
been permanently resident in 
Germany for at least three months 
continuously in the former FRG. 
Similarly Germans residing elsewhere 
also are eligible to vote provided 
prior to leaving former FRG they 
had been continuously resident in 
Germany for 3 months and provided 
that no more than 10 years have elapsed 
since they left. 
An overseas citizen who has not stayed 
away from Germany for more than 10 
years continuously will be eligible to 
stand for election to Parliament. No 
special constituencies are allocated to 
them. 
5. France Overseas French nationals are allowed to EU nationals residing in France can only 

vote in national and legislative 
elections through their Embassies/ 
Consulates or through postal ballot. 
contest Municipal elections and be 
elected as Municipal Councillors. 
6. Italy Italian citizens liv ing abroad are given the 
right to elect 12 Deputies and 6 
Senators in the General Elections and 
also vote in the Referendum. The 
electorate has been divided in 4 
Districts as (a) Europe, (b) South 
America, (c) North and Central America 
and (d) Africa, Asia, Oceania and 
Antarctica. (Law enclosed) 
The law stipulates that each District will 
elect at least one Deputy and one Senator. 
The remaining seats are distributed 
between 4 Districts proportionately based 
on the number of Italian citizens living 
there. Only overseas Italian nationals can 
contest in the Districts abroad. 
7. South Africa Those who are overseas on a work permit 
or have emigrated cannot vote. 
Overseas South Africans cannot contest 
elections, as they can not register 
themselves as voters in the Municipality 
since an ordinary resident person can only 
register as a voter. 
8. Australia Nationals living abroad for less than three 
years and intending to return to Australia 
within six years from the date of 
departing from Australia are 
eligible. They need to register as an 
overseas elector. They can send the 
vote on or before the polling day at 
certain Australian Missions or send 
by postal ballot. 
An Australian national who is not a 
citizen of another country or is not under 
any acknowledgement of allegiance, 
obedience or adherence to a foreign 
power can contest elections in Australia. 
There are no specifically allocated seats 
for overseas nationals. 
9. Kuwait A Kuwaiti citizen living outside the 
country has the right to vote in the 
elections to the National Assembly or 
Municipality provided his name is 
included in the Voter’s list, which is 
updated in February every year. He has to 
cast his vote in Kuwait only on the day of 
polling as there is no provision for postal 
ballot or voting in their Embassies abroad. 
A Kuwaiti citizen residing abroad is 
allowed to stand as a candidate in the 
election in any of the seats. There are no 
reserved seats either for overseas 
Kuwaitis or for any other category. The 
candidate has to complete all election 
related formalities such as filing of his 
nomination etc. in Kuwait before the 
competent authority. 
10. Bangladesh Overseas Bangladesh nationals are not 
allowed to vote in elections. Exceptions 
are Bangladeshi diplomats posted in 
Missions/Posts abroad, who can vote 
through postal ballots. 
Overseas Bangladesh nationals are not 
permitted to contest elections. 
2. Analysing the above existing practices followed by  various countries, it is seen that Australia, 
Canada, Germany, Italy, France, UK and USA allo w their overseas national s to cast their votes 
through postal ballot or through their Embassies/C onsulates. A Kuwaiti national can vote but has to 
come Kuwait for voting. South African overseas citizens may not be able to vote if they are availing work permit or 
have emigrated. As regards contesting in elections, ove rseas nationals of USA, UK, Kuwait, Australia, Canada, 
Germany, Italy and France can contest elections. Italian overseas nationals have separate seats 
earmarked for them form ed in four Districts viz. (a) Europe (b) South America (c) North and Central America and 
(d) Africa, Asia, Oceania and Antarctica. Banglad esh and South African overseas nationals cannot 
contest elections. 

3. From the above details, it is evident that only few countries allow their overseas citizens to 
contest elections, that to o with conditionality in some countries. If NRls are allowed to contest general 
seats, questions may be raised about the ‘‘representative’’ character of NRIs. ‘level playing field’, ‘foreign’ 
sources influencing our elect oral forces and so on. 
 