Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2015)
The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities
(Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014
REPORT NO. 
74


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT
The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities
(Conditions of Service)  Bill, 2014
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-147

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(iii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iv)-(vi)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1-11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 12-15
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 17-45
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................. 47 -84
I. The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals And Other Authorities
(Conditions Of Service) Bill, 2014
II. Tenure and Superannuation Age of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Members of Quasi-Judicial Entities Enumerated In First Schedule Of
the Bill
III. The Vacancies Position As On 31
St December, 2014 In Certain Tribunals
Under First Scheduled in The Bill.
IV . Comments of the Department of Justice on the Views/Suggestions Contained in
memoranda Submittied by Individual/Organisation on the Provision of the Bill.

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(As Constituted on 31st August, 2013 )
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N. S. V . Chitthan
15. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S. S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S. D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(As Constituted on  1 st September, 2014 )
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan ⎯ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
*10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Shanta Kumar
18. Shri Santosh Kumar
19. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
20. Shri Anoop Mishra
21. Shri B. V . Naik
22. Shri Vincent H. Palla
23. Shri V . Panneerselvam
24. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Dr. A. Sampath
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Udhayakumar M.
28. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
29. Dr. Anshul Verma
#30. Shri Tariq Anwar
$31. Adv. Joice George
* Change in the nomination of Shri Aayanur Manjunatha w.e.f.  30 th September, 2014.
# Vacancy existing since the constitution of the Committee was filled-up on 11 th September, 2014.
$ Change in the nomination of Shri Innocent  w.e.f.  22 nd December, 2014.
(ii)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
(iii)

(iv)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf,
do hereby present the Seventy-fourth Report of the Committee on The Tribunals, Appellate
Tribunals & Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 ( Annexure I ).
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 19
th February, 2014 to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 24 th February, 2014, for examination
and report to Parliament within two months i.e. by the 24 th April, 2014. The Committee,
however, in view of busy schedule of Members during the General Elections to the Sixteenth
Lok Sabha, could not complete consideration of the Bill during its term. The Committee was
reconstituted w.e.f. the 1
st September, 2014. After its reconstitution, extension of time for
presentation of its report was granted till the 27 th February, 2015.
3. In order to solicit the views of stakeholders, the Committee issued a Press
Communiqué on 8th March and 13th September, 2014. In response thereto the Committee
received several memoranda containing suggestions from various organizations/individuals/
experts. Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions so received, were
obtained for consideration of the Committee. The Committee heard the views of Secretary,
Department of Justice on 13th March, 2014 and Additional Secretary, Department of Personnel
and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests, representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice on 24th March 2014.
4. The Committee after its reconstitution again heard the views of Secretary, Department
of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill in its sittings held on 26th September, 2014.
The Committee heard. Shri K. Ashokan, Presiding Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal-II, New
Delhi; Shri Ashish Kalia, Presiding Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal-III, New Delhi, Shri Sudhir
Kumar, Former Member, Central Administrative Tribunal and Shri M.R. Madhavan, President
PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi on 16
th December, 2014 as non-official witnesses.
5. In its meeting held on 30th December, 2014, the Committee heard Customs, Excise
& Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTA T), National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission (NCDRC), Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITA T), National Green Tribunal
(NGT) and representatives of the respective nodal Ministries of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change, Consumer Affairs (Department of. Consumer Affairs), Food & Public
Distribution and Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs). On 22nd January, 2015 the
Committee heard Armed Forces Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal for Electricity and
representatives of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and
Ministry of Labour and Employment.

6. In its meeting held on 17 th February, 2015, the Committee heard the Secretary,
Department of Legal Affairs, Chairman, Law Commission of India and Shri Arvind P. Datar,
Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India.
7. The Committee during its Study-visit from the 31 st October to the 6 th November, 2014
interacted with Regional Benches of Central Administrative Tribunal, Railway Claims Tribunal,
Assam State Administrative Tribunal, Company Law Board, Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal and Income Tax Appellate Tribunal at Guwahati and Kolkata. During its
Study-visit to Chennai from 27
th January to 4 th February, 2015 it interacted with Intellectual
Property Appellate Board, Company Law Board, Coastal Aquaculture Authority and Debt
Recovery Appellate Tribunal and Associations of Cost Accountants.
8. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/
information placed before it:-
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Justice, Ministry
of Law and Justice;
(ii) Relevant Acts/Rules under which Tribunals/Commissions were set-up;
(iii) Two Hundred Thirty Second Report (2009) on Retirement Age of Chairpersons
and Members of Tribunals - Need for Uniformity of Law Commission of India;
(iv) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various
organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the
comments of the Department of Justice thereon;
(v) Views expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by
various Tribunals other official and non-official witnesses;
(vi) Replies of Tribunals/Commissions to the Questionnaire prepared by the
Secretariat on the issues dealt with by the Bill.
(vii) T ribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act, 2007;
(viii) Leggatt Committee Report (2001); and
(ix) Supreme Court of India Judgments/orders in the matter of:-
(i) L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union Of India and Others (AIR 1997 S.C. 1125
to 1155);
(ii) Union Of India vs R. Gandhi, President, Madras Bar  Association (Civil
Appeal No. 30670 of 2004);
(iii) Rajiv Garg Vs Union of India (Civil Writ Petition No. 120/2012) ; and
(iv) Madras Bar Association vs. Union of India (C) No. 150 of  2006;
9. The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meeting held on the 25
th
February, 2015.
(v)

10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
NEW D ELHI ; Dr. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
25th February, 2015 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha
(vi)

ACRONYMS
DRT Debt Recovery Tribunals
DRAT Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunals
PCI Press Council of India
CA T Central Administrative Tribunal
CLB Company Law Board
NIT National Industrial Tribunal
ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
CA T Central Administrative Tribunal
TDSAT Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority
JAC Judicial Appointment Commission
NTC National Tribunal Commission
(vii)

REPORT
The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill,
2014 intends to provide uniform service conditions with regard to retirement age, tenure of
appointment, reappointment, housing allowance, travelling allowance, sumptuary allowance,
Leave Travel Concession, leave, conveyance and telephone facility, etc. for Chairpersons and
Members of twenty-six Tribunals/Commissions/statutory bodies enumerated in First Schedule
of the Bill. Second and Third Schedules of the Bill contain details of perquisites to be provided
to the Chairpersons and Members of those entities.
2. The Bill is intended to be an overarching legislation introduced pursuant to the order
passed by Hon’ble Supreme Court on 4 th  December, 2012 on the Civil Writ Petition
No.-120/2012 in the matter of Rajiv Garg Vs. Union of India which is still pending in the
apex court.
3. The attempt of Government to bring in uniformity in service conditions of Chairpersons
and Members of Tribunals/Commissions/ statutory bodies is, however, limited to the aforesaid
areas; while eligibility conditions and manner of appointment of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
(if any) and Members (Judicial/Technical), pay and remuneration, grounds and manner of their
removal, provisions of supporting staff and infrastructure facilities are precluded from the
scope of the Bill. In these respects, there will be no uniformity and Tribunals would continue
to be regulated by the respective statute under which they were established.
4. The Committee notes that the Bill is at best only a half baked attempt to bring
uniformity in various aspects of the Tribunals constituted under different Acts of the
Parliament. The Committee feels that the Government should have used the opportunity
provided by the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Rajiv Garg’s case to take a holistic
look on factors that hamper efficient and independent functioning of Tribunals in the
country and come out with a comprehensive Bill that while ensuring uniformity in various
aspects amongst Tribunals falling in the same category should have paved the way for
independent and efficient functioning of these Tribunals by providing them with
independence, security and capacity associated with Courts. The Bill, Committee feels,
sadly lacks in providing a blue print for an independent and efficient functioning of the
Tribunals in the country.
Bodies/Tribunals in the First Schedule
5. The statutory bodies included in the First Schedule of the Bill have different purposes,
nature, composition, status of Chairperson and Members, etc. Bodies included in the First
Schedule of the Bill, thus, differ in various respects and there seems to be no intelligible
differentia based on which Tribunals have been included in the First Schedule as would be
evident from the following paras:
5.1 The Committee was informed that the commonality which run through all those
bodies is that all of them are headed either by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or
the High Court. About one-third of Tribunals enumerated in First Schedule to the Bill are

2
headed by a retired judge of Supreme Court or Chief Justice of High Court. Those
Tribunals are -National Green Tribunal, National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission,
Competition Appellate Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal for Electricity, Press Council of India,
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority, Securities Appellate Tribunal,
Authority for Advance Ruling, Armed Forces Tribunal, Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority Appellate Tribunal. The Committee, however, finds that in some Tribunals listed
in the First Schedule of the Bill, even persons other than a retired Judge of the Supreme
Court or a High Court, are eligible to become Chairperson. The Committee was informed
that the Presiding Officer of Debt Recovery Tribunals is of the rank of a District Judge
but a Presiding Officer of DRT having three years experience could become the Presiding
Officer of DRAT. Similarly, National Industrial Tribunal is headed by a District Judge
having three years experience.
5.2 The order of Supreme Court in the Rajiv Garg case relates to bringing in uniformity
amongst Tribunals/Commissions operating at the national level. The Schedule on the other
hand includes certain bodies such as Coastal Aquaculture Authority and Press Council of
India which are not per se  Tribunal and do not decide lis  between the parties even though
some of the functions to be performed by them are quasi-judicial functions. On the other
hand, certain of the appellate bodies have been excluded from the Schedule of the Bill. Some
of these bodies are :
(i). Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction;
(ii). Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited Property;
(iii). Appellate Tribunal under Prevention of Money Laundering;
(iv). Central Information Commission;
(v). Employees’ Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal; and
(vi). Inter-State Water Dispute Tribunals
5.3 While some of the Tribunals are single Bench bodies (Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal, National Industrial Tribunal, National Highways Tribunal), other Tribunals are multi-
Bench bodies (Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Customs Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority).
5.4 Some Tribunals are manned by a sole member (Judicial) while others are manned by
judicial and technical members.
5.5 The National Industrial Tribunal is within the system of regular court but has been
included under the First Schedule of the Bill.
5.6 While some of the Tribunals are first appellate bodies some others are second appellate
bodies, rest are authorities of first instance or regulatory bodies. The Coastal Aquaculture
Authority has only regulatory power.
5.7 Except Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and National Industrial Tribunal all other
statutory bodies under the First Schedule have been set up after 1976, while most of them

3
having been constituted by Acts of Parliament under enabling Articles of 323A and 323B of the
Constitution which were inserted by 42 nd Constitutional Amendment.
5.8 The status of Armed Forces Tribunal is different from other Tribunals in view of the
Articles 227(4) and 136(2) of the Constitution.
5.9 Appeal against the orders of Armed Forces Tribunal, National Green Tribunal, National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Comission and Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Authority lies to the Supreme Court, while appeals against the orders of Central Administrative
Tribunal/State Administrative Tribunal lie to Division Bench of High Court after L. Chandra
Kumar case (1997).
6. Tribunals are not part of regular judicial system but are alternate dispute resolution
mechanisms created mainly for expeditious disposal of cases under the concerned Act under
which those have been set up. Even though some of them are complemental and supplemental
to the High Court, they are within the supervisory/ writ  jurisdiction of the concerned High Court
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
7. Press Council of India (PCI) in their written submission have maintained that in view
of its composition, function and mandate it should not be placed at par with other autonomous
regulatory bodies in the Bill. They, therefore, have desired that service conditions of Chairman
and Members of PCI should be out of the Bill to honour legislative intent associated with
creation of PCI.
8. The Presiding Officers of Debt Recovery Tribunals, New Delhi who appeared as non-
official witnesses, in their deposition submitted that both the Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal (DRAT) as well as Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) are single bench quasi-judicial
bodies set up under the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
While DRAT has been included under the First Schedule to the Bill. DRTs have been excluded
from the First Schedule of the Bill for the purpose of uniformity in service conditions and
perquisites. They submitted that the Presiding Officer of DRT is equivalent to the rank of
District Judge and Judicial Members of other Tribunals viz. Central Administrative Tribunal
(CAT), Company Law Board (CLB), National Industrial Tribunal (NIT) and Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal (ITA T) are also of the same rank and have been included in the First
Schedule the Bill for uniformity purpose. Even a Presiding Officer of DRT having three years
experience could become Presiding Officer of DRAT. Currently, Presiding Officer of DRT,
Mumbai has been discharging the additional responsibility of Presiding Officer of DRAT,
Chennai. The DRT has appellate power and hear appeals from Recovery Officers under
Section 30 of the Recovery of Debt due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993. They
have cited that the National Industrial Tribunal which is also headed by a District Judge
having three years experience has also been included under the Schedule to the Bill for
uniformity purpose. They, therefore, appealed to the Committee to include DRTs under
Schedule to the Bill for the sake of parity.
9. Clause 13 of the Bill enables Government to include any other Tribunals/Commissions
by Gazette Notification by amending the First Schedule of the Bill.
10. The Chairman of Law Commission has opined that all Tribunals deemed to be having
the same status irrespective of whether they are exercising appellate jurisdiction or original
jurisdiction, need to be treated uniformly.

4
11. The Committee is in agreement with the view that all the Tribunals of similar
status should be entitled to similar service conditions. The Committee is of the view
that for purpose of uniform service conditions, the classification of Tribunals may be
based on an intelligible differentia. The Committee feels that for purpose of uniform
service conditions etc., the Tribunals headed by a Supreme Court Judge and where
appeal against the order of the Tribunal lies to the Supreme Court may form a category
distinct from the Tribunal/Commission whose order is appealable to the concerned High
Court. The former Tribunals may form the category-I Tribunals while the latter may
form category-II Tribunals. The first category may include Tribunals such as Armed
Forces Tribunals, National Green Tribunal, National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority. The second category
may include Tribunals/Commissions headed by Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of
High Court where appeal against their orders goes to High Court. It may include
Central Administrative Tribunal/State Administrative Tribunal. The Tribunals headed by
a District Judge with certain experience or a person who qualifies to be a District Judge
may form the third category.
12. The Committee further notes that the Schedule needs to be revisited and
comprehensively revised. All Tribunals created under the Acts of Parliament which fall
in any of the three categories should be included and those who do not qualify to be
called Tribunals in the strict sense should be excluded from the Bill.
13. The Committee is not in favour of inclusion of regulatory bodies within the
Tribunals for purpose of bringing uniformity in service conditions.
Differential Age of Retirement
14. Clause 4 of the Bill prescribes tenure appointment within following three sets of age
of superannuation:--
(i) Seventy years in the case of Chairperson and Members who have been a Judge
of Supreme Court;
(ii) Sixty seven years in the case of Chairperson and Members who have been a
Judge of High Court;
(iii) Sixty five years in the case of Chairperson and Members who have been
qualified to be a Judge of High Court or a domain expert.
A tenure of five years has been prescribed within the age of superannuation in the Bill.
A Chairperson and a Member can be re-appointed for another term of five years also. In effect
a Chairperson and Members can serve in a Tribunal/Commission for maximum period of ten
years. The extant Statutes currently prescribe one retirement age for Chairperson and another
retirement age for Vice-Chairperson and Members (except Company Law Board where
retirement age for Vice-Chairperson is 65 years and for judicial and technical Members 62
years). Further, retirement age of Chairperson in extant Statutes varies from seventy to sixty
two year. The retirement age of Chairperson of seven bodies under the First Schedule of the
Bill is seventy years. In respect of the three bodies viz., Central Administrative Tribunal/State
Administrative Tribunal, Securities Appellate and Competition Appellate Tribunal, the retirement

5
age for Chairperson is 68 years. For the rest of the bodies under the Schedule, the retirement
age for Chairperson is 65 years except Company Law Board and National Highways Tribunal,
where retirement age is 67 years for Chairman and 62 years for Members. The retirement age
of Members in the Statutes is mostly 65 or 62 years except National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Disputes Commission where 70 years is prescribed as retirement age for Members
as well as Chairperson. A table showing comparative statement of tenure and superannuation
age of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of quasi-judicial entities enumerated in First
Schedule of the Bill is placed at Annexure-II .
15. The statutes also provide tenure appointment of three to five years for some of the
bodies and regular appointment for Chairperson and Members in other bodies  i.e. , Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal, Custom Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. Nine bodies under the
First Schedule of the Bill has a provision for re-appointment for second tenure except for
Coastal Aquaculture Authority where re-appointment can be done for two consecutive terms.
16. Three sets of retirement age as proposed in the Bill are based upon the retirement age
of Judge of Supreme Court (65 years), Judge of High Court (62 years) and Secretary to
Government of India (60 years) by adding period of one term of proposed tenure
(i.e., 5 years) as a policy decision of the previous Government of India which was considered
by Group of Ministers of that Government.
17. The Committee does not appreciate the policy of making the retirement age
individual-centric rather than post-centric. It apprehends serious flaws therein as a
Chairperson or a Member of a Tribunal or Commission would have to retire at age of
70 years if he is a retired judge of Supreme Court or 67 years if he is a retired judge
of High Court or 65 years if he qualifies to be a judge of High Court (those who come
from the Bar) and those who are domain experts. It would amount to treating same
class of individuals differently even though they perform same functions, belong to the
same Tribunal, and have the same designation. The retirement age needs to be
invariably associated with the post or position to which an individual is appointed and
not otherwise. Linking the retirement age to the source of appointment does not appear
to be a sound proposition and may not stand judicial scrutiny.
18. The Committee feels that the age of retirement should be to be the same for
persons holding same positions in the Tribunals in a category as referred to in para 11
above. The Committee further suggests that the retirement age may be uniform for
Chairperson and Members of Tribunals included in the same category as in the case of
National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and Supreme Court and High Court.
The Committee notes the Chairman and Members of the Tribunals shall hold office as
such for a term of 5 years and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term
subject to the conditions that they would cease to hold the office of the Chairman or
Members as the case may be on attaining the age of retirement. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Madras Bar Association case has favoured a term of seven or five years for
National Company Law Tribunal on the ground that considerable time is required to
achieve expertise in the concerned field and a shorter tenure often leads to a situation
that by the time the Members achieve the required knowledge, expertise and efficiency
their term will be over. The Committee is of the view that a longer term of 7 years may

6
be provided so that knowledge and expertise gained by the Members may be gainfully
utilized. The retirement age of Chairperson and Members of all Tribunals/Commissions
should be 70 years.
Issue of Reappointment
19. On the issue of reappointment, the Committee took note of decision of Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the matter of Madras Bar Association vs. Union of India (2014) where
Section 8 of National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 has been declared as unconstitutional as it may
impinge upon independent functioning of the Tribunal. The Supreme Court observed as under:
“....a provision for reappointment would itself have the effect of undermining the
independence of the Chairperson/Members of the NTT. Every Chairperson/Member
appointed to the NTT, would be constrained to decide matters, in a manner that would
ensure his reappointment in terms of Section 8 of the NTT Act. His decisions may or
may not be based on his independent understanding. We are satisfied, that the above
provision would undermine the independence and fairness of the Chairperson and
Members of the NTT Since the NTT has been vested with jurisdiction with earlier lay
with the High Courts, in all matters of appointment, and extension of tenure, must be
shielded from executive involvement.”
The Clause 4 of the Bill is a replica of Clause 8 of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005.
The Committee took note that reappointment provisions exists in some of the existing Acts
under which Tribunals and Commissions have been set up.
20. The Committee apprehends that Clause 4 of the Bill is susceptible to be challenged and
struck down, in view of aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court. Most of the stakeholders
have expressed similar apprehension in their written as well as oral submissions. The Chairman
of Law Commission of India has also expressed a similar view. The Secretary, Department of
Legal Affairs in his oral submission has, however, stated that for reappointment, the selection
process is the same as provided for the fresh appointment in the relevant statute and as such,
in his view Clause 4 of the Bill appears not to be unconstitutional as some of the extant
statutes already have similar provisions. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the
provision relating to reappointment may be omitted particularly as the Committee has
already recommended a uniform tenure upto seventy years for Chairman and Members
of the Tribunals.
21. Committee also dwelt upon at length on the need of making regular
appointments in the Tribunals in place of tenure appointments. The Committee noted
that system of regular appointment is in existence in Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and
Customs Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. It was felt that such appointments
may be needed to make Tribunals more vibrant and to facilitate induction of young and
talented experts and judicial officers with a reasonable length of experience in the
related field. The tenure posting appears to be less attractive to the Advocates and other
professionals.
22. The Committee, however, notes that lack of promotional prospects in system of
regular recruitment may hinder the prospects of attracting best available talent in the

7
field. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to examine the possibility
of making regular appointments in all Tribunals after suitably addressing the issue of
career progression of such directly recruited Chairperson/Members. The Committee
feels that the expertise and experience of the Chairperson and Members of Tribunal/
Commission can be utilised in the concerned High Court as appeal against the order of
Tribunal invariably goes to High Court except for Armed Forces Tribunal, National Green
Tribunal, National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Authority.
23. Although the existing statutes have provision for a sitting or retired judge of
Supreme Court or High Court to become Chairperson or Member of certain Tribunals/
Commissions, only retired judges have been manning the positions of Chairperson or
members of the Tribunals. The Committee appreciates that sitting judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts, in view of their higher status conferred by the
Constitution may not like to come to Tribunals, which certainly are not at par with the
Supreme Court or the High Courts even though salary and allowances may be same in
Tribunals and Supreme Court/High Courts. Even bureaucrats opt for the Tribunal at the
fag end of their career or after retirement. Consequently, the Tribunals/Commissions
have become a haven for retired judges and bureaucrats. The tenure appointment in
those bodies gives impetus to the prevalent practice.
24. The post retirement assignment appears to be impinging upon independent
functioning of judicial and quasi-judicial bodies as there is no cooling off period for
judges and bureaucrats before taking up post retirement assignment in Tribunal/
Commission.
Applicability of the Act to incumbent Chairpersons and Members
25. Clauses 3 and 9 relate to applicability of the provisions of Act, to incumbent
Chairperson and Members of the statutory body in the First Schedule of Bill. The provisions
in the Bill relating to new tenure and retirement age would not be applicable to incumbent
Chairperson and Members in view of proviso  to Clause 3 of the Bill. However, the new
perquisites as proposed under Second and Third Schedules of the Bill would be applicable to
the incumbent Chairperson and Members due to over-riding effect of Clause 9 upon Clause 3
of the Bill.
26. The retirement age of Members of Tribunal is proposed to be 67 or 65. The existing
retirement age of Members of Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Customs, Excise and Service
Tax Appellate Tribunal, Securities Appellate Tribunal, Railway Claim Tribunal, Authority for
Advance Ruling, Company Law Board, and Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange is 62 years
and, therefore, as per provision of the Bill, the existing Members of these Tribunals would not
get the benefit of enhanced retirement age.
27. As per Clause 9, however, allowance are being made uniform for Chairpersons
and Members of all Tribunals. This is resulting in reduced housing and sumptuary
allowances for some existing Chairpersons and Members who are retired Judges of
Supreme Court or High Court as compared to what they are entitled to at present. On

8
the other hand, some existing Members/Chairpersons would be entitled to higher
allowances than what they are getting at present.
28. A suggestion has been made that provisions of this Bill may be made applicable
to only Members and Chairpersons who join after coming in force of the provisions of
the Bill and existing incumbent to the office of the Chairpersons and Members of
various Tribunals may be given an option either to be regulated by the provisions of the
Bill or the extant provisions as applicable to them. The Committee feels that the
Government may consider the suggestion.
Leave Sanctioning Authority
29. The leave sanctioning authority for the Chairman and for Members in the absence of
Chairman has been proposed in the Bill to be the Minister in-charge under Clause 20. The
Committee noted that the President of India is leave sanctioning authority in respect of
Chairman of some of the Tribunals e.g. , Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority,
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission and Railway Claims Tribunal. In case, the
proposed provision in the Bill is agreed to, it would supersede the provisions of these
Acts where President is the leave sanctioning authority. The Committee is not in
agreement with the Clause 20 of Bill mainly for two reasons. Firstly, if leave
sanctioning authority remains with the ministry-in-charge it would affect the
independence of the Tribunal as the concerned Ministry is one of the parties to the
disputes that come for adjudication before the Tribunal and secondly, it affects the
status of Tribunals. The Committee wishes that such an authority should rest with an
independent agency, like National Commission for Tribunal, which has been dealt with
in the later part of this Report.
Inclusion of grounds of removal under the Bill
30. The Committee has been apprised that differential grounds of removal exist in the
respective Acts/Rules for the twenty-six Tribunals covered under the Schedule of the Bill.
Some, like CAT, Securities Appellate Tribunal, Armed Forces Tribunal, Intellectual Property
Law Board, provide for only two grounds for removal, i.e.  proven misbehavior or incapacity.
Some others, such as the National Green Tribunal, TDSAT provide for five grounds-
insolvency, conviction for moral turpitude, physical or mental incapacity, acquiring interest
prejudicial to its functions and abusing his position in a manner that is against public interest.
The Committee feels that the grounds for removal of Chairman and Members need to
be uniform and be included in the present Bill. The Law Secretary in his oral evidence
has also agreed to such proposal. The Government may consider including grounds of
removal in the present Bill.
Need for a comprehensive Bill
31. Majority of Tribunals have been created as alternative disputes resolution mechanism
for expeditious disposal of cases and also to reduce pressure upon concerned High Courts. But
backlog of cases have been mounting in those bodies. As on 31st December, 2014 position of
cases pending in certain Tribunal of Commissions is given below:–

9
Pendency of cases as on 31st December, 2014
Sl.No. Name of quasi-judicial entity Pendency
1. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 99349
2. Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal 96039
3. Railway Claim Tribunal 44756
4. Central Administrative Tribunal 38209
5 Armed Forces Tribunal 15603
6. Company Law Board 4201
7. National Green Tribunal 2875
8. Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal 1010
9. National Industrial Tribunal 750
10. Competition Appellate Tribunal 162
11. Cyber Appellate Tribunal 34
32. Some of the Tribunals i.e. , National Highway Tribunals, Cyber Appellate Tribunal and
Airport Economic Regulatory Appellate Authority are dysfunctional due to vacancies. The post
of Presiding Officer in all eight Benches of National Highway Tribunal (which is a single
Member Bench) located at Chandigarh, Lucknow, Kolkata, Mumbai, Jabalpur, Bengluru,
Chennai and Guwahati are lying vacant. The post of Presiding Officer in Cyber Appellate
Tribunal is vacant since July, 2011. Therefore, it cannot function in the absence of its
Chairperson in view of Section 49 of Information Technology Act, 2000. The Competition
Appellate Tribunal was assigned additional charge of Airport Economic Regulatory Appellate
Authority since its inception till 20th August, 2014. Now it is dysfunctional.
33. The vacancies position as on 31 st  December, 2014 in certain Tribunals under First
Scheduled to the Bill (Annexure-III) . The pendency in those Tribunals has defeated the
purpose for which those Tribunals have been created as parallel to High Courts. It is due to
the fact that those bodies have not been provided with the requisite manpower and/or
infrastructure facilities, as a result of which Tribunals system could not achieve the objective
for which those have been created.
34. The Chairman, Law Commission while deposing before the Committee has drawn the
attention of the Committee to the change made in the Tribunals system in United Kingdom on
the basis of Leggat Committee. On the basis of recommendations of Leggat Committee (2001),
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act, 2007 was enacted by the British Parliament. Under
that Act an independent body called Judicial Appointment Commission (JAC) has been created
to select candidates for Tribunal for appointment by Law Chancellor. The Law Chancellor is
also responsible for providing administrative and staff support to all Tribunals. A permanent
Tribunal service has also been created for manning the Tribunals in UK.

10
35. He has suggested for setting up of a National Tribunal Commission and also to
introduce a common cadre based Tribunal service to be selected by that Commission and to
the appointed by Law Minister/President of India. He also suggested that all Tribunals service
should be placed under Ministry of Law and Justice for independent functioning of those
bodies. Similar view has been expressed by the apex court in L. Chandra Kumar Case. At
present, Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange are under
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs). Other Tribunals are under their
nodal Ministries for the sake of convenience. Some of the Tribunals like Income- Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Railway Claims Tribunal, Company Law Board, Telecom Disputes Settlement and
Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange, National Green Tribunal have
favoured the observation of Supreme Court of India in the interest of independent functioning
of those bodies.
36. The Committee expresses its concern over the sad state of affairs in the
Tribunals/Commissions. Some of them are dysfunctional due to large scale vacancies.
Some of the bodies cannot function without the presiding officer in view of the position
in the respective Acts. The post of presiding officer of Cyber Appellate Tribunal is
vacant therefore the body is dysfunctional in view of Section 49 of Information
Technology Act, 2000.
37. The Committee has been apprised that most of these Tribunals have not been
provided with adequate residential accommodations, proper office infrastructure or
adequate supporting staff, many of the posts of those bodies are lying vacant and also
cases are mounting in those bodies and the purpose for which those bodies were created
have been defeated.
38. It is time for Government to provide necessary infrastructure, human and
financial resource to the Tribunals for speedy delivery of Justice. The Committee,
therefore, endorses the view of Law Commission of India for creation of National
Tribunals Commission to oversee selection process, eligibility criteria for appointment
introduction of common eligibility criteria for removal of Chairman and Members as
also for meeting the requirement of infrastructural and financial resources. The
Government may improve the Bill by bringing in a comprehensive legislation proposing
uniform condition of service with regard to eligibility conditions for appointment, ground
of removal, uniform retirement age, allowances and other perquisites for Chairperson
and Members of Tribunals/Commissions belonging to the same category and tbese
functions and responsibilities be vested in the National Tribunal Commission may be
created for the purpose.
39. The Committee also feels that NTC should deal with Tribunals only. The
regulatory Bodies which do not perform quasi-judicial function, should be kept out of
purview of this Bill and may be dealt with separately.
40. While considering this Bill, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the following
issues which are very essential to the efficient and independent functioning of
quasi- judicial bodies:-
(i) The authority in decision making of Government should endeavour to
deliver fair justice in their day to day functioning and decision taking by

11
proper application of rules, regulations, judicial precedents, directions,
etc., as a result of which appeals against their decision could be reduced
to minimum and cases before Tribunals will substantially go down.
(ii) Appeals before the tribunals involves cost which is borne out of tax payers
money. Presently no cost is levied as court fee in the tribunal
proportionate to the quantum of relief sought. The Government should
contemplate to impose fee for regulating appeals as well as generating
revenue to meet expenditure required for infrastructure, supporting staff,
etc.
(iii) It should be imperative upon the Government to categorically mention in
the Financial Statement of the Bill proposing to create a quasi-judicial
body, the cost of setting up of a quasi-judicial body including provision of
infrastructure and salary. Committee wishes that in the future Bills the
nodal ministry as well as the Ministry of Law and Justice should ensure
that such details in the Financial Statement appended to the Bill are
invariably given.
41. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time for the Government to
positively look into the issues raised above.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee, is in agreement with the view that all the Tribunals of similar
status should be entitled to similar service conditions. The committee is of the view that
for purpose of uniform service conditions, the classification of Tribunals may be based
on an intelligible differentia. The committee feels that for purpose of uniform service
conditions etc., the Tribunals headed by a Supreme Court Judge and where appeal
against the order of the Tribunal lies to the Supreme Court may form a category
distinct from the Tribunal/Commission whose order is appealable to the concerned High
Court. The former Tribunals may form the category-I Tribunals while the latter may
form category-II Tribunals. The first category may include Tribunals such as Armed
Forces Tribunals, National Green Tribunal, National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority. The second category
may include Tribunals/Commissipns headed by Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of
High Court where appeal against their orders goes to High Court. It may include
Central Administrative Tribunal/State Administrative Tribunal. The Tribunals headed by
a District Judge with certain experience or a person who qualifies to be a District Judge
may form the third category. [Para 11]
2. The Committee further notes that the Schedule needs to be revisited and
comprehensively revised. All Tribunals created under the Acts of Parliament which fall
in any of the three categories should be included and those who do not qualify to be
called Tribunals in the strict sense should be excluded from the Bill. [Para 12]
3. The Committee is not in favour of inclusion of regulatory bodies within the
Tribunals for purpose of bringing uniformity in service conditions. [Para 13]
4. The Committee does not appreciate the policy of making the retirement age
individual-centric rather than post-centric. It apprehends serious flaws therein as a
Chairperson or a Member of a Tribunal or Commission would have to retire at age of
70 years if he is a retired judge of Supreme Court or 67 years if he is a retired judge
of High Court or 65 years if he qualifies to be a judge of High Court (those who come
from the Bar) and those who are domain experts. It would amount to treating same
class of individuals differently even though they perform same functions, belong to the
same Tribunal, and have the same designation. The retirement age needs to be
invariably associated with the post or position to which an individual is appointed and
not otherwise. Linking the retirement age to the source of appointment does not appear
to be a sound proposition and may not stand judicial scrutiny. [Para 17]
5. The Committee feels that the age of retirement should be to be the same for
persons holding same positions in the Tribunals in a category as referred to in para 11
above. The Committee further suggests that the retirement age may be uniform for
Chairperson and Members of Tribunals included in the same category as in the case of
12

National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and Supreme Court and High Court.
The Committee notes the Chairman and Members of the Tribunals shall hold office as
such for a term of 5 years and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term
subject to the conditions that they would cease to hold the office of the Chairman or
Members as the case may be on attaining the age of retirement. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Madras Bar Association case has favoured a term of seven or five years for
National Company Law Tribunal on the ground that considerable time is required to
achieve expertise in the concerned field and a shorter tenure often leads to a situation
that by the time the Members achieve the required knowledge, expertise and efficiency
their term will be over. The Committee is of the view that a longer term of 7 years may
be provided so that knowledge and expertise gained by the Members may be gainfully
utilized. The retirement age of Chairperson and Members of all Tribunals/Commissions
should be 70 years. [Para 18]
6. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the provision relating to
reappointment may be omitted particularly as the Committee has already
recommended a uniform tenure upto seventy years for Chairman and Members of
the Tribunals. [Para 20]
7. Committee also dwelt upon at length on the need of making regular
appointments in the Tribunals in place of tenure appointments. The Committee noted
that system of regular appointment is in existence in Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and
Customs Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. It was felt that such appointments
may be needed to make Tribunals more vibrant and to facilitate induction of young and
talented experts and judicial officers with a reasonable length of experience in the
related field. The tenure posting appears to be less attractive to the Advocates and other
professionals. [Para 21]
8. The Committee, however, notes that lack of promotional prospects in system of
regular recruitment may hinder the prospects of attracting best available talent in the
field. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to examine the possibility
of making regular appointments in all Tribunals after suitably addressing the issue of
career progression of such directly recruited Chairperson/Members. The Committee
feels that the expertise and experience of the Chairperson and Members of Tribunal/
Commission can be utilised in the concerned High Court as appeal against the order of
Tribunal invariably goes to High Court except for Armed Forces Tribunal, National Green
Tribunal, National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Authority. [Para 22]
9. Although the existing statutes have provision for a sitting or retired judge of
Supreme Court or High Court to become Chairperson or Member of certain Tribunals/
Commissions, only retired judges have been manning the positions of Chairperson or
members of the Tribunals. The Committee appreciates that sitting judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts, in view of their higher status conferred by the
Constitution may not like to come to Tribunals, which certainly are not at par with the
Supreme Court or the High Courts even though salary and allowances may be same in
Tribunals and Supreme Court/High Courts. Even bureaucrats opt for the Tribunal at
13

14
the fag end of their career or after retirement. Consequently, the Tribunals/
Commissions have become a haven for retired judges and bureaucrats. The tenure
appointment in those bodies gives impetus to the prevalent practice. [Para 23]
10. The post retirement assignment appears to be impinging upon independent
functioning of judicial and quasi-judicial bodies as there is no cooling off period for
judges and bureaucrats before taking up post retirement assignment in Tribunal/
Commission. [Para 24]
11. As per Clause 9, however, allowance are being made uniform for Chairpersons
and Members of all Tribunals. This is resulting in reduced housing and sumptuary
allowances for some existing Chairpersons and Members who are retired Judges of
Supreme Court or High Court as compared to what they are entitled to at present. On
the other hand, some existing Members/Chairpersons would be entitled to higher
allowances than what they are getting at present. [Para 27]
12. A suggestion has been made that provisions of this Bill may be made applicable
to only Members and Chairpersons who join after coming in force of the provisions of
the Bill and existing incumbent to the office of the Chairpersons and Members of
various Tribunals may be given an option either to be regulated by the provisions of the
Bill or the extant provisions as applicable to them. The Committee feels that the
Government may consider the suggestion. [Para 28]
13. In case, the proposed provision in the Bill is agreed to, it would supersede the
provisions of these Acts where President is the leave sanctioning authority. The
Committee is not in agreement with the Clause 20 of Bill mainly for two reasons.
Firstly, if leave sanctioning authority remains with the ministry-in-charge it would affect
the independence of the Tribunal as the concerned Ministry is one of the parties to the
disputes that come for adjudication before the Tribunal and secondly, it affects the
status of Tribunals. The Committee wishes that such an authority should rest with an
independent agency, like National Commission for Tribunal, which has been dealt with
in the later part of this Report. [Para 29]
14. The Committee feels that the grounds for removal of Chairman and Members
need to be uniform and be included in the present Bill. The Law Secretary in his oral
evidence has also agreed to such proposal. The Government may consider including
grounds of removal in the present Bill. [Para 30]
15. The Committee expresses its concern over the sad state of affairs in the
Tribunals/Commissions. Some of them are dysfunctional due to large scale vacancies.
Some of the bodies cannot function without the presiding officer in view of the position
in the respective Acts. The post of presiding officer of Cyber Appellate Tribunal is
vacant therefore the body is dysfunctional in view of Section 49 of Information
Technology Act, 2000. [Para 36]
16. The Committee has been apprised that most of these Tribunals have not been
provided with adequate residential accommodations, proper office infrastructure or
adequate supporting staff, many of the posts of those bodies are lying vacant and also
cases are mounting in those bodies and the purpose for which those bodies were created
have been defeated. [Para 37]

15
17. It is time for Government to provide necessary infrastructure, human and
financial resource to the Tribunals for speedy delivery of Justice. The Committee,
therefore, endorses the view of Law Commission of India for creation of National
Tribunals Commission to oversee selection process, eligibility criteria for appointment
introduction of common eligibility criteria for removal of Chairman and Members as
also for meeting the requirement of infrastructural and financial resources. The
Government may improve the Bill by bringing in a comprehensive legislation proposing
uniform condition of service with regard to eligibility conditions for appointment, ground
of removal, uniform retirement age, allowances and other perquisites for Chairperson
and Members of Tribunals/Commissions belonging to the same category and these
functions and responsibilities be vested in the National Tribunal Commission may be
created for the purpose. [Para 38]
18. The Committee also feels that NTC should deal with Tribunals only. The
regulatory Bodies which do not perform quasi-judicial function, should be kept out of
purview of this Bill and may be dealt with separately. [Para 39]
19. While considering this Bill, the Committees’ attention was drawn to the following
issues which are very essential to the efficient and independent functioning of quasi
judicial bodies :- [Para 40]
(i) The authority in decision making of Government should endeavour to
deliver fair justice in their day to day functioning and decision taking by
proper application of rules, regulations, judicial precedents, directions,
etc., as a result of which appeals against their decision could be reduced
to minimum and cases before Tribunals will substantially go down.
(ii) Appeals before the tribunals involves cost which is borne out of tax payers
money. Presently no cost is levied as court fee in the tribunal
proportionate to the quantum of relief sought. The Government should
contemplate to impose fee for regulating appeals as well as generating
revenue to meet expenditure required for infrastructure, supporting staff,
etc.
(iii) It should be imperative upon the Government to categorically mention in
the Financial Statement of the Bill proposing to create a quasi-judicial
body, the cost of setting up of a quasi judicial body including provision of
infrastructure and salary. Committee wishes that in the future Bills the
nodal ministry as well as the Ministry of Law and Justice should ensure
that such details in the Financial Statement appended to the Bill are
invariably given.
20. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time for the Government to
positively look into the issues raised above. [Para 41]

MINUTES

XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 13 th March, 2014 in Committee
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
3. Shri N.S.V .Chitthan
3. Shri D.B.Chandre Gowda
4. Shri Arjun Meghwal
5. Shri S.S.Ramasubhu
6. Shri S. Semmalai
7. Shri S.D.Shariq
8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
9. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
10. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh , Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law & Justice
1. Shrimati Anita Kaul, Secretary
2. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and Secretary, Department of
Justice and other Officers of the Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. He then requested
the Secretary, Department of Justice to make a presentation, inter-alia, clarifying the various
19

provisions of The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and The Tribunals, Appellate
Tribunals & Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014.
3 . *                     *                     *
4 . *                     *                     *
The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014
5. The Secretary gave the background which necessitated the proposed amendment and
opined that the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill,
2014, inter alia, intends to ensure uniform service conditions, allowances and perquisites for
Chairman and Members of 26 quasi-judicial bodies, including the Central Administrative
Tribunal, State Administrative Tribunals, National Green Tribunal, Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, the Press Council of India, etc. On the basis of decision of the Inter-Ministerial
Group (IMG), the Department of Justice has been designated as Central agency for
administrative control of those Tribunals and accordingly proposed to provide uniform tenure,
age of retirement and residential accommodation of members of Tribunals through a common
legislation.
6. Responding to the query about different retirement age, she mentioned that appointment to
Tribunals is tenure based and retirement age is calculated on the basis of retirement of the
incumbent and therefore age of retirement is 70 years for a Supreme Court Judge, 67 years
for a High Court Judge and 65 years for others. She further opined that they can be appointed
for one term of a maximum of five years so long as they satisfy the criteria of age of
retirement and there is no bar on appointment on another Tribunal, provided that the Member
is within the stipulated age of retirement. She also apprised the Committee about the
accommodation, medical and LTC facilities to be provided to Chairmen and Members of the
Tribunals.
7. She further added that Chairpersons/Members of Tribunals may not be allowed to take
up arbitration work while functioning on Tribunals. However, if they have arbitration work at
hand at the time of their appointment, competent authority may permit them to complete such
arbitration after examining the request on a case-to-case basis. Further Chairpersons/Members
of Tribunals shall have to declare their assets/ liabilities and financial other interests at the time
of their appointment, which also will be placed in their personal records.
8. Several queries arising out of the presentation were raised by Members regarding the
various provisions of the Bill, and the same were clarified by the Secretary.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4:01 P.M.
20
*** Relate to some other matters.

RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 24 th March, 2014 in
Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
3. Shri S. Semmalai
4. Shri S.D.Shariq
5. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
I. Department of Personnel & Training
1. Shri Bhanu Pratap Sharma, Additional Secretary
2. Ms. Archana V erma, Joint Secretary
II. Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Anil Sant, Joint Secretary
III. Department of Justice
Shri  Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee and
Additional Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice and other senior
officials of all three Ministries. He then requested the Additional Secretary, Department of
Personnel and Training to make a presentation, inter-alia, clarifying the various provisions of
21

The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 and
requested Additional Secretary, Environment and Forests thereafter to make his presentation on
the Bill.
3. Initiating his presentation on the Bill, the Additional Secretary, Department of Personnel
and Training made comparative statement of the terms and conditions as they exist under the
Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985, vis-a-vis the proposal in the Bill. He informed that
Department of Personnel and Training broadly agrees with the proposed changes in terms of
office, pensions, salary and other allowances provided. On Terms of Office of the Chairman
and Members of the Tribunals of maximum five (5) years for Chairpersons and Members with
a maximum age of 70 years for a Judge of the Supreme Court, 67 years for Chief Justice or
Judge of a High Court and 65 years in case of others, he felt that Chairman and Members may
be re-appointed for one more term of maximum of five (5) years so long as they satisfy the
criterion of age of retirement.
4. Several queries arising out of the presentation were raised by Members regarding the
various provisions of the Bill, and the same were clarified by the Additional Secretary,
Department of Personnel and Training.
5. Welcoming the introduction of amendment in the Bill, Additional Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests felt that the Bill will remove ambiguity in the existing National Green
Tribunal Act and also the distinction between a judicial member and an expert member in terms
of perks, allowances and salaries. He also suggested that an Expert Member or a Technical
Member under the National Green Tribunal Act can come on deputation also. He also pointed
out that there is no provision for reappointment in the National Green Tribunal Act whereas
in the proposed Bill there is a provision for reappointment also even though the upper limit of
age has been prescribed. He further apprised the Members number of High Courts have by and
large been directing the persons to approach National Green Tribunal wherever a case involves
adjudication of environmental issues and today the number of cases pending in National Green
Tribunal in Delhi Bench is about 690 odd cases and in Chennai it is about 672. Queries arising
out of the presentation were raised by Members regarding the various provisions of the Bill,
and the same were clarified by the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. The Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 11:45 A.M.
22

I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 12 th September, 2014 in
Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramachandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
10. Shri Santosh Kumar
11. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
12. Shri Anoop Mishra
13. Shri B.V. Naik
14. Shri Vincent H. Pala
15. Shri V . Panneerselvam
16. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
17. Dr. A. Sampath
18. Shri Bharat Singh
19. Shri Udhayakumar M.
20. Dr. Anshul Verma
21. Shri Tariq Anwar
23

24
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
I. Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary;
2. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri P.K. Das, Joint Secretary;
4. Ms. Archana Verma, Joint Secretary;
5. Ms. Mamta Kundra Joint Secretary;
6. Shri Jishnu Barua Joint Secretary;
7. Shri Prakash, Director;
8. Shri M. Devaraj, Director;
9. Ms. Gayatri Mishra, Director;
10. Ms. Anshu Sinha, Director;
11. Shri Diwakar Nath Misra, Director;
12. Shri V .M. Rathnam, Director; and
13. Shri N. Raja, Director.
II. Union Public Service Commission
1. Shri Ashim Khurana, Secretary;
2. Shri R.K. Arora, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri Rajeev Chandra Joshi, Additional Secretary;
4. Shri Mohit Chandra, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri Sanjay Mehrishi, Joint Secretary;
6. Ms. Manju Kumar, Joint Secretary; and
7. Shri T.V . Dinesh, Joint Secretary.
III. Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Department of
Pension & Pensioner’s Welfare
1. Shri N. Ravi Shanker, Secretary;
2. Shri Arun Jha, Additional Secretary;
3. Shrimati Vandana Sharma, Joint Secretary;
4. Shri V .A. Chavda, Director;

25
5. Shri K. Nagaraja; Director;
6. Shri Aditya Joshi, Director;
7. Ms. Tripti P. Ghosh, Director; and
8. Shri Sumant Narain, Director.
2 . *                     *                     *
3. He informed the Members that two Bills, namely, the Delhi High Court (Amendment)
Bill, 2014 and the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service)
Bill, 2014 have been referred to the Committee by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to complete
its examination and report by 31st October, 2014. He suggested that a Press Communique
soliciting comments/suggestions on those two Bills from stake holders, may be issued by the
Secretariat which was duly endorsed by the Committee.
4. Elaborating the provisions of both the Bills, he mentioned that there is a need to interact
with Registrar-General of High Court of Delhi and Judicial Officers in charge of registry of
District Courts in Delhi, Bar Associations of High Court of Delhi and District Courts in Delhi
on the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill in view of proposed change in pecuniary jurisdiction
of both the Courts. He also suggested interaction with Members of Twenty Six quasi-judicial
bodies whose service conditions, remuneration, pension, retirement age, etc. have been
proposed to be made uniform in the Tribunal Bill, in order to assess case load, disposal rate,
vacancy position and other related problems in those bodies. He proposed a study visit of the
Committee to Guwahati, Shillong and Kolkatta to interact with some of those Tribunals/
Commissions specified in the First Schedule to the Bill, from 13 th September to 17 th October,
2014, which was duly endorsed by this Committee.
5 . *                     *                     *
5.1. *                    *                    *
6 . 0 *                     *                     *
6.1. *                    *                    *
7 . *                     *                     *
8 . *                     *                     *
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 1.26 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 19 th
September, 2014.
*** Relate to some other matters.

III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 26 th September, 2014 in Committee
Room ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
6. Shri Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
7. Shri Santosh Kumar
8. Shri Vincent H. Pala
9. Dr. A. Sampath
10. Shri Bharat Singh
11. Shri Udhayakumar M.
12. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
13. Dr. Anshul V erma
14. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
26

Ministry of Law & Justice
Department of Justice
1. Ms. Anita Kaul, Secretary;
2. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri Y .M. Pande, Director.
2 . *                     *                     *
3 . *                     *                     *
4. The Secretary, Department of Justice, in her deposition submitted that the Tribunals,
Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 has been
introduced as a sequel to a few landmark judgments of Supreme Court of India [L. Chandra
Kumar Case (1997), R. Gandhi Case (2010) and Rajiv Garg Case (on going)]. Thereafter, she
requested the Joint Secretary concerned to make a power-point presentation on the Bill. While
making power point presentation, the concerned Joint Secretary submitted that the appointment
of Chairman and Members of Tribunals rests with the administrative Ministry. The Department
of Justice has been given the mandate to bring uniformity in matters of age of retirement,
salary, pension, allowance, accommodation, medical facilities, oath of office and secrecy, leave
travel concession, etc. on the basis of the recommendations of the Group of Ministers. He
added that the retirement age of Chairman and Members of Tribunals should be on the basis
of tenure rather than age in view of different ages of appointment of judicial as well as domain
specific expert members.
5. Members pointed out that three different retirement ages for the Members of tribunal
defeats the objective of the Bill which intends to establish uniformity of service conditions of
quasi-judicial bodies specified in First Schedule to the Bill. They were of the view that
uniformity of superannuation age should be preferable to the uniformity of tenure. It was
pointed out that the tribunal should not be a rehabilitation place for retired officers from
executive and judiciary rather it should encourage serving judicial officers from subordinate
judiciary, judges from High Courts and Supreme Court and Members of Bar of High Courts
in appointment as Member of tribunals. In that context, a cooling up period of two years was
proposed for the retired officers from Executive and Judiciary.
6. The Members pointed out variance in language of oath and secrecy specified in the
Fourth Schedule to the Bill and Third Schedule to the Constitution of India. Chairman
suggested the Secretary to seek the opinion of Attorney-General on the recent judgment of
Supreme Court on the constitutionality and the legality of setting up of National Tax Tribunal
which has direct bearing on the quasi-judicial system of the country. He suggested that Quasi-
Judicial Appointment Commission on the line of National Judicial Commission might be
contemplated for appointment of Chairman and Members of Tribunals.
7. While responding to the queries of Members, the Secretary submitted that issues of
uniformity of tenure and uniformity of age of retirement was considered by the Group of
27
*** Relate to some other matters.

Ministers which after due deliberation recommended for uniformity of tenure by providing for
three different ages of superannuation. On the issue of bringing judicial officers from
subordinate judiciary on deputation, she pointed out that more than 4200 vacancies are existing
in subordinate courts across the country which has direct impact on pendency of cases. On
the issue of common nodal Ministry for looking after issues relating to Tribunals, the
Inter-Ministerial Group set up in the Department of Justice felt that it would not be feasible
for one Department to handle all Tribunals in view of the fact that certain domain specific
experts need to be appointed in the Tribunal on which the concerned administrative Ministry
is competent to decide. On the issue of standardization of oath and affirmation for the
Members of Tribunals, the suggestions of members will be examined and result of the same
examination will be furnished to the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.49 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the
7th October, 2014.
28

X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16 th December, 2014 in
Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
7. Adv. Sharad Bansode
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
10. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Shri V . Panneerselvam
13. Dr. Anshul Verma
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Non-Official Witnesses
1. Shri K. Ashokan, Presiding Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal-II, New Delhi;
2. Shri Ashish Kalia, Presiding Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal-III, New Delhi,
3. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Former Member, Central Administrative Tribunal
29

30
4. PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi
(i) Shri M.R. Madhavan, President,
(ii) Dr. Mandira Kala
(iii) Ms. Prianka Rao
5. Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Justice
Shri Y .M. Pande, Director
2. Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and informed that non-official
witnesses who in addition to their written memorandum had expressed their desire to tender
oral evidence before the Committee on the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other Authorities
(Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 have been invited for the  purpose. The Chairman, thereafter,
welcomed the non-official witnesses and officers of the Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice.
3. The Presiding Officers of Debt Recovery Tribunals, New Delhi who appeared as
non-official witnesses, in their deposition submitted that both the Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal (DRAT) as well as Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) are single bench quasi-judicial
bodies set up under the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
While DRAT has been included under Schedule 1 to the Bill under examination of the
Committee, DRTs have been excluded. They added that the Presiding Officer of DRT is
equivalent to the rank of District Judge and Judicial Members of other Tribunals viz. Central
Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Company Law Board (CLB), National Industrial Tribunal (NIT)
and Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT) are also of the same rank and have been included
in the Schedule to the Bill and as such exclusion of DRTs was not justified. Even a Presiding
Officer of DRT having three years experience has become Presiding Officer of DRAT.
Currently, Presiding Officer of DRT, Mumbai has been discharging the additional responsibility
of Presiding Officer of DRAT, Chennai. The DRT has appellate power and hear appeals from
orders of the Recovery Officers under Section 30 of the Recovery of Debt due to Banks and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993. All DRTs put together recovered revenue to the tune of
R15,000 crore from defaulting parties in the last financial year. They cited National Industrial
Tribunal which is also headed by a District Judge having three years experience and has also
been included under the Schedule to the Bill. They, therefore, appealed to the Gommittee to
include DRTs under Schedule to the Bill for the sake of Article 14 of Constitution.
4. Dr. Sudhir Kumar, former Member of Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) in his
deposition has averred that CAT which has been created under Article 323A of Constitution has
been placed under same footing with other quasi-judicial bodies created under Article 323B of
Constitution which is not proper. He has suggested that quasi-judicial entities need to be bi-
furcated to differentiate Constitutional Tribunals from other regulatory bodies. He, therefore,
suggested that change in service conditions of 26 quasi-judicial bodies needs to be reflected
in their Parent Act to give immediate effect.
5. Shri H.R. Madhavan of PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi in his deposition
submitted that the provision of re-appointment of Chairman and Members of quasi-judicial
bodies listed in the Bill might be challenged in Court of Law in view of decision of Supreme
Court in the case of Madras Bar Association vs. Union of India (2014) wherein Section 8 of

31
the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 which has similar provisions has been declared
unconstitutional.
6. While referring to leave sanctioning provision in the Bill (Clause-20), he averred that the
President of India is currently the leave sanctioning authority for Chairman of Telecom
Disputes Settlement Appellate Authority (TDSAT), National Green Tribunal (NGT) and Appellate
Authority. The Minister concerned has been proposed as leave sanctioning authority of all
quasi-judicial bodies in the Bill including aforesaid two bodies for the sake of uniformity which
may impinge upon their independent functioning since the Departments under that authority are
invariably one of the parties to the dispute.
6.1 He pointed out that having three sets of superannuation age for chairman and Members
of all quasi-judicial bodies to be covered under the Bill is against the objective of the Bill. He,
therefore, suggested that previous service should not be factored into while deciding the age
of superannuation. The nexus between previous post and age of superannuation of Chairman
and Members denotes unequal treatment amongst different classes of individuals and is
apparently violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. He cited uniform retirement age for
Chairman and Members as 70 & 65, respectively, as suggested by Law Commission in their
Two Hundred Thirty Second Report (2009).
6.2 He added that differential grounds of removal exists in their respective Acts/Rules for
tribunals. This needs to be covered under this Bill so as to provide uniform conditions for
removal of the Chairman/Members of the Tribunals. The Bill also prohibits Chairman and
Members of tribunals not to practise before the same body but is silent whether they could
take up post-tenure employment with the litigant institutions or enterprises. He mentioned that
such type of moratorium already is in existence for Members of National Green Tribunal and
Competition Appellate Tribunal, which may be considered appropriate for inclusion in this Bill.
6.3 He suggested that the service conditions of Vice-Chairman/Vice-President might be
provided in the Bill as Company Law Board, Armed Forces Tribunal and Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal have such posts to assist the Presiding Officer.
6.4 Members observed that differential superannuation ages depending on the previous post
is defective and liable to be struck down as arbitrary and discriminatory under Article 14 of
the Constitution. They felt that retirement age and grounds of removal for Chairman and
Members should be uniform across the Tribunals listed under the Bill.
 (The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 5.22 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 18 th December, 2014.

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 10:30 A.M. on Friday, the 18 th December, 2014 in Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Subrata Bakshi
9. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
10. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Shri Santosh Kumar
12. Shri B.V. Naik
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri Bharat Singh
15. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of Committee. The Chairman, thereafter,
referred to the letter dated 16th December, 2014 received from Shri M. V enkaiah Naidu,
Minister of Urban Development, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and Parliamentary
Affairs forwarding therewith a letter of Shri D.V . Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and
32

Justice wherein he had referred to the observations of Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 120/2012 (Rajeev Garg Vs. UOI) on 7 th November, 2014. The observations of Supreme
Court are reproduced as under:-
“Learned Solicitor General submits that the matter is still pending before the
Parliamentary Standing Committee. Only after submission of the Report by the
Committee, the matter will be placed before the Parliament. On his request, the case
is adjourned for four weeks.
We hope and trust that in the meantime, the Respondent Union of India will
request the concerned Parliamentary Affairs Minister to expedite the matter before the
Parliamentary Standing Committee so that the matter may be placed before the
Parliament on an early date...”
3. Taking note of the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Minister of Urban
Development, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and Parliamentary Affairs requested the
Chairman of the Committee to expedite the submission of the report on the Tribunals, Appellate
Tribunals and Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 as desired by the Supreme Court
of India.
4. Members felt that the Committee is yet to interact with stakeholders on the Bill. The
Committee also noted that Hon’ble Chairman has granted an extension upto 30 th January, 2015
for presentation of the report to the Committee.
5. It was decided that the next meeting of the Committee will be held at 3.00 P.M. on 30 th
December, 2014 to hear the views of the following four Tribunals (i) Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal; (ii) National Green Tribunal; (iii) National Disputes Redressal Commission; and (iv)
Customs, Excise and Service Tax, Appellate Tribunal. The Committee also decided to hear the
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice on a later date.
6 . *                     *                     *
7 . *                     *                     *
8 . *                     *                     *
9. The meeting adjourned at 10.45 A.M.
33
*** Relate to some other matters.

II
RECORD NOTE OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th December, 2014 in
Committee Room G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
5. Shri B.V. Naik
6. Dr. A. Sampath
7. Shri Bharat Singh
8. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Customs, Excise & Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT)
(i) Justice Shri G. Raghuram, President;
(ii) Shri R.K. Singh, Member (Technical); and
(iii) Shri A. Mohan Kumar, Registrar
2. National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
(i) Justice Shri Vinay Kumar Jain, Member; and
(ii) Shri Anil Srivastava, Registrar
34

3. Department of Consumer Affairs (M/o Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution)
Shri G .C. Rout, Deputy Secretary
4. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
(i) Shrimati Diva Singh, Member (Judicial);
(ii) Shri N.K. Saini, Member (Accountant);
(iii) Shri J. Sudhakar Reddy, Member (Accountant); and
(iv) Shri Prabha Shanker Singh, Assistant Registrar.
5. Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary & LA
6. National Green Tribunal
Shri Sanjay Kumar, Registrar-General
7. Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
Shri Bishwanath Sinha, Joint Secretary, MEF & CC
8. Department of Justice (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
2 . *                     *                     *
The Chairman welcomed all the witnesses and requested them to dwell on issues in
brief and also offer their views, if any, on the feasibility of a comprehensive law method of
induction and removal which would create uniform qualifications, perquisites, service
conditions, etc. for all tribunals.
3. The President of The Customs, Excise, and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTA T),
informed the Committee about asymmetry of available infrastructure for the tribunals and
suggested for common model of infrastructure which would specify size of the court room,
chamber for Chairperson and Members, supporting staff requirements budgetary support, some
amount of financial autonomy, etc. He pointed out that difficulty in finding Judicial Members
to handle specialized Tribunals for which he suggested a foundation training program to
acquaint them with critical domain expertise. He was of the view that pension paid for past
service rendered should not be subtracted from the pay.
4. He pointed out that no guidelines or norm for re-appointment have been laid down in
the Bill; Re-appointment as such is contrary to arbitration principles as the sponsoring Ministry
is invariably a party to the litigation. He was of the view that differential retirement age is
against the attempt of Government for standardizing service conditions of Chairperson and
Members of Tribunal/Commission. He appealed to the Committee that provisions of Clause 3
*** Relate to some other matter.

should be extended to incumbent Chairperson and Member in larger interest. He also shared
information relating to existing and forthcoming vacancies, additional Benches created, etc. of
CESTAT. He ad ded that 85% of orders passed by Commissioners, Appellate Commissioners are
not sustainable in the Tribunal resulting in loss of revenue to Government. Revenue to the tune
of Rupees Two Hundred Thousand Crores have been locked due to pendency of more than one
lakh cases in that body.
5. The Judicial Member of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission submitted
that the Chairman of the Commission is entitled to salary, allowances and perquisites of a
sitting judge of Supreme Court whereas Members of that Commission have the option of
choosing consolidated honourarium or last pay drawn. He appealed to the Committee that
salary, allowances and perquisites of a sitting judge of High Court or Secretary to Government
of India may be provided to judicial and expert Members to stop heart-burning amongst the
Members in that Commission. He cited examples of National Green Tribunal, Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Authority, Armed Forces Tribunal and Competition Appellate Tribunal
where Members are entitled to salary, allowances of a sitting High Court Judge. He was of the
view that allowances proposed under the Second and Third Schedules of the Bill would
adversely affect retired judges of Supreme Court and High Courts who are now incumbent
Chairperson and Members of Tribunal in view of Clause 9 of the Bill and suggested amendment
to the said Clause. Even though the Commission has Pan India presence infrastructural
facilities, administrative staff support are inadequate at district level which need to be
addressed. He also suggested that autonomy in the matter of framing rules for appointment of
supporting staff of the Commission and budgetary utilization should be given to them.
6. The Judicial Members of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITA T) in her deposition
touched upon the brief history of the tribunal, its composition and functions. In order to
ensure the autonomy of the tribunals, she felt that all the tribunals should be placed under the
Ministry of Law and Justice. She also submitted that the retirement age for Members and the
Chairman should be the same. She also impressed upon the delay in providing housing facilities
for members, especially in smaller cities, which hampers their functioning.
7. The Registrar-General of National Green Tribunal (NGT) requested the Committee to
grant him more time for submission of the views of the tribunal on the Bill. The Chairman
graciously granted two week’s time to the National Green Tribunal (NGT).
8. A Member of the Committee suggested improving the facilities available to the Members
of the Bar of the Tribunal, so that they could ably assist these Tribunals. He also expressed
the need for improving their conditions. The Chairman requested the Department of Justice to
prepare a comparative note of the best practices and models of Tribunals in other countries
and furnish the same for the consideration of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 4.43 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 8 th January, 2015.
36

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd January, 2015 in
Committee Room G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Adv. Sharad Bansode
8. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
10. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
11. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
12. Shri B.V. Naik
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri Bharat Singh
15. Shri Tariq Anwar
16. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
37

38
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Armed Forces Tribunal
(i) Hon. Shri Justice Sunil Hali, Member (J);
(ii) Hon. Shri R.C. Mishra, Member (J);
(iii) Hon. Air Marshal N. Burma, Member (A); and
(iv) Shri N. Rama Murthy, Principal Registrar.
2. Appellate Tribunal for Electricity
(i) Shri Rakesh Nath, Member (Technical);
(ii) Shri N.M. Borah, Member (Technical); and
(iii) Shri Harvir Singh, Registrar.
3. Ministry of Defence
Shrimati Surina Rajan, Joint Secretary
4. Ministry of Power
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Shri Manoj Kumar, Joint Secretary
6. Ministry of Labour and Employment
(i) Shri Dheeraj Kumar, Joint Secretary; and
(ii) Shri Chanan Ram, Director.
7. Department of Justice (Ministry of Law and Justice)
Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them of the
agenda of the meeting for the day. He also welcomed the witnesses and requested them to
dwell particularly on two issues viz., appropriateness of bringing Members of bodies which
differ with regard to status, background and nature of functions to an even level with respect
to service conditions, term of appointments etc. and, whether a separate Commission needs to
be set up for quasi-judicial bodies. He also asked them to express their views on different
retirement age for the Chairman and Judicial and Technical Members as proposed in the Bill.
3. Hon’ble Justice Shri Sunil Hali, Judicial Member of Armed Forces Tribunal pointed out
infirmities in Clauses 3 and 9 of the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Authorities (Conditions
of Service) Bill, 2014. He submitted that Judicial Members of the Armed Forces Tribunal would
have to retire at the age of 67 years while Technical Members who come from Air Force/
Army/Navy would have to retire at the age of 65 which appears to be discriminatory.

39
Clause 3 has overriding effect upon the existing Acts, regulating service conditions of
Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal. The proviso to Clause 3 provides that proposed
service conditions including provisions relating to retirement age would not apply to incumbent
Chairperson and Members of the Tribunals whereas Clause 9 provides that proposed
allowances specified under Second and Third Schedule of the Bill would be applicable to
incumbent Chairperson and Members. This means that a retired judge of Supreme Court and
High Courts who has been working as a Chairperson in any Tribunal would receive reduced
allowances, particularly, housing and sumptuary allowances. He was of the opinion that
reduction in allowances of Members of Tribunal would amount to lowering down their status.
He, therefore, appealed to modify suitably provisos to Clause 3 and Clause 9 for the purpose.
He also mentioned that an attempt has been made by the Government to treat unequals at par
under the garb of providing uniform service conditions. He submitted that Armed Forces
Tribunal is a unique Tribunal which decides civil as well as criminal cases and can even award
death punishment. Appeal against the order of the Armed Forces Tribunals lies to the Supreme
Court with the leave of the Armed Forces Tribunal or the Supreme Court in view of the
Articles 227(4) and 136 (2) of the Constitution. The Members of Tribunals are of the rank of
High Court Judge while Members of certain Tribunals under First Schedule of the Bill are of
the rank of District Judge.
4. The Members of Appellate Tribunal for Electricity, present in the meeting were in
favour of uniform tenure of five years and a comprehensive legislation for regulating all
aspects of service conditions, but opposed to provision of re-appointment, reduction in
allowances of incumbent Chairperson and Members.
5. The Joint Secretary of Ministry of Labour and Employment submitted that out of 22
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Courts, only two at Mumbai and Kolkata, have been designated
as National Industrial Tribunal with the same retirement age of 65 years. He was of the view
that the new allowance proposed under the Second and Third Schedules of the Bill would be
beneficial to incumbent Presiding Officers and Members.
6. Some Members felt that allowances are not part of Service Conditions, thus Clause 9
could not be unconstitutional. The pendency of cases speaks of inefficiency of the Tribunal
and younger people with reasonable experience may be appointed to reduce pendency.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 12.34 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 17 th February, 2015.

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th February, 2015 in
Committee Room G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Parimal Nathwani
3. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
6. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
8. Shri B. V . Naik
9. Dr. A. Sampath
10. Shri Udhayakumar M.
11. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
12. Dr. Anshul V erma
13. Shri Tariq Anwar
14. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.R Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
(1). Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary & LA.
40

(2) . Law Commission of India
(i) Mr. Justice A.P. Shah, Chairman.
(3). Representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) Dr. Reeta V asishta, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
(ii) Shri Ishwar Chander Sharma, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
(4). Non-Official Witness
Shri Arvind P. Datar, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India.
(5). Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them of the
agenda of the meeting for the day. He then welcomed Justice A.P. Shah, Chairman, Law
Commission, Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Shri Arvind P. Datar,
Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India and other officers of the Ministry of Law and
Justice. Before inviting the witnesses to take the floor, the Chairman apprised the witnesses of
the progress the Committee has made on the Bill till date.
3. The Chairman pointed out that about one-third of Tribunals enumerated in the Bill are
headed by a sitting or retired judge of Supreme Court. Some of the Tribunals are single
member while others are multi-member quasi-judicial body having Members, both from legal
and technical sides. While the status of members of some of the Tribunals is of the rank of
a judge of High Court, others are of the rank of a District Judge. He further added that while
some of the Tribunals are first appellate bodies, some others are second appellate bodies and
rests are authority of first instance or regulatory bodies. He pointed out that the Press Council
of India has already desired that service conditions of Chairman and Members of PCI should
be excluded from the Bill.
4. While an attempt has been made to bring uniformity in tenure, age of superannuation
and various allowances stipulated under Schedules 2 and 3 of the Bill, the Chairman pointed
out that salary and perquisites of Chairperson and Members of Tribunals are presently regulated
by the Statutes under which they have been set up.
5. He also highlighted the two tenures of five years each within three sets of
superannuation age - 70, 68 and 65 as proposed in the Bill are said to be based upon age of
superannuation of judge of Supreme Court, Judge of High Court and Secretary to Government
of India which is currently 65, 62 and 60, respectively. He added that some of the Tribunals
like ITAT, CESAT, etc. enumerated in Schedule-I to the Bill have uniform retirement age of 62
for the Chairperson and Members. He also pointed out of the omission of Debt Recovery
Tribunal from the Bill while inclusion of National Industrial Tribunal, headed by a District
Judge, has been made.
6. Citing the L. Chandrakumar’s case, where the Supreme Court held that the
administrative control of tribunals should be under the Ministry of Law and Justice, he
41

42
informed the witnesses that many Tribunals have favoured the observation of Supreme Court
of India in the interest of independent functioning of those bodies.
7. Hon’ble Justice A.P Shah, Chairman, Law Commission of India opined that the Bill is
unsatisfactory on various accounts. Firstly, the Bill appears to have been introduced to address
only concerns of the Supreme Court in Rajiv Garg’s case, without undertaking a wide ranging
consultative effort to appreciate the problem with the tribunal system in India and how it can
be reformed. Secondly, the Bill addresses mundane issues and ignores pressing problems such
as: (a) The issues of appointments-the appointing body, requisite qualifications, and the status
of technical members-prescribed for the Chairperson and Members all Tribunals; (b) The
methods of incentivizing young, competent lawyers/judges to join Tribunals; and (c) The
requirement of a cooling off period, if any, between the retirement of judges/civil servants and
their appointment to the Tribunals.
8. He apprised that the definition of a “tribunal” or “authority” in the Bill leads to over-
inclusion of bodies such as the Coastal Aquaculture Authority and the Press Council of India,
which do not perform quasi-judicial functions. He added that the proposed law should be
confined to tribunals, performing judicial/quasi-judicial functions only. He added that on the
other hand, there is under-inclusion of Tribunals in the Bill such as: (a) Appellate Authority for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction;(b) Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited Property; (c)
Appellate Tribunal under Prevention of Money Laundering; (d) Central Information
Commission; (e) Employees’ Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal; (f) Inter-State Water Dispute
Tribunals etc. which are being excluded without any apparent reason.
9. The witness opined that the Bill prescribes different retirement ages based on the
source of appointment, whether Supreme Court or High Court judge, which is completely
untenable; the .reappointment provision in the Bill is constitutionally suspect given the Supreme
Court’s 2014 decision in Madras Bar Association  Vs.  Union of India. He added that the Bill is
completely silent on ways of ensuring that members (a) remain independent; and (b) do not
become post-retirement havens. He felt that the whole objective of setting up tribunals to
reduce the burden on the judiciary has failed due to mounting up of pendency.
10. Shri Arvind P. Datar opined that Section 3 of the Bill was an overriding provision over
all other enactments. With regard to Section 5 relating to Government servants joining the
Tribunals, he suggested a lien period may be prescribed for the Government servants joining
Tribunals. He suggested deletion of the provision for oath of office in Section 11 as this is
not a Constitutional post. He is further suggested that there should not be any distinction
between tribunals where the Chairperson is the High Court Judge and otherwise. He added that
the Schedule of the Bill should not be restricted to only 20-25 tribunals. He also opined that
Tribunals Service may be created in the country.
11. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs apprised the Committee that
the main objective of the Bill was to establish uniform conditions of service for the
Chairperson and Members of certain Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other authorities
enumerated in the First Schedule to the Bill. Other Tribunals may be included within the ambit
of the Act by amending the Schedule by the Central Government if they have a Supreme Court
or High Court Judge as the Chairperson or Member. These conditions of service include term
of office, eligibility for re-appointment, age of retirement, allowances and leave entitlement for

43
Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal covered by the Bill. However, he added that the Bill
does not deal with salary payable to the Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal and the
provisions of the Bill will be applicable to those who would be appointed after coming into
force of the proposed Act.
12. He apprised that Tribunals are created by or under a law made under Article 323A with
regard to service matters and tribunals for other matters may be created as enumerated in
Article 323B of the Constitution.
13. On clause 4 of the Bill, he informed that the Chairman and Members are eligible for
reappointment however, the process of selection of Chairman and Members as provided under
the relevant Act and Rules and criteria for selection would have to be followed even in case
of reappointment. He added that Clause 8 prohibits the Chairman and Members from appearing
before the tribunal to which they were serving. Further, according to Clause 7, the Chairman
or Member, while holding such of fice, shall not act as an arbitrator in any matter. Such a
provision is expected to (i) give autonomy to the functioning of these Members of the tribunal;
(ii) their working is not interfered, and, (iii) they are not lured that after their retirement they
can get some other employment also.
14. On the different age of retirement in the same Tribunal, he opined that it was decided
by the Government as a matter of policy that it should be with reference to source of
recruitment and with a definite tenure of five years. He added that different ages of
superannuation have also been prescribed by different Ministries because each Act is
administered by a different Ministry.
15. Some Members felt that allowances are not part of Service Conditions, thus Clause 9
would not be unconstitutional and that the pendency of cases speaks of inefficiency of the
Tribunal and younger people with reasonable experience may be appointed to reduce pendency.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
16. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
17. The meeting adjourned at 5.34 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 25 th February, 2015

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25 th February, 2015 in Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
7. Adv. Sharad Bansode
8. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
9. Shri B. V . Naik
10. Shri Vincent H. Pala
11. Shri Bharat Singh
12. Shri Udhayakumar M.
13. Dr. A. Sampath
14. Dr. Anshul V erma
15. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
16. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
44

2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took the
consideration and adoption of the draft report on The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other
Authorities (Conditions of service) Bill, 2014. The Chairman highlighted the issues dealt in the
draft Report. He also informed the Members about the suggestions received from Shri Vincent
H. Pala, Member of the Committee. Members deliberated on the issues raised, and thereafter,
with certain changes the report was adopted by the Committee.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 26 th
February, 2015. It also authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri K.T.S. Tulsi to
present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri P.P. Chaudhary and in his absence, Shri Vincent
H. Pala to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.40 P.M. to meet again on 3 rd March 2015 at 3.00 P.M.
45

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
11 Aug., 2014
AS I NTRODUCED  I N T HE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. VII of 2014
THE TRIBUNALS, APPELLATE TRIBUNALS AND OTHER
AUTHORITIES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 2014
A
BIIL
to provide for uniform conditions of service of the Chairman
and Members, by whatever name called, of certain Tribunals,
Appellate Tribunals and other authorities and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER-I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tribunals, Appellate
Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Act,
2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means appellate tribunal
mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule established or
49
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

50
constituted under the provisions of any of the corresponding
specified Acts mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(b) “Authority” means an authority mentioned in column
(2) of the First Schedule established or constituted under the
provisions of any of the corresponding specified Acts mentioned
in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(c) “Board” means a board mentioned in column (2) of
the First Schedule established or constituted under the
provisions of any of the corresponding specified Acts mentioned
in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(d)  “Chairman” means a Chairman of a Tribunal,
Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority, by
whatever name called, appointed under the provisions of the
specified Acts;
(e) “Commission” means a Commission mentioned in
Column (2) of the First Scheduled, established or constituted
under the provisions of any of the Corresponding specified Acts
mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule;
 (f) “Member” means a Member, other than ex officio
Member, of a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission
or Authority, appointed under the provisions of the specified
Acts;
(g) “Schedule” means any of the Schedules annexed to
this Act;
(h) “specified Acts” means Acts specified in column (3)
of the First Schedule;
(i) “Tribunal” means a tribunal mentioned in column (2)
of the First Schedule established or constituted under the
provisions of any of the corresponding specified Acts mentioned
in column (3) of the said Schedule.
Chapter II
C
ONDITIONS  OF S ERVICE
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
the provisions of the specified Acts, the provisions of this Act
shall apply to the Chairman and Members appointed under the
specified Acts:
Provided that the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the
Chairman and other Members, as the case may be, holding such
office immediately before the commencement of the said Act.
4. The Chairman and every other Member shall hold
office as such for a term of five years from the date on which
Term of office.
Application of
Act..

51
he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment
for another term:
Provided that no Chairman or other Member shall hold office as
such after he has attained,-
(a) in the case of Chairman or Member who has been a
Judge of the Supreme Court, the age of seventy years;
(b) in the case of the Chairman or Member who has
been a Chief Justice or Judge of a High Court, the age of sixty-
seven years;
(c) in the case of any other Chairman or Member, the
age of sixty-five years.
5.  A person who, immediately before the date of
assuming office as the Chairman or, as the case may be, a
Member, was in service of the Government, shall be deemed to
have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon
his office as such Chairman or Member.
6. If a person who, immediately before the date of
assuming office as the Chairman or other Member, as the case
may be, was in receipt of, or being eligible so to do, has opted
to draw, a pension, other than a disability or wound pension, in
respect of any previous service under the Government, his
salary in respect of service as the Chairman or other Member,
as the case may be, shall be reduced-
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu
of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such
previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of
that portion of the pension.
7. No person while holding office as the Chairman or
Member shall act as an arbitrator in any matter:
Provided that the Central Government may, on a
request made in this behalf and after examining the request on
a case to case basis, permit a Chairman or Member to
complete his uncompleted arbitration work at the time of his
appointment.
8. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairman or a Member,
as the case may be, shall not appear, act or plead before the
Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority of
which he has been such Chairman or Member.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3,
the Chairman and Members shall be entitled to the
Chairman and
Members
deemed to retire
from service.
Prohibition of
acting as
arbitrator.
Suspension of
pension.
Prohibition of
practice.
Allowances of
Chairman and
Members.

52
allowances specified in the Second Schedule and travelling
allowance specified in the Third Schedule.
10. The Chairman or Member who is not a sitting or
retired Judge or a retired Central Government servant shall also
be eligible to avail the benefit of Central Government Health
Scheme for the duration of his tenure as Chairman or Member
of such bodies.
11. The Chairman or Member shall, before entering upon
his office, make and subscribe to an oath of office and secrecy
in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule.
12. The Chairman and Member shall, before entering
upon his office, declare his assets and liabilities and financial
and other interests.
13. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do, it may by notification published
in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule and thereupon the
Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly:
Provided that only such Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal,
Board, Commission or Authority, shall be included in the First
Schedule which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section
(1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as
may be after it is issued.
CHAPTER III
L
EAVE
14.  (1)  Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave
granted to a Chairman or Member may be at his option either,-
(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave
on half allowances on medical certificate); or
(b) leave on half allowances; or
(c) leave partly on full allowances and partly on half
allowances.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave
on full allowance shall be reckoned as double that period of
leave on half allowance.
15. (1) A leave account shall be kept showing therein the
amount of leave due to the Chairman or Member in terms of
leave on half allowance.
(2) In the leave account,—
Medical
facilities.
Oath of office
and secrecy.
Declaration of
financial and
other interests.
Kinds of leave
admissible.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Leave account.

53
(a) there shall be credited to such Chairman and
Member-
(i) one-fourth of the time spent by him on actual service;
(ii) where by reason of his having been detained for the
performance of duties not connected with the Tribunal,
Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority, he could
not enjoy any vacation which he would otherwise have been
entitled to enjoy had he not been so detained, a period equal to
double the period by which the vacation enjoyed by him in any
year falls short of one month as compensation for the vacation
not enjoyed;
 (b) there shall be debited to him all leave with allowances
taken by him.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section the
expression “actual service” shall include-
 (a) time spent by a Chairman or Member on duty;
(b) vacations, excluding any time during which the Chairman or
Member is absent on leave.
16. A Chairman or Member shall be entitled in his entire
service including the period of service rendered in a pensionable
post under the Union or State or on re-employment, if any, to
claim the cash equivalent of leave salary on full allowances on
his retirement in respect of the period of earned leave at his
credit to the extent of maximum period of three hundred days.
17. Leave on half allowances, not exceeding more than
six months, may be granted in excess of the amount at his
credit during the whole period of his service:
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if he is not
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave and earned
leave so granted.
18. Extraordinary leave may be granted for a period not
exceeding six months, during the whole period of his service in
excess of any leave permissible under the provisions of this
Chapter, but no salary or allowances shall be payable during, or
in respect of, such leave.
19. Casual leave not exceeding fourteen days may be
granted in a calendar year.
20. (1) Leave sanctioning authority for Members shall
be Chairman and for Chairman, it shall be the Minister of the
concerned Ministry, who will also be the sanctioning authority
for Members, in case of absence of Chairman.
Leave
encashment.
Leave not due.
Extra-ordinary
leave.
Casual leave.
Sanctioning
authority for
leave and foreign
travel.

54
(2) Sanctioning authority for foreign travel shall be the
Minister of the concerned Ministry.
FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (a), (b), (c), (e), (g) and (i)]
Sl. Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal/ Specified Acts
No. Authority/Board/Commission
(1) (2) (3)
1. Company Law Board The Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)
2. Cyber Appellate Tribunal The Information Technology Act,
2000 (21 of 2000)
3. Central Administrative The Administrative Tribunals Act,
Tribunal 1985 (13 of 1985)
4. State Administrative The Administrative Tribunals Act,
Tribunal 1985 (13 of 1985)
5. Joint Administrative The Administrative Tribunals Act,
Tribunal 1985 (13 of1985)
6. Income-Tax Appellate The Income-Tax Act, 1961
Tribunal (43 of 1961)
7. Authority for Advance The Income-Tax Act, 1961
Rulings (43 of 1961)
8. Telecom Disputes The Telecom Regulatory Authority
Settlement and Appellate of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997)
Authority
9. Coastal Aquaculture The Coastal Aquaculture Authority
Authority Act, 2005 (24 of 2005)
10. Appellate Tribunal for The Electricity Act, 2003
Electricity (36 of 2003)
11. Appellate Tribunal for The Foreign Exchange Management
Foreign Exchange Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)
12. Film Certification appellate The Cinematograph Act, 1952
Tribunal (37 of 1952)
13. National Green Tribunal The National Green Tribunal Act,
2010 (19 of 2010)

55
14. Securities Appellate The Securities and Exchange Board
Tribunal of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992)
15. Customs, Excise and The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)
Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal
16. Authority for Advance The Customs Act, 1962
Rulings (Central Excise, (52 of 1962)
Customs and Service Tax)
17. Armed Forces Tribunal The Armed Forces Tribunal Act,
2007 (55 of 2007)
18. Competition Appellate The Competition Act, 2002
Tribunal (12 of 2003)
19. National Consumer The Consumer Protection Act,
Disputes Redressal 1986 (68 of 1986)
Commission
20. Debts Recovery Appellate The Recovery of Debts due to
Tribunal Banks and Financial Institutions
Act, 1993 (51of1993)
21. Intellectual Property The Trade Marks Act, 1999
Appellate Board (47 of 1999)
22. Railway Claims Tribunal The Railway Claims Tribunal Act,
1987 (54 of 1987)
23. National Industrial Tribunal The Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 (14 of 1947)
24. Press Council of India The Press Council Act, 1978
(37 of 1978)
25. National Highways Tribunal The Control of National Highways
(Land and Traffic) Act, 2002
(13 of 2003)
26. Airports Economic The Airports Economic Regulatory
Regulatory Authority Authority of India Act, 2008
Appellate Tribunal (27 of 2008)

56
SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 9]
ALLOWANCES OF C HAIRMAN AND M EMBERS OF T RIBUNALS, E TC.
Allowances Chairman Members
(1) (2) (3)
Free furnishing at Consolidated sum of Consolidated sum of
official residence R3,00,000 R2,00,000
Sumptuary R5,000 per month R2,000 per month
allowance
Water and 3,600 kilo litres per 3,600 kilo litres per
electricity annum and 10,000 annum and 10,000
units per annum units per annum
Conveyance Staff car with up to Staff car with up to
facility 200 litres of fuel per 200 litres of fuel per
month month
Leave Travel Twice a year Twice a year
Concession
Telephone facility R2,800 per month R2,800 per month
(exclusive of taxes) (exclusive of taxes)
with permission to with permission to
reimburse up to thirty reimburse up to thirty
per cent additional per cent additional
THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 9]
TRA VELLING A LLOWANCE OF C HAIRMAN AND M EMBERS OF T RIBUNALS, E TC.
Sl.No. Type Admissibility
1. Air Business/Club class
2. Rail A reserved two-berth compartment
of the highest class, and take his
wife along with him without payment
of the fare if such a compartment is
provided; or actual fare paid,
whichever is less.

57
3. Daily allowance Not exceeding R5,000 per day for
hotel/guest house accommodation and
food bill not exceeding R500 per day
or actual expenses whichever is less.
Note.- The daily allowance
shall be increased by 25 per cent as
and when the Dearness Allowance
reaches fifty per cent of the basic
salary.
4. Ship One reserved first class cabin, if
available or the fair actually paid for
himself.
5. Mileage allowance Actual air conditioned taxi fare.
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 11]
FORM OF O ATH OF O FFICE  A ND S ECRECY
“I,___________________________, having been appointed
as the Chairman/Member (strike out which is not applicable) do
solemnly affirm and do swear in the name of God that I will
faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as the Chairman/
Member (strike out which is not applicable), of the Tribunal,
Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority (strike out
which is not applicable) namely _________________________, to
the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment without fear or
favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution
and the laws of the land.
(Signatures and name of the Chairman/Member)
Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board,
Commission or Authority
(strike out which is not applicable), namely
____________________________________”
Dated:

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The question of having uniform service conditions of the Chairpersons and Members
of the various Tribunals at the national level has been engaging attention of the Government
for quite some time. Recently, the Supreme Court, in the case of Rajiv Garg vs. Union of India
(Civil Writ Petition No. 120/2012), has also passed an order that decision in this regard may
be taken at the highest level.
2. The Government considered all issues relating to uniform service conditions particularly
with regard to retirement age, tenure of appointment, re-appointment and provisions concerning
residential and office accommodation for Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other Authorities
performing quasi-judicial functions manned by the sitting or retired Judges of the Supreme
Court or High Courts and also the ones manned by persons who are not the sitting or retired
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts keeping in view all related aspects including the
issues that have arisen in different cases before the Supreme Court and functions entrusted to
such bodies.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI KAPIL SIBAL
The 11th February, 2014.
58

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Chairman and Members shall be entitled to the
allowances specified in the Second Schedule and travelling allowance specified in the Third
Schedule. The total recurring annual expenditure towards the allowances of the Chairman and
Members is estimated at rupees 3 crore. The administrative Ministries or Departments bear the
expenditure in respect of the Tribunals, etc., under their control.
2. The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.
59

RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for uniform conditions of service of the Chairman and Members, by
whatever name called, of certain Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other
authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice)
60
GMGIPMRND—4380RS(S3)—13-02-2014.

61
ANNEXURE -II
Tenure and superannuation age of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of quasi-judicial entities enumerated in
Scheduled-I to the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014
Sl. Name of Entities T enure Re-appointment Chairperson/ V ice-      Member
No. President/ Chairperson/ Judi cial Non-Judicial
Presiding V ice-President
Officer
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Company Law Board No Provision No Provision 67 yrs. 65 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs
2. Cyber Appellate Tribunal 5 years No Provision 65 yrs Post does 65 yrs 65 yrs
not exist
3. Central Administrative Tribunal 5 years No Provision for 68 yrs Post is 65 yrs 65 yrs
4. State Administrative Tribunal Chairperson One abolished
5. Joint Administrative Tribunal term for Member in 2006
6. Income- Tax Appellate Tribunal No Provision No Provision 65 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs
7. Authority for Advance Rulings 3 years One term 70 yrs Post does 62 yrs 62 yrs
not exist
8. Telecom Disputes Settlement and 3 years No Provision 70 yrs Post does 65 yrs 65 yrs
Appellate Authority not exist
9. Coastal Aquaculture Authority 3 years Two consecutive No Provision Post does No No
terms not exist Provision Provision
10. Appellate Tribunal for Electricity 3 years One term 70 yrs -do- 65 yrs 65 yrs

12 3 4 5 6 7 8
11. Appellate Tribunal for Foreign 5 years No Provision 65 yrs -do- 62 yrs 62 yrs
Exchange
12. Film Certification Appellate Tribunal 3 years One term No Provision -do- No No
Provision Provision
13. National Green Tribunal 5 years Not permitted 70 yrs -do- 67 yrs 65 yrs
14. Securities Appellate Tribunal 5 years One term 68 yrs -do- 62 yrs 62 yrs
15. Customs, Excise and Service Tax 3 years No Provision 65 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs
Appellate Tribunal
16. Authority for Advance Rulings 3 years One term 70 yrs Post does 62 yrs 62 yrs
(Central Excise, Customs and not exist
Service Tax)
17. Armed Forces Tribunal 4 years One term 70/65 yrs -do- 65 yrs 65 yrs
18. Competition Appellate Tribunal 5 years One term 68 yrs -do- 65 yrs 65 yrs
19. National Consumer Disputes 5 years One term 70 yrs -do- 70 yrs 70 yrs
Redressal Commission
*20. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal 5 years No Provision 65 yrs -do- Post does Post does
not exist not exist
21. Intellectual Property Appellate Board 5 years No Provision 65 yrs 65 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs
22. Railway Claims Tribunal 5 years No Provision 65 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs 62 yrs
62

*23. Natio nal Industrial Tribunal No Provision No Provision 65 yrs Post does Post does Post does
not exist not exist not exist
24. Press Council of India 3 years One term No Provision Post does No No
not exist Provision Provision
*25. National Highways Tribunal 62 yrs Post does Post does Post does
not exist not exist not exist
26. Airports Economic Regulatory 3 years No Provision 70 yrs -do- 65 yrs 65yrs
Authority Appellate Tribunal
* Single Member Bench
63

64
ANNEXURE  III
The Vacancies as on 31st December, 2014 in Certain Tribunals Under First Schedule
in The Bill
Sl.No. Name of quasi-judicial entity Sanctioned V acant
post post
1. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 126 63
2. Railway Claim Tribunal 42 21
3. Customs Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal 32 13
4. Competition Appellate Tribunal 03 02
5. Intellectual Property Appellate Board 05 02
6. Company Law Board 09 04
7. Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal 01 01
8. Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Authority 03 01
9. Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange 03 01
10. National Green Tribunal 21 05
11. Armed Forces Tribunal 30 06
12. National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 12 01
13. Central Administrative Tribunal 65 18
64

The list of Tribunals/Quasi-Judicial Bodies
included in First Schedule is not exhaustive. A
Tribunal may be added to the Schedule under
Clause 13 of the Bill. Presently, only those
Tribunals have been included in the First
Schedule which has sitting or retired Supreme
Court Judges or High Court Judges as Chairman
or Member. CLB, ITAT CESAT, RCT and
National Industrial Tribunal are headed by
retired Judges. However, in the case of DRT, a
person eligible to be appointed as a District
Judge is appointed as Presiding Officer of DRT.
The list of Tribunals/Quasi-Judicial Bodies
included in First Schedule is not exhaustive. A
Tribunal may be added to the Schedule under
Clause 13 of the Bill. Presently, only those
Tribunals have been included in the First
Schedule which has sitting or retired Supreme
Court Judges or High Court Judges as Chairman
or Member. CLB, ITAT CESAT, RCT and
National Industrial Tribunal are headed by
retired Judges. However, in the case of DRT, a
Annenure-IV
Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individual/
organisation on the provision of the bill
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ
1. (Submitted by Shri K.
Ashokan, PO, DRT-II, Delhi)
2. (Submitted by Shri Ashish
Kalia, PO, DRT-III, Delhi)
The Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) should be
included at Sl. No. 27 in the First Schedule of the
Bill as its exclusion is arbitrary, discretionary and
not justifiable. A person who is or has been or is
qualified to be a District Judge is eligible for
appointment as Presiding Officer of DRT. The
same qualification has been prescribed in case of
a Judicial Member of CLB, ITAT, CESAT and
Railway Claims Tribunal and PO of National
Industrial Tribunal which have been included in
the First Schedule. The PO of DRT is selected by
a Selection Committee headed by CJI or a Judge
of Supreme Court as nominated by CJI. His term
of office is 5 years or until the age of 62 years
whichever is earlier. DRT is an adjudicating
authority.
The Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) should be
included at Sl. No. 27 in the First Schedule of
the Bill as its exclusion is arbitrary,
discretionary and not justifiable. A person who
is or has been or is qualified to be a District
Judge is eligible for appointment as Presiding
Officer of DRT. The same qualification has been
prescribed in case of a Judicial Member of CLB,
ITA T, CESAT and Railway Claims Tribunal and
PO of National Industrial Tribunal which have
65

66
person eligible to be appointed as a District
Judge is appointed as Presiding Officer of DRT.
The Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and Other
Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014
covers only those Tribunals and Authorities
which is performing quasi-judicial functions and
which has sitting or retired Supreme Court
Judges or High Court Judges as Chairman or
Member. The Maintenance Tribunal does not
fulfill the above requirements.
Needs no comment.
been included in the First Schedule. The PO of
DRT is selected by a Selection Committee headed
by CJI or a Judge of Supreme Court as
nominated by CJI. Although the procedure for
appointment of PO, DRT and Chairperson of
DRAT is the same, DRAT is included in
Schedule 1 and DRT has been excluded. The
term of office of PO, DRT is 5 years or until the
age of 62 years whichever is earlier. DRT is an
adjudicating authority.
The Maintenance Tribunals constituted in
different States under the Maintenance and
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens at 2007
and presided by Additional District Magistrate/
SDM may be included in Schedule 1. The
present service conditions of a Member of
Maintenance Tribunal need modification and up-
gradation. A Member of Tribunal in Delhi is
being paid presently only a sitting allowance of
R1,000/- per day without any other benefits.
The Memorandum has been written in a very
incoherent way. No specific suggestion/view has
been made in respect of the Tribunals Bill. The
grievance appears to relate to the Right to
Services and Grievances Redress Bill, 2014
being piloted by Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances.
3. (Submitted by Shri Rabindra
Kumar Das, Delhi)
4. (Submitted by Shri Arunesh
Pathak, Advocate, Kolkata)
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

67
The concerned Ministry/Department
administratively responsible for the Tribunal is
expected to take advance action to fill-up the
vacancies.
As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and proviso to
Article 221 (2) of Constitution of India, neither
the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in
respect of leave of absence or pension shall be
varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly,
some other terms and conditions may be
more beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order
to ensure that a Chairperson/Member
appointed after the new Act comes into force
carry the same terms and conditions, and
keeping in view the fact that the Chairman/
Member appointed under existing laws were
aware of the terms and conditions on which
they were being appointed before they
accepted their appointment, it is proposed not
to provide any option to existing Chairperson/
Members to opt for either the existing terms
or the new terms.
5. Shri B.S.V . Murthy,
Member (Technical) , Customs,
Excise & Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT),
Bangalore.
6. & 7. Mr. R. Periasami,
I.R.S, Member (Technical)
CESTAT, Chennai and Mr.
P.S. Pruthi, CESTAT, Mumbai.
There should be a provision in the Bill for
re-appointment of retiring Members in the same
Tribunals for 6 months at one time in order to
ensure that all vacancies remain filled up.
Existing Chairman/Members in the Tribunals be
given option to opt for new retirement age
prescribed in the Bill.

68
(1). As above
(2). The issue whether all Tribunals established
under the Central Acts can be brought under
one nodal Ministry/Department was considered
by the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) headed by
Secretary (Justice) in consultation with
Ministries/Departments under which the
tribunals administratively fall, and it was decided
that it is neither practical nor feasible to do so.
This recommendation of IMG has been accepted
by the Cabinet.
(3). Such a change cannot be made for one
tribunal.
(4). Once enacted, this Bill will provide uniform
terms & conditions to all Members of the
Tribunals including NGT, except age of
retirement, which will depend upon the source
of the recruitment.
(5). The limit of a maximum period of 300 days for
encashment is for the entire service whether it has
been rendered before or after joining the tribunal. A
former Government servant who did not have full
300 days leave at the time of his/her superannuation,
gets encashment for balance days of leave at the
time of superannuation from the Tribunal, subject to
a maximum ceiling of 300 days.
(1). Existing Judicial Members in the Tribunals
should continue to enjoy those existing facilities,
which are more beneficial than the proposed
facilities.
(2). The Tribunals may be brought within the
administrative jurisdiction of Ministry of Law &
Justice to ensure uniformity.
(3). Leave sanctioning authority for Members in
NGT should remain the Chairman and for
Chairman, it should remain the President.
(4). There should be no disparity in pay,
allowances and perks available to Judicial
Members/Expert Members of Tribunals.
(5). The provision of leave encashment in
respect of persons who are appointed after
working in the Government needs to be
revisited.
8. Prof. (Dr.) P.C. Mishra,
Expert Member, National Green
Tribunal (NGT), Eastern Zone
Bench, Kolkata.
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

69
9. Mr. Ranjan Chatterjee
(Retd. IAS), Expert Member,
National Green Tribunal
(NGT).
10. Shri Surendra Kumar,
Judicial Member, Appellate
Tribunal for Electricity.
(1) The proposed Bill will result in disparity for
the Members, as the conditions of service of
Expert Members are different from those of
Judicial Members, in NGT.
(2) The disparity between the allowance and
perks admissible to judicial members and expert
members in NGT needs to be eliminated.
(3) The provision of leave encashment up to
300 days, in respect of persons who have been
appointed after working in the Government, may
be revisited.
4) All Tribunals be brought Under the
administrative control of the Ministry.
(1) Chairman and Members holding the office
on the day of notification of the Act should be
allowed to continue till the age of 67 years or
(1) & (2) Once enacted, this Bill will provide
uniform terms & conditions to all Members of
the Tribunals including NGT, except age of
retirement, which will depend upon the source
of the recruitment.
(3) The limit of a maximum period of 300 days
for encashment is for the entire service whether
it has been rendered before or after joining the
tribunal. A former Government servant who did
not have full 300 leave at the time of his/her
superannuation, gets encashment for balance
days of leave at the time of superannuation from
the Tribunal, subject to a maximum ceiling of
300 days.
(4) The issue whether all Tribunals established
under the Central Acts can be brought under
one nodal Ministry/Department was considered
by the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) headed by
Secretary (Justice) in consultation with
Ministries/Departments under which the
tribunals administratively fall and it was decided
that it is neither practical nor feasible to do so.
This recommendation of IMG has been accepted
by the Cabinet.
(1) As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and
proviso to Article 221 (2) of Constitution of
India, neither the allowances of a Judge nor his

70
11,12, 13, 14 & 15. Mr. Indra
Prakash Lal, Member
(Technical), CESTAT, Kolkata,
Mr. Manmohan Singh, Member
be allowed to complete the tenure of 5 years
whichever may be earlier.
(2) Sumptuary allowance for Chairman
should be as applicable to a sitting Judge of
Supreme Court and for Members, it should be
as applicable to a sitting Judge of High Court.
The existing Chairman and the Members be
given option to opt for new provisions relating
to terms of office subject to specified age limit.
rights in respect of leave of absence or pension
shall be varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(2). The GoM considered the matter regarding
sumptuary allowance available to a sitting Judge
of the High Court to be made available to
Chairperson/Member of the Tribunals and
arrived at the proposed recommendation after
due consideration in order to provide uniformity.
As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and proviso to
Article 221 (2) of Constitution of India, neither
the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in
respect of leave of absence or pension shall be
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

71
varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(1) It is not proposed to make the service of
Chairperson/Member of a Tribunal as
pensionable. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for
reduction of the salary of a Chairperson/Member
to the extent of pension drawn from his/her
previous service in the Government.
2) As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and proviso
to Article 221 (2) of Constitution of India,
neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights
in respect of leave of absence or pension shall
be varied to his/her disadvantage after his
(1) The Act is silent on pension, family pension
and gratuity to Chairman/Members.
(2) The Chairman/Members be allowed to opt
for those Service Conditions the Bill which may
be beneficial for them.
(Technical), CESTAT, New
Delhi, Mr. R.K. Singh,
Member (Technical), CESTA T,
New Delhi, Mr. Rakesh
kumar, Member (Technical),
CESTA T, New Delhi and Mr.
P .R. Chandrasekharan, Member
(Technical), CESTAT, Mumbai.
16 Mr. Shankar Prasad,
Member (Technical), CESTA T,
Patna.

72
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/ Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(1) As above.
(2) The Government provided for one tenure of
re-appointment keeping in view the needs of
those Chairman/Members who are appointed at
an early age. It will be seen that a Judge/
Government servant who joins as Chairman/
Members of a tribunal after his superannuation,
will at the most get one term of re-appointment.
(1) As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and
proviso to Article 221 (2) of Constitution of
India, neither the allowances of a Judge nor his
(1) Option may be given to existing Chairman/
Members of the Tribunal to switch over to new
terms and conditions under the proposed Bill.
(2) In order to invite young talent, the
re-appointment clause needs to be deleted.
(1) Benefit of extension up to 65 years of
age be given to the existing Chairmen/Members.
17. Mr. Ashok Jindal, Member
(Judicial), CESTA T.
18. Mr. H.L. Karwa, ITAT,
Bombay.
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

73
rights in respect of leave’ of absence or pension
shall be varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(2) The Government provided for one tenure of
re--appointment keeping in view the needs of
those Chairman/Members who are appointed at
an early age. It will be seen that Judge/
Government servant who join as Chairman/
Members of a tribunal after their
superannuation, will at the most get one term of
re-appointment.
(1 & 2) The Bill will apply prospectively. Hence,
the existing terms and conditions of
(2) Tenure posting of five years should not
be made applicable in the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal in order to attract young talent.
(1) Retirement age of Chairman, CAT is 68
years. This can’t be reduced to 67 years.
19. Mr. Sudhir Kumar, former
Member (Administration)  CAT

74
20.Mr. Chetan Sharma,
Secretary General, Confederation
of NCR, RW AS.
21.Mr. Pradeep S. Mehta,
Secretary General, CUTS,
Jaipur.
(2) The allowances, presently being enjoyed by
Chairman/Member of a Tribunal, cannot be
reduced.
(3) Leave sanctioning authority for Chairman of
a Tribunal can’t be minister.
(4) Sanctioning authority for foreign travel in
respect of Chairman/Members cannot be
minister.
The memorandum relates to Delhi High Court
(Amendment) Bill, 2014.
(1) The Bill should have provisions on the
process of removal of the Chairman and
Members.
(2) The Bill should prescribe the bench mark of
pre-requisites for appointment of Members and
Chairman.
(3) The cooling off period of two years from
date of retirement be provided.
(4) Arbitration should be Totally banned for
Chairman/Members.
(5) The Bill should provide for uniform method
of review and accountability for Chairman/
Members.
Chairperson/Members of a Tribunal, including
age of retirement, will not change.
(3 & 4) The GoM considered the matter at
length and arrived at the proposed
recommendation after due deliberation in order
to provide uniformity.
Needs no comments as it relates to another Bill.
(1) The procedure / provision of removal of
Chairperson/Member of a Tribunal in the existing
Acts governing these Tribunals shall apply.
(2) The eligibility, qualifications and other bench
mark for appointment of Chairperson/Members
of a Tribunal will continue to be governed by
the existing Acts relating to these Tribunals.
(3) The Government did not receive or consider
any proposal relating to cooling off period
during the process of finalization of the Bill.
(4) Prohibition on undertaking arbitration work
has been included in Clause 7 of the Bill.
However, if an incumbent is already undertaking
arbitration work at the time of his/her
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

75
Blank
(1) Age of retirement should be uniformly fixed.
(2) No uniform criteria for inclusion of
Tribunals within the ambit of the Bill.
(3) Potential conflict of interest in making the
Minister as leave sanctioning authority.
(4) Fixed tenure for Chairperson and Members
may deter younger applicants.
(5) Bill does not include grounds for removal.
appointment, he/she may be permitted to
complete the arbitration work on a case to case
basis.
(5) The issues relating to review/accountability
of Chairperson/Members of a Tribunal will
continue to be governed by the existing Acts
relating to these Tribunals.
(1) The age of retirement has been proposed by
the Government t in the Bill based on the source
of recruitment to the Tribunals.
(2) Proviso to Clause 13 of the Bill clarifies that
only such Tribunal, Board, Commission or
Authority, shall be included in the First Schedule
which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(3) The recommendation has been made after
due deliberations by the GoM and accepted by
the Cabinet.
(4) The Government provided for one tenure of
reappointment keeping in view the needs of
those Chairman/Members who are appointed at
an early age. It will be seen that Judge/
Government servant who join as Chairman/
22.
23. Mr. M.R. Madhavan,
PRS, Legislative Research,
New Delhi.

76
24. Mr. P.K. Jain, Mumbai.(1) If passed, the Bill will create 2 sets of
Members in the Tribunals.
Members of a Tribunal after their
superannuation, will at the most get one term of
re-appointment.
(5). The provision of removal of Chairperson/
Member of a Tribunal in the existing Acts
governing these Tribunals shall apply.
(1) Since the Law, once passed, will be
applicable prospectively, there will be two sets
of Members in the Tribunals until those
appointed prior to enactment of the Bill
superannuate. This is a normal transition phase
after which all Members will have uniform
terms and conditions.
(2) As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and
proviso to Article 221 (2) of Constitution of
India, neither the allowances of a Judge nor his
rights in respect of leave of absence or pension
shall be varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

77
(2) The Existing Chairman and the Members be
given option to opt for new provisions relating
to terms of office subject to specified age limit.
(1) Only 26 Tribunals have been covered in
the Bill.
(2) Factual position with regard to staff cars,
disposal, pendency etc. in the Tribunals has not
been mentioned.
(3) No justification has been given for
continuously keeping the position of Chairman
and Members of the Tribunals reserved only for
retired persons.
25. Mr. Radhey Shyam Gora,
Advocate, Supreme Court of
India, New Delhi
26 Mr. D. Ravikumar, Mumbai.
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(1) Proviso to Clause 13 of the Bill clarifies that
only such Tribunal, Board, Commission or
Authority, shall be included in the First Schedule
which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(2) As regard staff car, conveyance facility has
been provided in Schedule II to the Bill.
Regarding issues relating to pendency, disposal
etc., the Bill does not mention them specifically
as review of performance will be done as per
provision of the relevant existing Acts.
(3) The Bill does not require that only retired
persons can be appointed as Chairman/Members
of the Tribunals. However, it may happen that
more incumbents, who are retired, may offer
themselves to be appointed as Chairperson/
Members of the Tribunals.
(1) The age of retirement has been proposed by
the Government in the Bill based on the source
of recruitment to the Tribunals.

78
(2) The position of Chairman/Member of
Tribunal envisaged as whole time position
requiring them to give their full time.
(3) LTC has been given in line with that
available to High Court Judges.
(4) Press Council of India is included.
(5) The daily allowance has been recommended
based on what is available to a Secretary to
Government of India. Note under Serial Number
3 of III Schedule already provides for increase
in the Daily Allowance in proportion to the
increase in the Dearness Allowance.
(6) The Government decided to have uniform
salary of R80,000 /- for High Court Judges and
Secretary to Government of India. In deference
to them, for Judges appointed from Supreme
Court R90,000/- per month has been
recommended. These salaries are already
mentioned in the statutes of various Tribunals
established under Central Acts.
(7) The qualification/experience of Chairpersons/
Members are provided in the existing Acts
relating to these Tribunals.
(8) No reservation is provided in appointment of
(1) Retirement age should be uniform.
(2) Practicing may be allowed to Chairman/
Members.
(3) LTC may be given once a year.
(4) Press Council of India not included.
(5) Daily allowances be increased.
(6) Salary to be mentioned in the Bill.
(7) Members to be from specific field.
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

79
8) Reservation of SC/ST/OBC to be
provided.
(1) Independence of Tribunals absent.
(2) Option may be given to existing Chairman/
Members to switch over to new Service
Conditions.
Judges under the consideration. Hence it has
also not been recommended in the Bill.
(1) There may not be any need to explicitly
legislate on the independence of Tribunals as the
provision relating to functioning/removal of
Chairman/members of a Tribunal ensures such
independence.
(2) As per proviso to Article 125 (2) and
proviso to Article 221 (2) of Constitution of
India, neither the allowances of a Judge nor his
rights in respect of leave of absence or pension
shall be varied to his/her disadvantage after his
appointment. Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowance
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
the fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/Members to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
27. Mr. Shailendra Kumar

80
28. Mr. R.K. Jain, President
Excise and Customs Bar
Association, New Delhi.
(3) Many Tribunals excluded in the Bill.
(1) Uniformity in the process of appointments in
Tribunals absent in the Bill.
(2) In order to achieve uniformity,
administrative control of all Tribunals to be
placed under one Nodal Agency.
(3) The Bill needs to be applicable to all
Tribunals whether headed by the Supreme Court
or High Court Judges or other than Judges.
(4) Provisions should be made for removal of
Chairman/Members in case of proven
misconduct.
(5) There should be complete ban on arbitration
work by the Chairman/Members and to take any
office of profit.
(6) Ban on the practice by the Chairman/
Members should also be applicable on all
authorities under the Tribunals.
(3) Proviso to Clause 13 of the Bill clarifies that
only such Tribunal, Board, Commission or
Authority, shall be included in the First Schedule
which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(1) The Bill does not deal with the process of
appointment in the Tribunals, which is covered
under the relevant existing Acts.
(2) The issue whether all Tribunals established
under the Central Acts can be brought under
one nodal Ministry /Department was considered
by the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) headed by
Secretary (Justice) in consultation with
Ministries/Departments under which the
tribunals administratively fall and it was decided
that it is neither practical nor feasible to do so.
This recommendation of IMG has been accepted
by the Cabinet.
(3) Proviso to Clause 13 of the Bill clarifies that
only such Tribunal, Board, Commission or
Authority, shall be included in the First Schedule
which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(4) The provision of removal of Chairperson/
Member of a Tribunal in the existing Acts
governing these Tribunals shall apply.
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

81
(5) Prohibition on undertaking arbitration work
has been included in Clause 7 of the Bill.
However, if an incumbent is already undertaking
arbitration work at the time of his appointment,
he/ she may be permitted to complete the
arbitration work on a case to case basis.
(6) There is no provision regarding practice
before Court of Law. However, Clause 7 of the
Bill prohibits a Chairman/Member to act as an
arbitrator due to the reason that this position is
a whole time position.
(7) The Chairpersons/Members are expected to
declare the asset/liability owned by them
including those which are formally in the name
of their dependent spouse/children.
(8) Provisions relating to leave are similar to
those for Judges of the Supreme Court and High
Courts.
(1). Proviso to Clause 13 of the Bill clarifies that
presently such tribunals, Board, Commission or
Authority have been included in the first schedule
which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman and Member and
which perform quasi-judicial functions. Settlement
Commission does not fulfill the criteria and has
not been included in the first schedule.
(7) Declaration of assets and liabilities of
spouse/dependent children of the Chairman/
Members also needs to be obtained.
(8) Provisions in the Bill relating to “leave”
needs to be more specific.
(1). Proviso to Clause 13(1) of the Bill needs to
be deleted and even those Tribunals and
Statutory Bodies or quasi-judicial bodies which
are not necessarily headed by retired judges of
the Supreme Court and High Court should be
29. Shri A. K. Prasad, Member
office of the Settlement
Commission, Mumbai.

82
identified and listed in the first schedule.
Settlement Commission deserves to be included.
(2). After the enactment of the bill, there would
be two classes of Members of the said
Tribunals, one governed by earlier provisions
and others governed by the new Act, though
both would be performing the same functions.
(3). There should only be an overall retirement
age limit of 65/67/70, as the case may be and
there is no need to limit the tenure of five years
at a time.
(4). Separate provisions regarding allotment of
accommodation for the General pool or Special
pool, nature of accommodation, period of
retirement etc. needs to be incorporated in the
Bill.
(2). The law once passed, will apply
prospectively. So, there will be two sets of
Members in the Tribunals until those appointed
prior to enactment of the Bill superannuate. This
is a normal transitional phase after which all
Members will have uniform terms and
conditions.
(3). The issue has been examined in detail by
the GoM and it recommended that there should
be a uniform tenure of five years. Chairpersons/
Members may be re-appointed for one term so
long as they satisfy age condition. However,
there is no bar on appointment on another
Tribunal, provided the Member is within the
prescribed age of retirement.
(4). As regards residential accommodation, the
provisions for Government Accommodation or
House rent in lieu thereof are provided in the
existing Acts relating to these Tribunals.
Ministry of Urban Development, in consultation
with NBCC, has developed a project at Ghitroni,
New Delhi, on CPWD’s land measuring 239
acres. Construction of housing at Ghitroni
would add to the stock of Government houses
available with the Ministry of Urban
Development, from which 200 apartments (of
3000 sft. Size for Chairpersons and of 2500 sft.
Size for Members) would be reserved for
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

83
residential accommodation of Chairpersons and
Members of Tribunals/Quasi-Judicial Bodies as
stock belonging to a pool of houses.
Some of the pay and allowances
admissible to Chairman/Members proposed in
the Bill may be less than the pay and allowances
available under the current laws. Similarly, some
other terms and conditions may be more
beneficial in the proposed Bill. In order to
ensure that a Chairperson/ Member appointed
after the new Act comes into force carry the
same terms and conditions, and keeping in view
that fact that the Chairman/Member appointed
under existing laws were aware of the terms
and conditions on which they were being
appointed before they accepted their
appointment, it is proposed not to provide any
option to existing Chairperson/ Member to opt
for either the existing terms or new terms.
(1). Very general statement, hence no
comments.
(2). Based on O.M. No. Rs. 5/8/2014-P&L
dated 16th September; 2014, Department of
Justice has written to the Tribunals to provide
various details, including relating to arrears of
cases. Information is awaited from some of the
Tribunals.
Chairman/Members of Maharashtra Administrative
Tribunal are of the view that service conditions
of the Chairmen/Members of the State
Administrative Tribunal may be continued to be
governed by the conditions of service as
applicable to Judges of the High Court.
(1). Abolish system of Tribunal, Forums,
Commission, and Board etc as it is a parallel judicial
system.
(2). Collect details of pending cases, investigate
reasons of pendency.
(3). People should be free to make complaint
against President/ Chairpersons/Members for
valid reasons.
30. Shri S.K. Joshi, Registrar,
Maharashtra Administrative
Tribunal, Mumbai
31. Shri M.L. Gupta,
Director, Citizen’s Right’s
Association, Nehru Nagar
Ghaziabad

84
(4). Contempt of Court Law not to be made
applicable.
(5). Procedure regarding removal of President/
Chairpersons/Members.
(6). No re-appointment in any case.
(7). Facilities like residential accommodation,
LTC, telephone and other facilities should not be
given.
(8). Working hours and attendance should be
maintained, as in Government office.
By excluding application of the Act to the
existing members, there will be disparity in the
pay and allowances drawn by Senior Members
compared to junior Members of the Tribunal.
32. Shri N.M. Misra, Member
(Technical), Railway Claims
Tribunal, Ahmedabad Bench
(3). There is no bar on making complaints
against Chairman/Members of the Tribunal.
(4). The Contempt of Court Act, 1971 iS
applicable to Tribunals established by virtue of
Article 323 A and 323 B of the Constitution of
India.
(5). The procedure regarding removal of
Chairpersons/Members of a Tribunal in the
existing Acts governing these Tribunals shall apply.
(6). The issue has been examined in detail by
the GoM and it recommended that there should
be a uniform tenure of five years. Chairpersons/
Members may be re-appointed for one term so
long as they satisfy age condition. However,
there is no bar on appointment on another
Tribunal, provided the Member is within the
prescribed age of retirement.
(7). These facilities have been provided on the
basis of similar facilities available to Supreme
Court and High Court Judges.
(8). These details are not included in the
Principal Legislation but in the Rules made
thereunder.
The law once passed, will apply prospectively.
So, there will be two sets of Members in the
Tribunals until those appointed prior to enactment
of the Bill superannuate. This is a normal
transitional phase after which all Members will
have uniform terms and conditions.
Memorandum No.Suggestions/ViewComments of DoJ

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.