STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY

d 1 (2007-08)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

TWENTY FIRST REPORT

aaa

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)


TWENTY FIRST REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2007-08)

( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )

MINISTRY OF POWER

DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 September, 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 September, 2007

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)


COE No. 21

Price : Rs. 26.00

© 2007 By Lox SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by National Printers, New Delhi.


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iii)
INTRODUCTION (vy)
Introductory .. 1
Report 3
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Energy contained in the Report ....... 9
ANNEXURES
I, Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Energy
held on 19.07.2007 and 5.9.2007 ... 10
Il. | Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill 2007... 15

@


22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2007-08)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Smt. Anuradha Choudhary
Shri Mohan Jena
Prof. Chander Kumar
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju
Shri Nand Kumar Sai
Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba
Shri E.G. Sugavanam
Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkatswamy
Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha
Shri Motilal Vora
Shri Jesudasu Seelam
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
Dr. (Shrimati)Najma A. Heptulla
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

(ii)


29, Dr. K. Kasturirangan
30. Dr. Bimal Jalan
31. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

मी ७०८

Shri P.K. Bhandari
Shri J.S. Chauhan
Smt. Juby Amar

Smt. Neena Juneja

(iv)

SECRETARIAT
ना Joint Secretary
_ Deputy Secretary
Under Secretary
Senior Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty First Report on the
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 relating to the Ministry of Power.

2. The Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 (copy enclosed at
Annexure-T) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 18th May, 2007 and referred to the Standing
Committee on Energy for detailed examination and making a report thereon by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha.

3. The Committee held a sitting for briefing by the Ministry of Power in
connection with examination of the Bill. The views of the concerned State Governments
on the proposed amendments were sought in writing.

4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the State Government of
West Bengal and Jharkhand for placing their views on the Bill before the Committee.
The Committee also wish to thank the representatives of the Ministry of Power for
placing before them detailed information as desired by the Committee and also briefing
the Committee on the subject as desired.

5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on Sth September, 2007.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

New DELar; GURUDAS KAMAT,
5 September, 2007 Chairman,
14 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

v)



CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) came into being as a culmination of thoughts
and attempts made over a whole century to tame the wild and erratic Damodar, then
denounced as the ‘River of Sorrow’. In March 1948, a little over six months after
independence, the Damodar Valley Corporation Act was passed by the
Central Legislature, requiring the Central and the State Governments of West Bengal
and Bihar (now Jharkhand) to participate jointly for the purpose of building, operating
and maintaining Dams with hydro-electric stations, thermal power stations, associated
transmission and distribution arrangements and barrage and irrigation system in the
Damodar Valley covering an area of 24,235 sq. kms. The Corporation ultimately came
formally into existence on July 7, 1948.

2. As per the Act the entire capital for the completion of any project was to be
provided by the participating Governments (Central/West Bengal/Bihar). Presently, its
jurisdiction extends to West Bengal and the newly constituted State of Jharkhand.

3. Apart from the functions of generation transmission and distribution of
electric energy (hydro and thermal) the Corporation also promotes operation of
schemes for irrigation, water supply and drainage and also flood control. Other
activities include promotion of afforestation and control of soil erosion, public health,
agriculture, industrial, economic and general well being of the Damodar Valley in its
area of operation.

4. Section 4(1) ofthe DVC Act, 1948 provided that “the Corporation shall consist
of a Chairman and two other Members appointed by the Central Government after
consultation with the provincial State Government (West Bengal and Bihar). Section
5(1) of the Act provided that “every Member of the Corporation shall devote the whole
of his time to the affairs of the Corporation.” Apart from the Chairman, there were two
full time Members from the Governments of West Bengal and Bihar.

5. In 1957, DVC Act, 1948 was amended and Section 5(1) was deleted. This
implied that there was no compulsion of having fuil time Members in the Board. The
Board of the DVC, now, consists of a Chairman and two part time Members from the
two State Governments. In addition, Joint Secretary (Thermal), Ministry of Power
(asa special invitee) and Director (Operations) NTPC (as an expert) are also associated
with the Board.

6. The Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in
the Lok Sabha and referred to the Standing Committee on Energy for examination and
making report thereon on 18.05.2007.


2

7. In the Bill, it is proposed to amend Section 4 of the Act which states:

“The Corporation shall consist of a Chairman and two other Members appointed
by the Central Government after consultation with the Provincial Governments.”

8. The Section 4 of Damodar Valley Corporation Act 1948 for sub-section (1) of
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(I) The Corporation shall consist of:
(a) a Chairman;
(0) a Member (technical), and a Member (finance):
(c) one representative from the Central Government;

(d) two representatives one each from the Governments of Jharkhand
and West Bengal;

(e) three independent experts one each from the field of irri gation, water
supply and generation or transmission of electricity.

(1A) The Chairman and Members under clauses (a), (0) and (d) of sub-section
(1) shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the
State Governments concerned while the Members under clauses (c) & (e)
shall be appointed by the Central Government, by notification in the official
gazette.

(IB) The Chairman and Members under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be whole time while the Members under clauses (c) to (e) shall be
part time.”

9. The Committee deliberated on the proposed amendment in the Bill and were
also briefed by the Ministry of Power on the same. The details of the discussion held are
contained in the succeeding paras of the Report. The Committee endorse the Bill with
some suggestions given in the succeeding paras.


CHAPTER II
REPORT

The present proposal is for deleting the existing sub-section (1) of Section 4 of
the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948, and for inserting following sub-sections in
Section 4 of the Act:

“() The Corporation shall consist of:-—
(a) a Chairman;
(0) a Member (technical), and a Member (finance);
(०) one representative from Central Government;

(d) two representatives one each from the Governments of Jharkhand
and West Bengal;

(०) three independent experts one each from the field of irrigation, water
supply and generation or transmission of electricity.

(1A) The Chairman and Members under clauses (a), (b) & (d) of sub-section
(1) shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the
State Governments concerned while the Members under clauses (c) and
(०) shall be appointed by the Central Government, by notification in the
official gazette.

(IB) The Chairman and Members under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be whole time while the members under clauses (c) to (e) shall be
part time.”

2. Explaining the need for the proposed amendment the Ministry of Power has
stated that over the last 50 years, a number of changes have taken place in the activities
of DVC, in tune with the industrial development in the Valley area. The demand for
power by industry, specially coal, steel, railways and other consumers has gone up
considerably; this has necessitated amendment of DVC Act for increasing the number
of Members on the Board of DVC.

3. The Ministry has further informed that against installed capacity of 524 MW
till 1961, DVC has generation capacity of 2354 MW till date. It proposes to add’ more
than 7000 MW in the 11th Plan period. The main projects of expansions being Mejia,
Chandrapura, Koderma, Durgapur, Raghunathpur, Bokaro-A, Maithon Bokaro Steel.

4. Explaining the expansion of DVC over the years, the Ministry further added
that DVC has grown into a large generating company with its own transmission and

3


4

sub-transmission network supplying power to West Bengal and Jharkhand State
Electricity Boards and also to other State outside the eastern region through inter-regional
corridor. The Corporation also proposes to build transmission and distribution systems
in the DVC area concomitant with, the increased demand in DVC area. In view of the
expansion plans of DVC, it becomes necessary to restructure it.

5. Responding to a query on the role of DVC presently, the Secretary, Power
informed the Committee:

“Sir, you have rightly pointed out that the focus of DVC is not only on power
generation. In fact, where it is power generation, it is also hydro-power generation
also to a limited extent because the head that is required for major hydro-power
generation is not available there. But the greater potential is of course irrigation
and flood control and water supply and other schemes and this particular
organisation, this map, that is before you, will show you which are the reservoirs
which are there in the area — the barrages, the canals, the flood storage capacity,
irrigation command which is gradually being developed. At the same time they
have a vast plan which they have prepared, a Master Plan by WAPCOS under the
guidance of the CWC for exploring the untapped tributaries of Damodar and
Barakar, a unified control of all the dams and harnessing the surface water flow
during monsoon session. There is also an eco conservation Master Plan prepared
by the FRI. This has been finalised and the estimation for afforestation over the
next five years is around Rs.260 crore. There is also a pollution abatement study
that is going on in the region.”

6. Replying to a specific question about multi-dimensional role of DVC under
the Ministry of Power, the Secretary explained as follows:

“There is a similar body called the Bhakra Beas Management Board which also
has integrated functions of power generation of irrigation and flood control. These
objectives, in fact, have been adequately addressed in the participating States or
the partner States as they were called in that case. The States involved are Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan, and Himachal Pradesh has also been included now. The
structure in that organisation, in fact, isa little different. They have the Chairman
of the BBMB. There is a Member for Irrigation and a Member for Power. Here
the greater focus is power because what had happened in that (BBMB) situation
was there are two major rivers of the North which have been harnessed and
which have been combined together — one is the river Sutlej and the other is the
river Beas. Two major rivers are involved and very extensive State irrigation
schemes are part of it and they are being managed adequately. But I would state
a little distinction as to why we have not made any changes in BBMB and why
we have been forced to make this change in DVC. Here in this case this
organisation is luckily growing and expanding whereas the BBMB has not able
to add much to its kitty in recent years. Here, as I have mentioned to you today
from about 2354 MW we are hoping to achieve 10,000 MW, which is no mean
achievement. It is going to be much larger than the size ofa single State Electricity


5

Board. In fact, some of the regional grids are smaller than this size. Here is a
potential which we saw and we thought that it was not harnessed adequately in
the past, so we have decided to address this issue accordingly.

In the proposed structure of DVC what we are finding is that a nominee of the
Government of India, two representatives from the State Governments, and one
Member (Technical), we call it the Member (Technical), the idea is that he is not
an expert in the field of power and he is going to be an expert who will be
advising in the field of irrigation, power and flood control. There is also a Member
(Finance) for obvious reasons, Then there are three independent experts in each
field which we are looking for and the three fields are irrigation, water supply,
generation or transmission. So keeping in view the overall envisaged requirements
of the organisation we have tried to keep it as lean as possible and that is why the
amendment has been sought.”

7. Further the Corporation also proposes to build up transmission and distribution
systems concomitant with the above generation plan. As power generation and supply
activity is poised for a major jump in the next five-year plan period, it would be necessary
to have a broad-based DVC so as to discharge its newly emerging role as a dominant
power generator effectively. The present organisation structure, which was originally
designed to cater to the limited needs of Damodar Valley areas, is found to be deficient
for making DVC a major power producer of the country with clientele across all the
regions.

8. The Ministry of Power has further informed that the Administrative Staff
College of India (ASCI) was appointed to examine various alternative models for
restructuring DVC and suggest the most viable one to take care of the changing needs
of DVC.

9. The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) submitted its report after
studying the functions and activities of DVC and emphasized the need of making the
Corporation more broad based and professional. ASCI recommended inclusion of full
time Member Secretary or Member (Administration), Member (Technical), Member
(Finance), Member (System & Commercial) and an expert part-time Member in the
Corporation.

10. As informed by the Ministry, the recommendations of ASCI were discussed
on 19.05.2006 in a meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) with the
Principal Secretary (Power Department), West Bengal and Principal Secretary (Energy),
Jharkhand. In the meeting, it was agreed that the existing sub-section (1) of Section 4 of
the DVC Act, 1948 should be replaced by the following provision:

“The Corporation shall consist of a whole-time Chairman, a whole-time Member
(Technical), a whole-time Member (Finance), a representative from the Central


6

Government, a representative from Government of Jharkhand, a representative
from Government of West Bengal and up to three independent experts, appointed
by the Central Government after consultation with the State Governments.”

11. Regarding the expenditure, the Financial Memorandum of the Bill makes it
clear that the Bill, if enacted and brought into operation would involve expenditure
from the fund of the Damodar Valley Corporation for the post of Member (Finance),
Member (Technical) and three independent experts, one each from the field of irrigation,
water supply and generation or transmission of electricity. It has been estimated that
approximate expenditure is Rs. 65 lakhs (Rupees sixty five lakhs only) per annum for
full-time Members and Rs. 8 lakhs (Rupees eight lakhs only) per annum for part-time
Members to be funded from the Damodar Valley Corporation. No expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India shall be incurred.

12. During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Power further explained:

“Tn respect of expenditure, I assure that the structure of this plan is not very
lavish. It is minimal. Nine Members that we are talking about is for the Board
meeting when it meets. Full time Members are only three (including Chairman).
There are six part time Members, three being the representatives of the
Governments and three being independent Members in the nature of experts
participating. This is the kind of a plan that we have in mind.”

13. Ona specific query on the Secretary being full time Member of the Board,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power clarified:

“Tn the past, Secretary was nota full time Member ofa Board. You have instances
of the Bihar Electricity Board, Jharkhand Electricity Board, etc. You are all from
the States. The Secretary was not a Member of the Board. They are below Board
level......... the Secretary of the Board who is virtually like an establishment officer
of the organisation which is envisaged in the Act also. But he is not the Member
of the Board. He is below the Board.”

14, Regarding the proposed arrangement in the system, the Secretary, Ministry
of Power further clarified before the Committee

“You are aware that in the earlier times, there was Chief Engineer to be normally
the head of the engineering department in the State. Today, we have Engineers in
Chief. The post of Chief Engineer is not abolished. He is there and there is also
an Engineer in Chief. There would be a Financial Advisor and Member Finance.
There is the Secretary of the Board. However, if you feel that there is need for a
Member level representation for that organisation and if the Committee in its
considered view were to come to that, we shall certainly examine that with the
highest respect.”


7

15. The Committee also made a reference to the State Governments of West
Bengal and Jharkhand to know their views on the proposed amendments. The
Government of West Bengal in a written note have stated that West Bengal have no
objections to the proposed amendments in the bill. The reply from the Government of
Jharkhand states that Member (Finance) if appointed a full time Member, there is a
possibility of overlapping of the duties of Financial Advisor and Member (Finance),
therefore the post of Financial Advisor may be made equivalent to level of Member. It
is also suggested that Director (Technical) may be made equivalent to the Member.
Also the appointment made against the above posts may be on the basis of competition.
By upgrading the post of Secretary-cum-Chief Executive Officer, he may be nominated
as Chief Executive Officer-cum-Member Secretary. The post of Secretary-cum-Chief
Executive Officer is equivalent to the post of Managing Director. Therefore, it will be
appropriate to appoint the Secretary from the persons having Professional Management/
Public Undertaking.

16. The Committee note that DVC has to play multi-dimensional role and
over a period of almost fifty years since the DVC was constituted in 1948, there
has been a considerable increase in its work load viz. promotion of schemes for
generation, transmission and distribution of electrical energy (hydro and thermal),
promotion and operation of schemes for irrigation, water supply and drainage as
well as in other activities of the Corporation which include flood control in the
Damodar river and its tributaries, promotion of afforestation and control of soil
erosion, public health, agriculture, industrial, economic and general well being of
people in the Damodar Valley.

17. The demand for power by the coal and steel industries, railways and
others has also greatly increased over the years. The Committee note that as against
a generation capacity of 524 MW till 1961, DVC now has a capacity of 2354 MW.
The DVC proposes to add more than 7000 MW in the 11th Plan. This has
necessitated the restructuring of the Corporation to make it more broad based
and professional.

18, The Committee support the amendments proposed in the Damodar
Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 whereby there would be two permanent
Members (Technical & Finance) apart from the Chairman, three part time
Members comprising of independent experts one each from the field of irrigation,
water supply, generation or transmission, two Members representing the two State
Governments (West Bengal and Jharkhand) and also a nominee of the Central
Government. The Committee also desire that the additional expenditure on the
appointment of new Members to the Board of Directors should be kept to the
minimum. The Committee however further desire that the Secretary of the
organisation should be made a full time Member of the Board to enhance the
functioning capabilities of the organisation and as has been recommended by the
Administrative Staff College of India.



8

19, The Committee also feel that DVC should pay equal importance to its
other welfare activities such as afforestation and eco-conservation, flood control,
fish farming, management of natural resources, rural electrification, etc. apart
from its role in power generation, transmission and distribution.

New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
5 September, 2007 Chairman,

14 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY CONTAINED IN THE REPORT

81.90. Reference

Conclusions/Recommendations

Para No. of
the Report
1 2: 3}
uf 16. | The Committee note that DVC has to play multi-dimensional role

2. छः
3. 18.
4. 19

and over a period of almost fifty years since the DVC was constituted
in 1948, there has been a considerable increase in its work load viz.
promotion of schemes for generation, transmission and distribution
of electrical energy (hydro and thermal), promotion and operation
of schemes for irrigation, water supply and drainage as well as in
other activities of the Corporation which include flood control in
the Damodar river and its tributaries, promotion of afforestation and
control of soil erosion, public health, agriculture, industrial, economic
and general well being of people in the Damodar Valley.

The demand for power by the coal and steel industries, railways and
others has also greatly increased over the years. The Committee note
that as against a generation capacity of 524 MW till 1961, DVC
now has a capacity of 2354 MW. The DVC proposes to add more
than 7000 MW in the 11th Plan. This has necessitated the
restructuring of the Corporation to make it more broad based and
professional.

The Committee support the amendments proposed in the Damodar
Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 whereby there would
be two permanent Members (Technical & Finance) apart from the
Chairman, three part time Members comprising of independent
experts one each from the field of irrigation, water supply, generation
or transmission, two Members representing the two State
Governments (West Bengal and Jharkhand) and also a nominee of
the Central Government. The Committee also desire that the
additional expenditure on the appointment of new Members to the
Board of Directors should be kept to the minimum. The Committee
however further desire that the Secretary of the organisation should
be made a full time Member of the Board to enhance the functioning
capabilities of the organisation and as has been recommended by
the Administrative Staff College of India.

The Committee also feel that DVC should pay equal importance to
its other welfare activities such as afforestation and eco-conservation,
flood control, fish farming, management of natural resources, rural
electrification, etc. apart from its role in power generation,
transmission and distribution.

9


ANNEXURE I

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2006-2007) HELD ON 19.07.2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘B’
PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1600 hours to 1715 hrs.
PRESENT

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

2.

3

4.

5. Shri Mohan Jena

6. Prof. Chander Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

9. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

10. Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana

11. Shri Nand Kumar Sai

12. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

13. Shri M.K. Subba

14, Shri E.G. Sugavanam

15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

16. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
18. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
19. Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam
20. Shri Motilal Vora
21. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav


ll

‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri P.K.Bhandari — Joint Secretary

2. Shri J.S. Chauhan —_— Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Shiv Kumar _— Deputy Secretary

4. Mrs. Juby Amar = Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF POWER

1. Shri Anil Razdan जे Secretary

2. Shri Harish Chandra = Sr. Adviser

3. Shri Anil Kumar _ Addl. Secretary

4. Shri A.K. Khurana _ Addl. Secretary

5. Shri Jayant Kawale ता Joint Secretary

6. Shri A.K. Kutty = Joint Secretary

7. Shri G.B. Pradhan _ Joint Secretary

8. Shri Alok Kumar = Director

9. Shri Punet K. Goel _ Director
CentRrAL Evectriciry AutHoriry (CEA)

1. Shri Rakesh Nath = Chairperson

2. Shri R. Dahiya = Member (Thermal)
DAMobaRr VALLEY CorPoRATION (DVC)

1. Shri Asim K, Barman — Chairman

2. Shri Subrata Biswar _ Secretary

3. Shri S.B. Srivastava — Director (Tech.)

4. Shri T.K. Gupta = Director (Accounts)

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
representatives of the Ministry of Power to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

2. After the introductory remarks of Chairman and formal introduction of the
witnesses, the representatives of the Ministry of Power briefly explained about the need
for the proposed amendments in the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948. Thereafter
the following important points came up for discussion during the sitting:

(i) | The proposed amendments in the Damodar Valley Corporation
(Amendment) Bill, 2007.

(ii) The expansion of DVC Board of Directors and the need for bringing about
such amendments.

(iii) Role of DVC in power generation and the new power projects proposed
and capacity addition in the existing units.


12

(iv) Diversified activities of DVC apart from power generation.

(v) _ Role of the new Board of Directors and Chairman, DVC under the new
system.

3. Members raised some other queries which were answered by the
representatives of the Ministry of Power.

4. A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.

5. The witnesses, then, withdrew,

The Committee then adjourned.


MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON 5TH SEPTEMBER, 2007 IN COMMITTEE

11,
12.

BSS) 6) a 10 50 का 8? 8२:

ROOM ‘139’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
Prof. Chander Kumar
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
Dr. Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju
Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha
Shri Bimal Jalan
Shri Motilal Vora
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri P.K.Bhandari _— Joint Secretary

2. Shri J.S. Chauhan = Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar _— Deputy Secretary
4. Mrs. Juby Amar _ Under Secretary

2, ** कक कक कर ae

3, #* कक कक cy ae

13


14

4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 21st Report on the
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2007 pertaining to the Ministry of
Power. The Committee adopted the draft Report without any amendments.

5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.


ANNEXURE II
As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

BILL NO. 47 OF 2007

THE DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

A
BILL

further to amend the Damodar Valley Corporation
Act, 1948.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Damodar Valley Short title and
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2007. commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 4 of the Damodar Valley Corporation Amendment of
14 of 1948. Act, 1948, for sub-section (1), the following section 4.
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

(1) The Corporation shall consist of—

(a) a Chairman;

(b) a member (technical), and a member
(finance);

(c) one representative from the Central
Government;

(d) two representatives one each from the
State Governments of Jharkhand and
West Bengal;

(e) three independent experts one each from
the field of irrigation, water supply and
generation or transmission of electricity.

15


16

(JA) The Chairman and members under clauses

(B)

(a), (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be
appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Governments
concerned while the members under clauses
(०) and (e) shall be appointed by the Central
Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette.

The Chairman and members under clauses (a)
and (b) of sub-section (1) shall be whole-time
while the members under clauses (०) to (०)
shall be part-time.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Damodar Valley Corporation was constituted under the Damodar Valley
Corporation Act, 1948 with the authority for flood control, irrigation, power generation
and integrated development of the Damodar River Valley. The Corporation consists of
a full-time Chairman and two other part-time members appointed by the Central
Government after consultation with the State Governments of Jharkhand and West
Bengal. A number of changes have taken place in the activities of the Corporation in
tune with the industrial development in the valley area and the increased demand for
power by Industries especially coal, steel and other consumers. The Administrative
Staff College of India has recommended restructuring of the Corporation to make it
more broad-based and professional so that it may discharge its responsibilities more
effectively and efficiently. Therefore, amendments to the Act are proposed so that besides
the Chairman there are two full-time members with functional responsibilities for finance
and technical matters. The remaining members, who are part-time shall include one
representative each from the Central Government, and the State Governments of
Jharkhand and West Bengal, and three independent experts, one each from the field of
irrigation, water supply and generation or transmission of electricity.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
The 4th April, 2007


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation would involve expenditure from
the fund of the Damodar Valley Corporation for the post of member (finance), member
(technical) and three independent experts, one each from the field of irrigation, water
supply and generation or transmission of electricity. It has been estimated that
approximate expenditure is Rs. 65 lakhs (Rupees sixty-five lakhs only) per annum for
full-time members and Rs. 8 lakhs (Rupees eight lakhs only) per annum for part-time
members to be funded from the Damodar Valley Corporation. No expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India shall be incurred.


EXTRACT FROM THE DAMODAR VALLEY
CORPORATION ACT, 1948. (14 OF 1948)

कक कक कक कक कं

4... (1) This Corporation shall consist of a Chairman
and two other members appointed by the
Central Government after consultation with
the Provincial Governments.

+ कक कक कक कक

ANNEXURE

Constitution of
the Corporation


LOK SABHA

A
Bill

further to amend the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Power)

20