STANDING COMMITTEE

1 6 ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Biomass Power/
Co-Generation Programme—An Evaluation]

&
कह

SIXTEENTH REPORT

सययमेब जयन

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)


SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Biomass Power/
Co-Generation Programme—An Evaluation”]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.8.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.8.2006

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)


Price : Rs. 47.00

© 2006 By Lox SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


ComPosITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2005-2006...

INTRODUCTION

Cuapter I

Cuapter I

Cuarter III

Carter [V

CHAPTER V

IL

CONTENTS

Report .....

Recommendations /Observations that have been
accepted by the Government .......

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies .....

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited .....

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 31.7.2006

Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained

in the 9th Report of the Standing Committee

on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) ....

PAGE

30

31

36

38

0)


रा = = 7 a *~
a . = शा
_ शा हु पु 7 a हु we _ 7
7 a a हि के on -
7 a ७ Eels = - = = i
ee ele Pree acre Ral eatigm कान ० 8
i -
= be ow oss FF oe EE 1]
न हि : boot | *
: —— ae Sete ie OL be
- Vee
= 20% 7275]
7 ner a = |
eee boo = =~.
2) eee: |
Soa eet i an em yt -
=" oo Lo.
= * me .] = a . पु
7 _ ea ee or बा के लक = + |
a meee A Hees eek tot a =
oa aed Seer ood ee कम oe 7
7 Ts gem 7-० Re aT ate
i है 5 हु = — b>
बे रा = =-.
oe +



COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

2. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
3. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

4. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
*5. Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar

7. Shri Chander Kumar

8. Shri Subodh Mohite

9. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

10. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

11. Dr. Rabindra Kumar Rana

12. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

13. Shri Khiren Rijiju

14. Shri Nandkumar Sai

15. Shri M. Shivanna

16. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

17. Shri M.K. Subba

18. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

19. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
20. Shri G. Venkataswamy
21. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

“Expired on 14th April, 2006.

(iil


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
“23. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
24. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
26. Shri Bimal Jalan
27. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Juby Amar — Committee Officer
5. Shri Manoj Pahuja — Executive Assistant

“Ceased to be Member of the Committee wef, 2nd April, 2006, consequent upon his
retirement from Rajya Sabha.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained ir the
8th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on the su.ject
“Biomass Power/Co-Generation Programme—An Evaluation” of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

2. The Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 25th August, 2005. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 20th January, 2006.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 31.7.2006.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deter; GURUDAS KAMAT,
July 31, 2006 Chairman,
Sravana 9, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

()


7 mn ie a 8g 2 et
नल BS हा... ही व Set. ॥७७
wee rR 2५ ०
हम ला मी आल |
7 ones ail er = lo :
= "डा आज f= i
ie ta a |
ee ee ह..छ। कया ६&-2गयाणा -दाजाकार--2आ
OS Hiroe, elias othe 1 |
- oa a - 7 पु ai
— रत हि = 7 a, a a
er |
== | हु 7 _a
a a= a all -
a - = 7 _ / — a i
se = a oa
fal = -_ कक om मर ह
= 7 _ _ a = a:



CHAPTER I

REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Evaluation” of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources.

2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.08.2005
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
22 Recommendations/Observations.

3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:

@

Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SLNos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 20 and 21
Total: 15

Chapter—II

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to persue in view of the Government's replies:

SLNo. 14
Total: 1
Chapter-III

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

SLNos. 1, 11, 17 and 22
Total: 4
Chapter—IV

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

SLNos. 13 and 19
Total: 2
Chapter-V


4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time
along with reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

Effective Implementation Strategy for Biomass Power
(Sl. No. 1, Para 2.17)

6. The Committee in their 8th Report observed that Biomass is
renewable organic material derived from trees, plants, crops or from
human, animal, mnicipal and industrial wastes. Woody Biomass is
derived from fores's, plantations forestry residues while other sources
provide non-woody Biomass. The Committee noted that the total
estimated Biomass power potential in India was above 1 lakh MW.
This included 16,000 MW grid interactive power from surplus agro
residues and wastes from forestry and plantations, 3500 MW through
bagasse co-generation and 1 lakh MW from plantation of 60 million
hectares of w. steland. The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources had Leen implementing Biomass Power and Cogeneration
Programme since 1994. The Committee also noted that over these ten
years, only 101 Biomass Power and Cogeneration projects aggregating
to 750 MW had been installed in the country and 73 projects
aggregating to 585 MW were under various stages of implementation.
This included 58 Bagasse Cogeneration Projects aggregating to 450 MW
and 34 Projects under implementation aggregating to 312 MW. The
Committee were not satisfied with the present slow approach of the
Government in tapping the huge Biomass potential available in the
country. The Government had fixed a target that 10% of the additional
gird interactive power generation capacity should come from renewable
sources during the 10th and 11th Plan Periods, which is 5.5% at present.
The Committee felt that renewable energy including Bio-energy should
now be brought into mainstream for meeting/supplementing the energy
demands in the urban and rural areas. The Committee recommended
that the Government should now evolve an effective implementation
strategy for Biomass Power Cogeneration Programme for maximum
exploitation of Biomass resources of the country with an objective to
make Biomass energy available at an affordable price to the common
man.

2


7. The Ministry in its reply submitted:

“The barriers to accelerating the growth of bio-power are (i) raw
material availability in requisite quantity and quality (ii) plant
capacity limitations on account of nature of raw materials and
difficulties associated with its collection and transportation to the
plant site (iii) requirement of fiscal and financial incentives and
(iv) requirement of preferential tariffs. Until such time as the
aforesaid four or barriers can be addressed in reasonable and
meaningful manner and bio-power can compete with conventional
power without incentives/preferential tariffs, the current aim for
bio-power of 3% out of the overall aim for renewables of 10% of
the additional power generation capacity to be set up in the country
appears highly reasonable and satisfactory.

It is further submitted that potential for grid-interactive biomass
power generation based captive plantations on wastelands is only
theoretical as 40 m ha or so of wastelands can be put to multiple
uses, including food grains, oil seeds production. If the available
wastelands are to be utilized for energy plantation purposes, it
would have to be a major inter-Ministerial/Departmental initiative
with the participation of the Ministries of Environment and Forest,
Agriculture, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj & Bio-technology.
This Ministry can only facilitate provision of know-how for the
conversion of biomass into energy/electricity. However, for
conversion of agricultural waste, forest residues and biomass
obtained from plantations on croplands to energy/electricity, this
Ministry has taken the initiative to launch Test Project on Village
Energy Security, wherein the requirement of cooking, lighting and
motive power in villages could be met through renewable energy,
mostly biomass, distributed generation systems, wherever feasible
and cost-effective. Depending upon the outcome of the test phase,
a decision to extend the initiative would be taken. Meanwhile, a
decision has been taken to electrify remote villages through
distributed renewable generation systems, mostly biomass based,
wherever feasible and cost-effective.

In so far as bagasse cogeneration is concerned, the barrier to
its accelerated deployment has been identified as the inability of
many sugar mills, especially in the cooperative sector, to generate
bankable proposals for obtaining loans from financial institutions
on account of their poor financial and liquidity positions. Further,
bagasse cogeneration appears to be more viable in coastal areas
where there is an elongated crushing season sometimes exceeding
180 days as compared to a normal crushing season of 150 days,

3


for most sugar mills. Even then, the Commission for Additional
Sources of Energy has desired that a Committee be set up
comprising, among others, representative of the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs and NCDC to suggest innovative ways and
means for the accelerated growth of bagasse cogeneration, especially
in the cooperative sector.”

8. The Committee note with concern that though Bio-Power has
the potential to compete with conventional power without incentives/
preferential tariffs, yet it has some barriers for accelerating the growth
of Bio-Power. The Committee, therefore, desire that strategy should
be worked out by the Ministry to address these barriers in a
reasonable and meaningful manner with all the concerned sections/
quarters and reiterate their earlier recommendations that the
Government must evolve an effective implementation strategy for
Biomass Power Cogeneration Programme for maximum exploitation
of Biomass resources of the country with an objective to make
Biomass energy available at an affordable rate. The Committee feel
that remote villages can be electrified at a lower cost through biomass
system and would like to know the details of the cases where such
test projects have been taken up.

Setting up Biomass Projects by Private Developers
(Sl. No. 2, Para 2.18)

9. The Committee had noted in their earlier Report that the private
developers were facing a number of problems in setting up Biomass
projects like firm assessments on availability of Biomass and ensuring
its supply to the project, uncertainty on tariff to be fixed by SERCs
and evolving technology of Biomass gasification systems, etc. The
Comunittee desired that these problems should be resolved on priority
and in a time bound manner.

10. The Ministry in its reply submitted:

“A project for assessing the availability of surplus biomass in
different parts of the country for conversion to energy /electricity
has been initiated. Under this project, a ‘biomass Resource Atlas
for India’ is likely to be completed by March 2007 and the same
would be placed on the website of this Ministry for use of
prospective project developers. ...

The subject of tariff fixation and related issues are of a quasi-
judicial nature in the implementation of which this Ministry has
no direct role. Even then, this Ministry has been taking up such
matters with the State Governments from time to time, depending
upon the facts and circumstances of the cases.”


11. The Committee feel that the problems being faced by the
private developers in setting up biomass projects need to be sorted
out and resolved at the highest level and also in an institutional
framework. The Committee appreciate that a project for assessing
the ability of surplus biomass in different parts of the country ha
been initiated, under which, a Biomass Resource Atlas for India is
likely to be completed by March, 2007 and the same would be placed
on the website for use of prospective project developers. Therefore,
the Committee urge upon the Ministry to ensure timely compl: ‘ion
of Biomass Atlas. However, there appears to be a need to fuither
improve the gasification technology and make the same available to
private developers. The Committee desire that this should be done
in a systematic manner throughout the country.

State-wise Biomass potential and Targets
(81. No. 4, Para 2.20)

12. During the examination of the subject, the Committee were not
convinced with the reasoning given by the Ministry that State-wise
targets were not fixed under the Biomass Power Programme as this
activity was driven by the private investment, which depends on a
host of factors including entrepreneurial activity in the State, surplus
Biomass potential and the price of electricity fixed by the State
regulators. The Committee in their 31st Report (13th Lok Sabha) on
the Electricity Bill, 2001 had recommended that the States should be
encouraged to procure at least 5% of their energy demands from
renewable sources and the limit of the same should be raised to 10%
by the end of 11th Plan. The Committee had desired that the Ministry
should assess State-wise potential of Biomass and also fix the targets
accordingly for every year for a balanced exploitation of Biomass
potential available in each State. The Committee also desired that the
Government should also collect full data of power generation through
Biomass co-generation mode by private developers in various States
and for this purpose there was a need to develop a better coordination
with the State level nodal agencies engaged in the field of non-
conventional energy sources for promotion and development of private
sector projects. The Committee felt that fixation of national targets for
procurement of energy demands from renewable sources would help
in better exploitation of non-conventional resources.

13. In its reply, the Ministry responded:

“The assessment of state-wise potential of biomass is being
addressed under the project for preparation of Biomass Resource

5


Atlas for India....... the aim of the Ministry is to add 10% of the
power generation capacity to be set up in the country during the
10th and 11th plan periods through renewables, of which 3% is
envisaged through biomass power. However, under the Electricity
Act, 2003, the SERCs are required to fix a percentage for purchase
of power from non-conventional sources taking into account
availability of such resources in the region and its impact on
consumer tariffs. Consequently, the need for fixation of national
targets has ceased.”

14, The Committee are happy to note that assessment of State-
wise potential of Biomass Resource is being addressed under the
Project Biomass Resource Atlas. The Committee feel that the target
of the Ministry to add 10% of the power capacity to be setup in the
country during the 10th and 11th Plan periods through renewables
can only be better achieved, if the Ministry plays the role of an
effective coordinator with a holistic vision. Though, under the
Electricity Act, 2003, the SERCs are required to fix percentage for
purchase of power produced from the non-conventional sources, yet
the Ministry cannot absolve itself of its responsibilities in giving
overall perspective and directions to the programme. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Ministry to collect full date of power
generation through biomass co-generation mode by private developers
in various States and for this purpose they feel that there was a
greater need to develop a better coordination with the State level
nodal agencies engaged in the field of non-conventional energy
sources for promotion and development of private sector projects.

Financial Incentives for Biomass/Cogeneration Project
(SI. No. 8, Para No. 3.14)

15. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources were encouraging the setting up of grid interactive
Biomass based power projects through the non-government investment.
The Committee were happy to note that leading Financial Institutions
like PFC, HUDCO, NCDC, IDBI and scheduled banks had started
providing loans to Biomass Power Cogeneration Projects. The
Department of Food and Public Distribution had also agreed for giving
funds from Sugar Development Fund for Bagasse based cogeneration
projects at lower rates. The Committee desired that Government should
take initiatives to convince the Financial Institutions and banks about
the importance and viability of Biomass based power projects by
showing their determination in developing the latest technology. R&D
efforts for cost reduction, future planning policy and tariffs etc. The
Committee also urged the Government to take up the matter with
Financial Institutions and banks to evolve simplified procedures for
quick disposal of loan application for Biomass based power projects.

6


16. In its reply, the Ministry has stated:

“The financial institutions and banks are currently employing more
and more modern appraisal techniques like credit ratings of
borrowers to arrive at decisions to give loan, the quantum of loan,
the interest rate to be charged and also the terms & conditions
governing the loan. Consequently, financial institutions have become
more professional in their approach and in an environment like
this, would be unwilling to accept outside interference in absence
of sound credit rating and financial viability of the p >ject.
Nonetheless, every effort is being made to create greater awa.eness
about the robustness of some renewable technologies. As regards
R&D efforts for cost reduction, it is submitted that combustion
technology is already mature for applications of this type. However,
in case of gasification systems, R&D support is being provided.”

17. The Committee are not all convinced with the logic extended
by the Ministry, as they are fully aware of the appraisal techniques
in vogue in the financial institutions and banks that have been
brought to their notice by the Ministry as an alibi for their reluctance
to intervene on behalf of the Bio-mass based power projects. It is
true that the financial institutions and the banks are bound by their
rules/regulations/procedures. It is also equally true that the non-
conventional energy projects are at present in a nascent stage and
hence require suitable initiatives, incentives as also interventions
from the Government side. Rather than taking refuge behind the
appraisal procedures of the financial institutions and banks, the
Ministry should actively work out some incentive schemes or
guarantees from its side for the Bio-mass based power projects so
that it because a bit easier for the financial institutions and banks
to give due priority to the loan applications in relation to these
projects. The Committee strongly feel that a pro-active intervention
by the Ministry at this juncture would go a long way in providing
the non-conventional energy sector with the much needed toe-hold
for establishing itself.

R&D for Biomass/Cogeneration Projects
(Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.21)

18. The Committee noted that a lot of work had been done in
developing small capacity Biogas production units and Biomass gasifiers
and industrial scale Biomass furnaces, boilers, dual fuel engines, etc.
With the increase in the use of natural gas, now industry had started
manufacturing gas compressors and producer gas engines. The
Committee desired that the R&D efforts should now be concentrated
to develop and implement selected co-coordinated projects with target
to develop demonstrable technology packages having potential for

7


wider adaptation. The Committee also desired that Government should
prepare a detailed programme for the setting up of pilot and first of
a kind commercial scale units to demonstrate indigenously developed
technology packages and develop confidence of industries concerned.
The Committee further desired that in preparation of such programme/
project the participation of users stakeholders should also be ensured.

19. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted:

“Biomass combustion technologies are already mature. However,
biomass gasification technologies, which are still in the development
phase, will be supported at the National Institute of Renewable
Energy (NIRE) at Jalandhar, when established, which will focus on
bio-energy technologies and will be the technical focal point of
this Ministry for all matters relating to biomass conversion
technologies.”

20. The Committee are dismayed with the response of the
Ministry to their recommendation as it is not at all indicative of any
concrete action but reflects extreme inertia on its part. NIRE and its
setting up should have been conveyed to the Committee in specific
terms particularly when the Ministry thinks it to be the last word
for all matters relating to the Bio-mass conversion technologies. The
Committee are of the view that unless and until R&D efforts and
infrastructure are at par with the expectations and requirements of
the user industries, if not ahead, they are going to be of no use to
them. Be it Bio-mass combustion technologies or Bio-mass gasification
technologies, the R&D infrastructure ought to be not only at par
with the similar technologies available globally but also at the cutting
edge. The Committee, therefore, desire that they must not only be
informed in concrete terms about the efforts being made at present
for the development of biomass gasification technologies by the
Ministry but should also be given complete details in regard to the
establishment of the National Institute of Renewable Energy at
Jalandhar. The details should include the efforts made by the
Ministry till date in giving priority consideration to the establishment

-of NIRE and financial allocations made for the purpose and the
specific date by which the Institute will be set up. Pending the
setting up of this Institute, the Government should explore the
possibility of handing over this project to other Scientific Institutions
like HT and IIs.

Biofuels
(Sl. No. 13, Para No. 4.23)

21. The Committee noted that bio-fuels are considered as most
preferred alternative to petrol and diesel particularly in the transport

8


sector, MNES had initiated a programme on bio-fuels for transportation
since 2002-03. The focus of the programme was to develop the
technology for converting vegetable oils, mainly non-edible oils, to
bio-fuel and promote the use of these bio-fuels in automobile sector
after taking care of different aspects of the conventional diesel/petrol
engines. The Committee recommended that the ministry should first
of all undertake details non-edible seed resource assessment study to
know the potential of such seed production in each agro-climatic zone.
After that, the Ministry must prepare a time-bound programme for
extending similar bio-fuel demonstration projects covering more and
more villages in all States of the country. The Committee also
recommended that as large number of activities were to be taken up
under bio-fuel programme the Ministry should also prepare a National
Policy on bio-fuels with the participation of the concerned stakeholders
and institutions working in the field of bio-fuels as this programme
involved major R&D efforts at this stage. The Government should
provided separate budget as per requirement of the projects to be
undertaken during the coming years.

22. In response, the Ministry has stated:

“Tt has been suggested to the Committee of Secretaries that this
Ministry should focus on policy and development of bio-fuel
systems/devices for stationary, portable and transport applications,
while issues relating to production of bio-fuel crops could be
handled by the Ministry of Agriculture with support from the
Ministries of Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and Bio-
Technology. Bio-fuel refining and distribution/retailing could be
handled by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and standards
for bio-fuels by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs.”

23. The Committee note that it has been suggested to the
Committee of Secretaries that this Ministry should focus on policy
and development of bio-fuel systems/devices for stationary, portable
and transport applications, while issues relating to production of
bio-fuel crops could be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture with
support from the Ministries of Rural Development, Panchayati Raj
and Bio-Technology. Bio-fuel refining and distribution/retailing could
be handled by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and
standards for bio-fuels by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs.

The Committee would like to be apprised of the final decision
taken in the matter and if not taken as yet, the reasons therefor. The

Committee would also like to know whether the task of preparation

9


of a National Policy on bio-fuels with the participation of the
concerned stakeholder and the institutions working in the field of
bio-fuels-which in their considered opinion was very much
imperative—has been undertaken or not. In addition, the Committee
would also like to know as to whether separate budget provisions
as per requirements of the bio-fuel demonstration projects to be
undertaken during the coming years, have been made by the
Government.

Village Energy Security Programme
(Sl. No. 16, Para No. 5.17)

24, The Committee observed that Test Projects would be undertaken
by a Village Energy Committee formed by the Gram Sabha and notified
by the Panchayats and facilitated by implementing agencies such as
District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs), forestry departments
and NGOs with technical inputs overall coordination and monitoring
by the State Nodal Agencies. It was proposed to take up about two
lakh villages. The Committee wanted that role of NGOs in such projects
should be well defined & monitored closely to check the misuse of
the huge funds released under this programme for the benefits of
poor villagers and the Government should issue strict guidelines in
this regard. The Committee also desired that Forest departments should
certainly be associated in selection of forest fringe villages and
plantation of fast growing oil seed bearing trees for getting better
results.

25. The Ministry in its reply submitted:

“A decision whether to launch a full-fledged Village Energy Security
Programme would be taken up depending upon the outcome of
the test projects. Meanwhile, the task of electrification of remote
villages is being continued under the Remote Village Electrification
Programme of the Ministry which is expected to cover about 10,000
remote census villages as against an initial estimate of 25,000 remote
census villages as per the updated data on remote census villages
furnished by the Rural Electrification Corporation. In addition,
however, remote hamlets of electrified census villages would need
to be taken up. The number of such remote hamlets is not yet
firmed up.

The implementation of the test projects is being done by the Forest
Department, Zila Parishad or NGOs selected by the States. To

10


prevent misuse of funds, the same are being released to government
agencies/SNAs who are required to deposit the funds in a Village
Energy Fund operated by the Village Energy Committee. The
accounts of a Village Energy Committee are to be duly audited as
per the procedure being followed by the Gram Panchayats or the
Joint Forestry Management Committees. The State Nodal Agencies
have been assigned the responsibility for monitoring and
coordination of the implementation of the test projects.

Since test projects involve plantation activity, States have been
advised to suitably associate the Forest Department in the
implementation of these projects, including those being
implemented by NGOs.”

26. The Committee have noted the reply of the Ministry. They
find that though the Village Energy Security Programme (VESP) is
still at test stages but finally it is going to be the bedrock of energy
source for about two lakh villages in the country. The Programme if
implemented with due care and alacrity has the potential of changing
the face of rural India. The test projects of VESP have been lingering
on for quite some time now. The Committee would appreciate that
a firm time table be drawn up to conclude them at the earliest and
based on the results thereof, implementation of VESP is initiated in
the right earnest. The Committee would like to be kept abreast in
these matters at regular intervals.

Training for Operation Biomass/Cogeneration Equipment
(Sl. No. 17, Para No. 5.18)

27. The Committee felt that if the projects of Biomass Co-generation
were to be taken up on a large scale at the village/district level,
proper training of the people, who will handle the equipment of
Biomass Co-generation, is required. The Committee desired that
Diploma level courses should be started in the polytechnics in the
various States covered under the programme with the help of Ministry
of HRD & State Governments.

28. In its reply, the Ministry responded:

“It is submitted that the existing trades in ITIs would be sufficient
to ensure the necessary skills required for the upkeep of village
level renewable energy systems. In addition, manufacturers would
be utilized in imparting special training wherever necessary.”

1


29. The Committee note that the Ministry has contended that
the existing trades in ITIs would be sufficient to ensure the necessary
skills required for the upkeep of village level renewable energy
systems and the specialised training needs will be taken care of by
the manufacturers wherever necessary. The Committee would like to
have a detailed note in regard to the exercise done by the Ministry
while arriving to this conclusion. The Committee would also like to
know as to what linkages/mechanisms the Ministry envisages for
ensuring that the specialised training requirement are met by the
manufacturers as also the experience of the cases where these systems
are working after the manufacturer’s warranty period is over.

Awareness Programmes for Biomass/Cogeneration
(Sl. No. 18, Para No. 5.19)

30. The Committee noted that Village Energy Security through
Biomass Programme relates to villagers and there was lack of awareness
about such an important scheme amongst them. The Committee desired
that Government should take up extensive awareness generation and
training programme in prospect villages for local communities who
will run the Biomass Power generating equipment. The Committee
also desired that similar programmes should be arranged for
Government functionaries, local NGOs, entrepreneurs, etc. to prepare
a good team of facilitators.

31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated:

“Awareness generation and training programmes are important
components of the test projects. As per the terms and conditions
of the test projects local youth are to be trained as operators by
equipment suppliers for operation and maintenance purposes. This
has been reiterated through communications to the implementing
agencies. Workshops and meetings are being organized for
generating awareness among Government functionaries, local
NGOs, entrepreneurs and members of the local communities in
different States. Visits to various project sites are being organized
for the implementing agencies and members of the Villages Energy
Committees.”

32. The Committee have noted the efforts being made by the
Ministry in the direction of awareness generation and training
wherever Test Projects of Biomass-Cogeneration are under
implementation. As has been previously commented by the
Committee in this Report (Para No. 25), the lingering on of the test

12


projects is definitely a cause for great concern. The Committee expect
that in the light of their aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry
will draw a firm time table for completion of these Test Projects
and based on their conclusions, start the implementation of Village
Energy Security Programme (VESP) without any further delay. With
these expectations, the Committee hope that the awareness and
training components of VESP will now not be restricted to test
projects areas only but extended to all prospective beneficiary villages
so that the gestation period for the implementation is reduced to the
best possible extent.

Waste to Energy Projects
(81 No. 20, Para No. 5.29)

33, The Committee found that the most important step was firming
up of potential for urban, industrial and commercial wastes for specific
urban centers and industrial units. For this purpose, the Ministry should
prepare a time-bound programme in consultation with State
Governments, major municipal bodies, government institutions and
private developers to know the quantity and quality of urban wastes
in all the major cities. The Committee desired that States should be
persuaded to implement Municipal Solid Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules, 2000 at the earliest as this will facilitate setting up
of projects based on Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). The Committee
also noted that only the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu
and Uttar Pradesh have announced policies for promotion of waste-to-
energy projects in their States. The Committee further desired that
other States should be asked to formulate and announce similar policies
for supply of waste of desired quality and quantity at project site and
facilities for evacuation and purchase of power generated from such
projects in their States.

34. The Ministry in its reply has contended as under:

“State Nodal Agencies have been advised to take further action on
the following activities for:

(i) Estimation of potential for energy recovery

(ii) Implementation of MSW Rules by Municipal Corporations/
Urban Local Bodies

(iii) Announcement of policies for supply of waste of desired
quantity and quality at project sites and for providing
facilities for evacuation and purchase of power generated
from such projects, and

13


(iv) Extensive awareness creation and publicity for attracting
private investment.

The policies announced by some of the States for development
of waste-to-energy projects are being circulated to other States for
introduction of similar ¢onducive promotion policies in their
respective states.

Municipal Corporations have also been separately requested to
expedite the implementation of MSW (Management & Handling)
Rules 2000.”

35. The Committee are happy to note that the State Nodal
Agencies have already been advised to take further action on the
activities viz., (i) Estimation of potential for energy recovery;
(ii) Implementation of MSW Rules by Municipal Corporations/Urban
Local Bodies; (iii) Announcement of policies for supply of waste of
desired quantity and quality at project sites and for providing
facilities for evacuation and purchase of power generated from such
projects; and (iv) Extensive awareness creation and publicity for
attracting private investment.

However, in view of the tremendous potential of urban waste as
an alternative source of energy, the Committee feel that the Ministry’s
efforts need to be vigorously pursued and followed up. It should
not be forgotten that the utilisation of urban waste will not only
pave way for having a viable alternative source of energy another
more significant fall out will be that our rivers and other water
bodies will be spared of the copious amounts of urban waste being
spewed into them daily by our municipalities. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Ministry to take urgent steps in a time
bound manner to firm up the potential for urban, industrial and
commercial wastes for specific urban centers and industrial units
and prepare a time-bound programme in consultation with State
Governments, major municipal bodies, Government institutions and
private developers to know the quantity and quality of urban wastes
in all the major cities. The Committee expects a concrete reply from
the Ministry in the matter.

Bio-Energy in the Islands
(Sl. No. 22, Para No. 5.35)

36. The Committee noted that there was a huge potential of Bio-
energy in the Islands where coconut trees residues were available

14


abundantly. The Committee further noted that at the initiative of the
Ministry, a project report had been prepared by the Anna University
for utilizing Biomass from coconut residues for power generation in
different Islands of Lakshadweep. The Andaman & Nicobar
administration had been advised to conduct a fresh study in the light
of the post Tsunami changes situation. The Committee hoped that
such studies would be completed in a short span of time so that the
projects of Biomass could be taken up expeditiously in thése Islands.
The Committee desired that there should be an integrated approach to
power generation in the Islands exploring Biomass, tidal, solar and
other forms of renewable energy. The committee further desired that
a time bound programme to implement these projects should be drawn
up and sufficient funds should be earmarked in advance by Union/
State governments to avoid time & costs over-runs.

37. The Ministry in its reply has submitted:

“The feasibility Report for taking up biomass power project in
Lakshadweep is under consideration of the Islands Administration/
Central Electricity Authority for taking up biomass power projects
of appropriate capacity in different Islands. A detailed survey is
being initiated to assess the potential of setting up sustainable
biomass power projects using wood/residues in A&N Islands.”

38. The Committee have taken note of the initiatives taken by
the Ministry in case of Lakshadweep and A&N Islands. In view of
the unprecedented trail of devastation left by the Tsunami in A&N
Islands, the Committee desire that the survey to assess the potential
of setting up sustainable biomass power projects using wood/residues
in A&N Islands be conducted and completed by the Ministry without
any delay so that the reconstruction efforts in the A&N Islands are
further boosted and the Bio-energy plays its significant role in the
energy scenario of the Islands for which there is a huge potential.
Similarly the DPRs submitted by IISC, Bangalore in respect of the
Andamans and the Project Report prepared by the Ana University
in respect of Lakshadweep should also be studied and finalized at
the earliest. The Committee trust that the implementation of this
very crucial component in the rebuilding of A&N Islands will not
suffer for want of funds. The Committee would again stress that
there should be an integrated approach to power generation in the
Islands exploring Biomass, tidal, solar and other forms of renewable
energy.

15


CHAPTER IL

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.18)

The Committee note that the private developers face a number of
problems in setting up Biomass projects like firm assessment on
availability of Biomass and ensuring its supply to the project,
uncertainty on tariff to be fixed by SERCs and evolving technology of
biomass gasification systems etc. The Committee desire that these
problems should be resolved on priority and in a time bound manner.

Reply of the Government

A project for assessing the availability of surplus biomass in
different parts of the country for conversion to energy/electricity has
been initiated. Under this project, a ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for India’
is likely to be completed by March 2007 and the same would be
placed on the website of this Ministry for use of prospective project
developers.

Regarding tariffs, as already submitted in reply to Recommendation
Serial No. 15 of the 6th Report of the Standing Committee on Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of MNES, the subject of tariff fixation and related
issues is of a quasi-judicial nature in the implementation of which this
Ministry has no direct role. Even then, this Ministry has been taking
up such matters with the State governments from time to time,
depending upon the facts and circumstances of the cases.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.19)

The Committee specifically note that India has very good Bagasse
co-generation potential which can generate 3500 MW power. Out of
this, only 450 MW projects have been installed and 312 MW projects
are in pipeline. The Committee are surprised to note that in the State

16


of Maharashtra out of the potential of 1000 MW, Bagasse Co-generation
projects of 32.5 MW only have been commissioned so far and projects
of 6 MW are under implementation. Similarly the Bagasse potential of
other States like U.P., Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat and Punjab has also been poorly utilized. The Committee are
concerned to note that the main hurdles in the programme exist in the
fact that in some States particularly in Maharashtra, the sugar mills
are in the cooperative sector and they face difficulties in limited access
to funds and also in raising equity component of the investment in
the programme. Also, there is heavy management risk in the projects
as the cooperative sector is subject to frequent changes in the
management and perception of risk in the Biomass Co-generation
Projects is high. The Committee feel that industrial Co-generation has
in the past not received adequate attention, as cheap power and fuel
were abundantly available. However, with increasing tariffs and
unreliable supply of grid power, there is considerable opportunity for
the industrial sector needs to tap the potential for producing electricity
and thermal energy in the co-generation mode. In this direction the
Bagasse Co-generation programme can play a pivotal role. The
Committee welcome the initiative taken by the government by
requesting the Maharashtra Energy Development Agency (MEDA) to
constitute a high level Committee for identifying and suggesting
measures for rapid implementation of Co-generation projects in
cooperative sugar mills in the State and desire that they should
persuade MEDA to prepare a Report in the shortest possible time. The
Committee also desire that after examining the Report the Government
should prepare a specific package of incentives containing capital as
well as operative subsidies for cooperative sugar mills in Maharashtra
and other States. The Committee may be apprised of the time-frame
fixed in this regard.

Reply of the Government

As mentioned in reply to recommendation no. 1, a committee is
being set up by the Ministry to suggest innovative ways and means
for the accelerated growth of Bagasse Co-generation.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.20)

The Committee also find that the capacity under implementation
in the various Biomass projects in the various States is relatively lower
than the capacity commissioned. Although the Ministry have sufficient
information on the potential available in the states for Biomass Power

17


and Co-generation programme, the capacity under utilization is quite
low. The Committee are constrained to note that State-wise physical
and financial targets are not fixed and therefore, comparative data on
the targets and achievements are not available. The Committee are not
convinced with the reasoning given by the Ministry that State-wise
targets are not fixed under the Biomass Power Programme as this
activity is driven by private investment, which depends on a host of
factors including entrepreneurial activity in that State, surplus Biomass
potential and the price of electricity fixed by the State regulators. The
Committee in their 31st Report on the Electricity Bill, 2001 (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) had recommended that the States should he encouraged to
procure at least 5% of their energy demands from renewable sources
and the limit of the same should be raised to 10% by the end of
110 Plan in phases. Similar objectives/targets have been fixed by the
Central Government also. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should assess State-wise potential
of Biomass and also fix the targets accordingly for every year for a
balanced exploitation of Biomass potential available in each State. The
Committee desire that the Government should also collect full data of
power generation through biomass/cogeneration mode by private
developers in various States. For this purpose, there is a need to
develop a better coordination with the State level Nodal agencies
engaged in the field of Non-Conventional energy Sources, responsible
for promotion and development of private sector projects. The
Committee feel that fixation of National targets for procurement of
energy demands from renewable sources would help in better
exploitation of our Non-Conventional resources.

Reply of the Government

The assessment of State-wise potential of biomass is being
addressed under the project for preparation of Biomass Resource Atlas
for India as mentioned in reply to the Recommendation No. 2, Para
2.18. The aim of the Ministry is to add 10% of the power generation
capacity to be set up in the country during the 10th and 11th plan
periods through renewables, of which 3% is envisaged through biomass
power. However, under the Electricity Act 2003, the SERCs are required
to fix a percentage for purchase of power from non-conventional
sources taking into account availability of such resources in the region
and its impact on consumer tariffs. Consequently, the need for fixation
of national targets has ceased.

[Ministry's OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006)
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

18


Recommendation (SI.No. 5, Para No. 2.21)

The Committee note that Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have a goal to achieve renewable grid power of 10,000 MW
including 3000 MW Biomass grid power by the year 2012. They have
a target of 700 MW for the Tenth Plan ie, by 2007 and rest 2300 MW
will have to be achieved during 11th Plan period. Out of the target of
700 MW only 370 MW has been achieved during the first three years
of the current plan. The Committee feel that the target of energy from
Biomass is very low under the situation when the country has such a
huge Biomass potential. Now, that 100% producer gas run engines
have become reality, it should be easy to obtain higher targets/
exploitation from Biomass sources. Efforts should be made to make
this engine cost effective and popularize the same for mass utilization.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should suitably
enhance their targets of Biomass Power generation and also generate
a suitable action plan for the same, for the remaining two years of the
current Plan and 11th Plan to achieve the goal of 3000 MW Biomass
gtid power by the year 2012.

Reply of the Government

The stated target of 3000 MW for the 10th and 11th plan periods
covers the entire spectrum of bio-power viz. biomass combustion/
bagasse cogeneration, biomass gasification and urban & industrial
waste-to-energy. Out of this, as stated in the reply to Recommendation
Serial No. 14 of the Action Taken Report on the 6th Report of the
Standing Committee for Demand for Grants (2005-06) of MNES, the
target for the 10th Plan is 830 MW, which comprises of 700 MW for
biomass combustion/bagasse cogeneration, 50 MW for biomass
gasification and 80 MW for urban & industrial waste-to-energy.

Against the aforesaid targets, the actual achievement w.rt. grid-
interactive bio-power during the first 3 years and 9 months of the
10th Plan ie. unto 31.12.2005 has been about 516 MW comprising
466 MW from biomass combustion/bagasse cogeneration, 18 MW from
biomass gasification and 32 MW from urban & industrial waste-to-
energy.

In view of the aforesaid achievements and the fact that further
projects of about 1000 MW are in the pipeline, the aim of 3000 MW
for grid-interactive bio-power for the 10th and 11th plan period appears
highly achievable.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
19


Recommendation (51. No. 6, Para No. 2.22)

The Committee are happy to note that the Government have taken
initiatives for preparation of ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for India’—based
on Biomass resource assessment studies in different regions of the
country. Ministry have informed that first computer application package
based on low resolution data will be available by the end of this
financial year. It would be made available through State nodal agencies
and some of the entrepreneur for testing and trial purposes. The second
phase where the higher resolution data and survey data will be
matched and project is proposed to be completed by March, 2007. The
Committee feel that such an important data should be made available
on website of the Ministry after the completion of first phase itself.
The Committee however desire that the Ministry should ensure that
total reliability of the data supplied.

Reply of the Government
Bio Energy Development Division

Data of the first phase of the project is expected to be placed on
the website of this Ministry by end March, 2006. Sc has already
placed information for seven States on its website (http://
lab.cgpl.iisc.ernet.in) for trial purposes.

So far as reliability of the data is concerned, it may be stated that
several apex institutions have been involved in assessment studies at
the micro-level. These include the Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI),
New Delhi, Anna University, Chennai, Operation Research Group
(ORG), Vadodara, Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI),
Hyderabad, Jadavpur University, Kolkata. IISc. is testing the compiled
data on a sample basis, which should help in further improving the
overall reliability of the same.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No. 3.13)

The Committee appreciate to note that with an objective to reduce
interest burden of Biomass based Power projects, MNES has been
providing subsidy for Government as well as private projects at the
same level. The earlier interest subsidy scheme for commercial projects
is proposed to be modified to one time subsidy support to the
commercial projects. The subsidy is for making repayment of term
loan provided to the developers by the Financial Institution. The
subsidy will be released after successful commissioning and
commencement of commercial generation from the project, to the

20


financial Institution. The Committee are however, surprised to note
that no formal study has so far been made to evaluate the impact of
earlier incentives given for Biomass Power and Cogeneration
Programme since its inception. The committee feel that these incentives
have not shown the desired results in attracting private sector and
corporate sector in Biomass Power Projects. There is a need for an
intensive evaluation of incentives being given for these programmes.
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Government should
conduct formal study to analyze the impact of various incentives and
subsidy schemes with a view to prepare separate incentive/subsidy
proposals and policy measures for Biomass Power Projects in
Government, private and cooperative sectors. The Committee desire that
SC/ST and other backward classes should be covered proportionately
in the package. The Committee also desire that this exercise should be
completed before the finalization of budget proposals for 2006-07.

Reply of the Government

Subsequent to the position reported earlier in main reply placed
before the Committee, the Ministry has conducted an in-house exercise
to assess the impact of the incentives provided under its schemes
including those relating to biomass power/co-generation projects. This
exercise has revealed that with each Rs. 1 crore of subsidy provided
by the Government, there has been a progressively increasing impact
on the resulting biomass power/cogeneration capacity addition, from
6.47 MW/crore in 1997-98 to 21.88 MW/crore in 2004-05, as reflected
below:

Year Impact (MW per crore)
1997-1998 6.47
1998-1999 6.16
1999-2009 225)
2000-2001 4,26
2001-2002 4.09
2002-2003 6.11
2003-2004 10.83
2004-2005 21.88

Accordingly, taking an average capital cost of such projects at
Rs. 3.5 crore/MW, the total private investment in these projects has
increased from about Rs. 22 crore in 1997-98 to around Rs. 75 crore in
2004-05, for every Rs. 1 crore of subsidy provided.

21


Regarding proportionate coverage of SC/ST and OBCs, special
financing schemes for these categories of entrepreneurs are already in
place in nationalized financial institutions, including IREDA.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (51.0० 8, Para No. 3.14)

The Committee note that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources are encouraging the setting up of grid interactive Biomass
based power projects through non-government investment. Now most
capacity addition is being achieved through private investment. The
State Nodal Agencies are responsible for promotion and development
of private sector projects by way of providing necessary clearance,
allotment of land and facilitating power purchase agreements etc. SERCs
are determining tariffs by taking its account fee submissions of all
stakeholders. The Committee are happy to note that leading Financial
Institutions like PFC, HUDCO, NCDC, IDBI and scheduled banks have
started providing loans to Biomass Power Cogeneration Projects. The
Department of Food and Public Distribution has also agreed for giving
funds from Sugar Development fund for Bagasse based cogeneration
projects at lower rates. The Committee, desire that Government should
take initiatives to convince the financial Institutions and banks about
the importance and viability of Biomass based power Projects by
showing their determination in developing the latest technology, R&D
efforts for cost reduction, future planning policy and tariffs etc. The
Committee also urge the Government to take up the matter with
Financial Institutions and banks to evolve simplified procedure for
quick disposal of loan application for Biomass based power projects.

The financial institutions and banks are currently employing more
and more modern appraisal techniques like credit ratings of borrowers
to arrive at decisions to give loan, the quantum of loan, the interest
rate to be charged and also the terms & conditions governing the
loan. Consequently, financial institutions have become more professional
in their approach and in an environment like this, would be unwilling
to accept outside interference in absence of sound credit rating and
financial viability of the project. Nonetheless, every effort is being made
to create greater awareness about the robustness submitted that
combustion technology is already mature for applications of this type.
However, in case of gasification systems, R&D support is being
provided.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

22


Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No. 3.15)

The Committee also desire that the Ministry should stress upon
the State Govts. to announce entrepreneur friendly schemes for buy-
back, wheeling and third party sale etc. so that more and more private
investment can be attracted to the Biomass/Cogeneration Power. The
Committee also feel that incentives like Sales Tax & Excise exemptions
accelerated depreciation and Tax holidays etc. should continue for the
present to encourage the private investment.

Reply of the Government

Under the Electricity Act 2003, the SERCs are required to fix rates
for wheeling, banking and third party sale etc. of power, including
renewable power and the State Government as owner of the...
purchasing electricity is only of the major stake holders in the process,
the other two being the renewable energy developer and the consumer
of electricity. In such a situation, the SERC has to balance the conflicting
interests of the buyer and seller of electricity. Fiscal incentives such as
accelerated depreciation, concessional import duty, tax holiday for
10 years etc. are being continued till the same are considered necessary.
Biomass power projects can now avail the benefit of concessional excise
duty on provision of certification by this Ministry, which was
introduced only recently.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 4.20)

The Committee note that modern Biomass conversion technologies
provide us an opportunity to use Biomass feed stocks for production
of all three kinds of fuel ie, gaseous, liquid and solid. Established
technologies for Biomass combustion, cogeneration and anaerobic
digestion are available. Recent development in pyrolysis and gasification
have further added advantages for using Biomass more effectively not
only for heat and electricity generation but also for transport and
chemicals production. The Committee, however, feel that there are
various barriers in technology development. The main barriers include
inadequate reliable regional data and availability of agricultural
residues, lack of coordinated approach in finalizing technology i.e., of
combustion/ gasification/cogeneration for a given kind of feed stock,
capacity and use, lack of standard specifications and inadequate testing
facilities for biomass furnaces, boilers gasifiers and meagre budget
support for R&D to pilot to demonstration to first of a kind of;
commercial scale plant. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry

23


of Non-conventional Energy Sources should take time-bound initiatives
for standardization of technology/systems for Biomass production,
harvesting handling, storage and preprocessing, development and
finalization of advance combustion/gasification/cogeneration technology
for different kinds of feedstocks and development and demonstration
of gas engines and micro-turbines for using Biogass and producer gas.
The Committee also desire that Ministry should take concrete initiatives
for development of standard specifications and testing protocol for
selected technologies in collaboration with Bureau of Indian Standards.
The Committee also recommend that testing and certification
mechanism should be strengthened and the government should
establish institutions for testing and certification.

Reply of the Government

Equipment for biomass grid-interactive power projects is already
covered by standards provided the same is obtained from reputed
manufacturers. Since biomass gasifiers are still in the development
phase, standards for these can be laid down once the technology
parameters are firmed-up.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 4.22)

The Committee strongly feel that the budget support being given
for R&D in Biomass sector is very small. The Committee note that
during 2002-03 only an amount of Rs. 3.74 crores was spent which
came down to Rs. 2.60 crore and Rs. 2.46 crore during 2003-04 and
2004-05 respectively and for the year 2005-06 an amount of Rs. 4 crore
has been allocated. This all shows very poor attention of the
Government towards the R&D projects responsible for very slow
progress in development of Biogas and Biomass gasifier technology
during last one decade. The Committee are surprised to note that as
against American Budget of US $80 million for R&D for the year 2005,
India is spending very small amount of Rs. 4 crore on R&D projects.
The Committee therefore, desire that Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources should undertake a detailed review of R&D projects
and deployment of programme by involving industry stakeholders also
for getting better results in future. The Committee also desire that
R&D budget should be enhanced sufficiently so that R&D projects in
development of bio-energy do not suffer due to non-availability of
funds.

24


Reply of the Government

The recommendation of the Committee pertaining to enhancement
of R&D budget of the Ministry and involvement of industry
stakeholders has been noted for compliance.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 5.16)

The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources have evolved a concept of providing
energy security in villages mainly through biomass. The objective of
the Village Energy Security Projects is to go beyond mere electrification
per se by meeting the total energy requirements of villages including
cooking, lighting and motive power with full participation of the local
communities including women. It will also create avenues for
employment generation, full participation of local communities and
environmental improvements leading to overall sustainable
development. The programme has the potential to generate 15 million
jobs in rural areas. The Committee note that Test Projects are being
taken up in remote villages and hamlets that are not likely to be
electrified through conventional means with emphasis on forest fringe
and tribal villages. The energy production systems would comprise
biogas plants based on dung and leafy biomass, biomass gasifiers
coupled to 100% producer gas engines and bio-fuel run pump sets.
The Committee feel that projects based on poultry droppings, like the
one working at Namakkal, Tamil Nadu, should also be encouraged in
other States. The Committee note that 210 preliminary proposals for
Test Projects on Village Energy Security have been received from 12
States. Out of this 92 proposals were short-listed for preparing detailed
proposals. Ministry have received 55 detailed village energy plans from
8 States. Out of this, 24 projects have been sanctioned in three States
ie. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee
feel that these Test Projects should have been spread in all parts of the
country for getting better experience and results. The Committee,
therefore, desired that Government should sanction the projects in
different States. They should also persuade the other States to submit
such proposals so that Test Projects may be distributed evenly in all
agro-climatic regions and results may come out in the proposed period
of one year.

Reply of the Government

The 24 test projects presently under implementation are in three
States, namely, Madhya Pradesh (11 nos.), Rajasthan (6 nos.) and

25)


West Bengal (7 nos). These were sanctioned during 2004-05. During
the current financial year 2005-06, 14 more test projects have been
sanctioned in 5 States, namely, Andhra Pradesh (1 no.), Madhya Pradesh
(2 nos.), Orissa (4 nos.), Uttaranchal (3 nos.) and Tamil Nadu (4 nos.)
and another 23 test projects have been cleared in-principle in six States,
namely, Andhra Pradesh (2 nos.), Chhattisgarh (8 nos.), Maharashtra
(5 nos.), Jharkhand (2 nos.), Orissa (3 nos.) and Gujarat (3 nos.) It is
expected that by March 2006, the total number of sanctioned test project
should approach the 100 mark, spread over as many different States
as possible covering different agro-climatic regions.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 5.17)

The Committee observed that Test Projects would be undertaken
by a Village Energy Committee formed by the Gram Sabha and notified
by the Panchayats and facilitated by implementing agencies such as
District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs), forestry departments
and NGOs with technical inputs overall coordination and monitoring
by the State Nodal Agencies. A high level Steering Group has been
constituted to provide overall guidance for the implementation of Test
Projects. It is proposed to take up about two lakh villages, consisting
of 1.73 lakh forest fringe villages and about 25,000 remote unelectrified
villages, total investment would be Rs. 40,000 crore. The Committee
therefore, want that role of NGOs in such projects should be well
defined & monitored closely to check the misuse of the huge funds
released under this programme for the benefits of poor villagers. The
Government should issue strict guidelines in this regard. The
Committee also desire that Forest departments should certainly be
associated in selection of forest fringe villages and plantation of fast
growing oil seed bearing trees for getting better results.

Reply of the Government

As submitted in reply to recommendation no. 1, a decision whether
to launch a full-fledged Village Energy Security Programme would be
taken up depending upon the outcome of the test projects. Meanwhile,
the task of electrification of remote villages is being continued under
the Remote Village Electrification Programme of the Ministry which is
expected to cover about 10,000 remote census villages as against an
initial estimate of 25,000 remote census villages as per the updated
data on remote census villages furnished by the Rural Electrification
Corporation. In addition, however, remote hamlets of electrified census
villages would need to be taken up. The number of such remote
hamlets is not yet firmed up.

26


The implementation of the test projects is being done by the Forest
Department, Zila Parishad or NGOs selected by the States. To prevent
misuse of funds, the same are being released to government agencies/
SNAs who are required to deposit the funds in a Village Energy Fund
operated by the Village Energy Committee. The accounts of a Village
Energy Committee are to be duly audited as per the procedure being
followed by the Gram Panchayats or the Joint Forestry Management
Committees. The State Nodal Agencies have been assigned the
responsibility for monitoring and coordination of the implementation
of the test projects.

Since test projects involve plantation activity, States have been
advised to suitably associate the Forest Department in the
implementation of these projects, including those being implemented
by NGOs.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para No. 5.19)

The Committee note that Village Energy Security through Biomass
Programme relates to villagers. There is a lack of awareness about
such an important scheme. The Committee, therefore desire that
Government should take up extensive awareness generation and
training programme in prospect villages for local communities who
will run the Biomass Power generating equipment. They also desire
that similar programmes should be arranged for Government
functionaries, local NGOs, entrepreneurs, etc. to prepare a good team
of facilitators.

Reply of the Government

Awareness generation and training programmes are important
components of the test projects. As per the terms and conditions of
the test projects local youth are to be trained as operators by equipment
suppliers for operation and maintenance purposes. This has been
reiterated through communications to the implementing agencies.
Workshops and meetings are being organized for generating awareness
among Government functionaries, local NGOs, entrepreneurs and
members of the local communities in different States. Visits to various
project sites are being organized for the implementing agencies and
members of the Villages Energy Committees.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 32 of Chapter I of the Report)

27


Recommendation (SI. No. 20, Para No. 5.29)

The Committee are happy to note that as per the need of the hour
and as desired by them in their 5th Report on Demands for Grants
2005-06 the Ministry have prepared an Accelerated Programme for
promotion of projects for energy recovery from urban wastes and
promotion is proposed to be done in fast track mode. The Committee
are also satisfied with the proposed incentives in the form of capital
subsidy up to Rs. 2 crore through FIs/banks for making MSW,
financially viable and remunerative. The Committee find that the most
important step is firming up of potential for urban industrial and
commercial wastes for specific urban centres and industrial units. For
this purpose,"the Ministry should prepare a time-bound programme in
consultation with State Governments, major municipal bodies,
government institutions and private developers to know the quantity
and quality of urban wastes in all the major cities. The Committee
also desire that States should be persuaded to implement MSW
(Management and Handling) Rules 2000 at the earliest as this will
facilitate setting up of projects based on MSW. The Committee also
note that only the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu
and Uttar Pradesh have announced policies for promotion of waste-to-
energy projects in their States. The Committee, therefore, desire that
other States should be asked to formulate and announce similar policies
for supply of waste of desired quality and quantity at project site and
facilities for evacuation and purchase of power generated from such
projects in their States.

Reply of the Government

State Nodal Agencies have been advised to take further action on
the following activities for:

(i) Estimation of potential for energy recovery

(ii) Implementation of MSW Rules by Municipal Corporations/
Urban Local Bodies

(iii) Announcement of policies for supply of waste of desired
quantity and quality at project sites and for providing
facilities for evacuation and purchase of power generated
from such projects, and

(iv) Extensive awareness creation and publicity for attracting
private investment.

28


The policies announced by some of the States for development of
waste-to-energy projects are being circulated to other States for
introduction of similar conducive promotion policies in their respective
States.

Municipal Corporations have also been separately requested to
expedite the implementation of MSW (Management & Handling) Rules
2000.

[Ministry's OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 35 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 5.30)

The Committee observe that all the Waste-to-Energy projects are
to be developed through public private partnership. The Committee
find that lack of awareness may be one of the main hurdles in attracting
private sector participation in the projects. The Committee, therefore,
desire that government should undertake extensive awareness creation
and wide publicity programme to attract private investment for this
sector and to harness the potential in a time-bound manner. The
Government -should also take initiatives to convince Fls/Banks for
getting projects developed and making easy financing available for
Waste-to-Energy projects.

Reply of the Government
Urban, Industrial and Commercial Applications

Besides organizing meetings with various stakeholders, the Ministry
is preparing information material for awareness creation for attracting
private investment in this sector. State Nodal Agencies, IREDA, IL&FS,
etc. have been requested to initiate efforts for development of projects
for specified cities to attract FIs/Banks for providing finances for waste-
to-energy projects. Project development activities have been started in
14 cities in Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Maharashtra apart from
Delhi.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]

29


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No. 4.24)

The Committee note that there is a mission to launch a Mission
on Bio-diesel with a special focus on Jatropha Curcas to be planted on
a large scale to produce bio-diesel from non-edible oils. The Committee
desire that special incentives of Jatropha Curcas and maximum area
should be covered. Villages Panchayats and Gram Sabha should be
involved in the programme and should be monitored closely to make
it a success.

Reply of the Government

At present, as per decision taken in a presentation by Planning
Commission before the then Prime Minister, the Ministry of Rural
Development was entrusted with the bio-diesel mission with focus on
Jatropha curcas. The recommendations of the Standing Committee for
providing special incentives for Jatropha curcas and coverage of
maximum area including involvement of Villages Panchayats and Gram
Sabha in the programme have been forwarded to Ministry of Rural
Development for necessary action. In this regard please also refer to
reply to Recommendation Serial No. 13.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]

30


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.17)

The Committee observe that Biomass is renewable organic material
derived from trees, plants, crops or from human, animal, municipal
and industrial wastes. Woody Biomass is derived from forests,
plantations forestry residues while other sources provide non-woody
Biomass. Fortunately, India is blessed with a huge potential of Biomass.
Moreover, Biomass resources are available locally within or around
the villages and energy production, distribution and provision of energy
can be managed by the village communities. The Committee also note
that the total estimated Biomass power potential in India is above
1 lakh MW. This includes 16,000 MW grid interactive power from
surplus agro residues and wastes from forestry and plantations,
3500 MW through bagasse co-generation and 1 lakh MW from
plantation of 60 million hectares of wasteland. The Ministry of Non-
conventional Energy Sources has been implementing Biomass Power
and Co-generation Programme since 1994. The Committee note that
over these ten years, only 101 Biomass Power and cogeneration projects
aggregating to 750 MW have been installed in the country and 73
projects aggregating to 585 MW are under various stages of
implementation. This includes 58 Bagasse Cogeneration Projects
aggregating to 450 MW and 34 projects under implementation
aggregating to 312 MW. The Committee are not at all satisfied with
the present slow approach of the Government in tapping the huge
Biomass potential available in the country. The Government have fixed
a target that 10% of the additional grid interactive power generation
capacity should come from renewable sources during the 10th and
ith Plan periods, which is 5.5% at present. Bio-energy can make
significant contribution in achieving this target. More efficient modern
Biomass technologies have the potential to alleviate poverty, improve
health, reduce drudgery of women and children increase productivity,
create employment and generate income in rural areas, thereby reducing
rural to urban migration. The Committee at this stage feel a need that
renewable energy including Bio-energy should now be brought into

31


mainstream for meeting/supplementing the energy demands in urban
and rural areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should now evolve an effective implementation
strategy for Biomass Power Cogeneration Programme for maximum
exploitation of Biomass resources of the country with an objective to
make Biomass energy available at an affordable price to the common
man.

Reply of the Government

The barriers to accelerating the growth of bio-power are (i) raw
material availability in requisite quantity and quality (ii) plant capacity
limitations on account of nature of raw materials and difficulties
associated with its collection and transportation to the plant site
(iii) requirement of fiscal and financial incentives and (iv) requirement
of preferential tariffs. Until such time as the aforesaid four barriers
can be addressed in a reasonable and meaningful manner and bio-
power can compete with conventional power without incentives/
preferential tariffs, the current aim for bio-power of 3% out of the
overall aim for renewables of 10% of the additional power generation
capacity to be set up in the country appears highly reasonable and
satisfactory.

It is further submitted that potential for grid-interactive biomass
power generation based captive plantations on wastelands is only
theoretical as 40 mha or so of wastelands can be put to multiple uses,
including foodgrains, oil seeds production. If the available wastelands
are to be utilized for energy plantation purposes, it would have to be
a major inter-Ministerial/Departmental initiative with the participation
of the Ministries of Environment and Forest, Agriculture, Rural
Development, Panchayati Raj & Bio-technology. This Ministry can only
facilitate provision of know-how for the conversion of biomass into
energy/electricity. However, for conversion of agricultural waste, forest
residues and biomass obtained from plantations on croplands to
energy /electricity, this Ministry has taken the initiative to launch Test
Projects on Village Energy Security, wherein the requirement of cooking,
lighting and motive power in villages could be met through renewable
energy, mostly biomass, distributed generation systems, wherever
feasible and cost-effective. Depending upon the outcome of the test
phase, a decision to extend the initiative would be taken. Meanwhile,
a decision has been taken to electrify remote villages through
distributed renewable generation systems, mostly biomass based,
wherever feasible and cost-effective.

In so far as bagasse cogeneration is concerned, the barrier to its
accelerated deployment has been identified as the inability of many

32


sugar mills, especially in the cooperative sector, to generate bankable
proposals for obtaining loans from financial institutions on account of
their poor financial and liquidity positions. Further, bagasse
cogeneration appears to be more viable in coastal areas where there is
an elongated crushing season sometimes exceeding 180 days as
compared to a normal crushing season of 150 days, for most sugar
mills. Even then, the Commission for Additional Sources of Energy
has desired that a Committee be set up comprising, among others,
representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and NCDC to
suggest innovative ways and means for the accelerated growth of
bagasse cogeneration, especially in the cooperative sector.

[Ministry's OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.21)

The Committee note that a lot of work has been done in developing
small capacity Biogas production units and Biomass gasifiers and
industrial scale Biomass furnaces, boilers, dual fuel engines, etc. With
the increase in the use of natural gas, now industry has started
manufacturing gas compressors and producer gas engines. The
Committee desire that the R&D efforts should now be concentrated to
develop and implement selected co-coordinated projects with target to
develop demonstrable technology packages having potential for wider
adaptation. The Committee also desire that Government should prepare
a detailed programme for setting up of pilot and first of a kind
commercial scale units to demonstrate indigenously developed
technology packages and develop confidence of industries concerned.
The Committee further desire that in preparation of such programme/
project the participation of users stakeholders should also be ensured.

Reply of the Government

Biomass combustion technologies are already mature. However,
biomass gasification technologies, which are still in the development
phase, will be supported at the National Institute of Renewable Energy
(NIRE) at Jalandhar, when established, which will focus on bio-energy
technologies and will be the technical focal point of this Ministry for
all matters relating to biomass conversion technologies.

[Ministry's OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
33


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 5.18)

The Committee also feel that if the projects of Biomass Co-
generation are to be taken up on a large scale at the village/district
level, proper training of the people, who will handle the equipment of
Biomass Co-generation, is required. The Committee therefore, desire
that Diploma level courses should be started in the polytechnics in the
various States covered under the programme with the help of Ministry
of HRD & State Governments.

Reply of the Government

It is submitted that the existing trades in ITIs would be sufficient
to ensure the necessary skills required for the upkeep of village level
renewable energy systems. In addition, manufacturers would be utilized
in imparting special training wherever necessary.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 5.35)

The Committee note that there is a huge potential of Bio-energy in
the Islands where coconut trees residues are available abundantly. The
DPRs submitted by IISC Bangalore for Biomass power systems at South
Andaman, Little Andaman and Great Andaman are to be approved.
The Committee further note that at the initiative of the Ministry, a
project report has been prepared by the Anna University for utilizing
Biomass from coconut residues for power generation in different Islands
of Lakshadweep. The Andaman & Nicobar administration has been
advised to conduct a fresh study in the light of the post Tsunami
changes situation. The Committee hoped that such studies would be
completed in a short span of time so that the projects of Biomass
could be taken up expeditiously in these Islands. The Committee desire
that there should be an integrated approach to power generation in
the Islands exploring Biomass, tidal, solar and other forms of renewable
energy. The Committee further desire that a time bound programme
to implement these projects should be drawn up and sufficient funds

34


should be earmarked in advance by Union/State Governments to avoid
time & costs over-runs.

Reply of the Government
The feasibility Report for taking up biomass power project in
Lakshadweep is under consideration of the Islands Administration/
Central Electricity Authority for taking up biomass power projects of
appropriate capacity in different Islands. A detailed survey is being

initiated to assess the potential of setting up sustainable biomass power
Projects using wood/residues in A&N Islands.

[Ministry's OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C dated: 20.01.2006]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 38 of Chapter I of the Report)

35


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (51. No. 13, Para No. 4.23)

The Committee note that bio-fuels have been considered as most
preferred alternative to petrol and diesel particularly in the transport
sector. The MNES had initiated a programme on bio-fuels for
transportation since 2002-03. The focus of the programme is to develop
the technology for converting vegetable oils, mainly non-edible oils, to
bio-fuel and promote the use of these bio-fuels in automobile sector
after taking care of different aspects of the conventional diesel/petrol
engines. The Committee are happy to note that Ministry have taken
up a scheme on bio-fuel Demonstration Projects in rural areas for
implementation initially in four villages to demonstrate the use of
non-edible vegetable oils for meeting the entire energy needs of lighting,
agricultural operations and other community based stationery
application and to study various techno-economic parameters. The
Committee recommend that the ministry should first of all undertake
details non-edible seed resource assessment study to know the potential
of such seed production in each agro-climatic zone. After that, they
must prepare a time-bound programme for extending similar bio-fuel
demonstration projects covering more and more villages in all States
of the Country. In Committee’s view, a large number of activities are
to be taken up under bio-fuel programme, therefore the ministry should
also prepare a national policy on bio-fuels with the participation of
the concerned stakeholders and institutions working in the field of
bio-fuels. Since this programme involves major R&D efforts at this
stage, the Government should provided separate budget as per
requirement of the projects to be undertaken during the coming years.

Reply of the Government

It has been suggested to the Committee of Secretaries that this
Ministry should focus on policy and development of bio-fuel systems/
devices for stationary, portable and transport applications, while issues
relating to production of bio-fuel crops could be handled by the
Ministry of Agriculture with support from the Ministries of Rural
Development, Panchayati Raj and Bio-Technology. Bio-fuel refining and
distribution/retailing could be handled by the Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas and standards for bio-fuels by the Ministry of Consumer
Affairs.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C, dated: 20.01.2006]

36


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51.0. 19, Para No. 5.28)

The Committee note that at present there is a potential for
generation of over 1700 MW of power from urban wastes in the
country. Out of this, only three projects with an aggregate capacity of
17.6 MW have been set up at Hyderabad, Vijayawada and Lucknow.
The Committee note that the project at Lucknow has come to as
standstill due to it’s the inability to get waste material and management
related problems. The Committee desire that such issues should be
resolved at the earliest to start the functioning of Lucknow Project.
The Ministry should also try to resolve the objects of Hon’ble Supreme
Court regarding other waste-to-energy projects so that the ambitious
programme to establish many more such projects does not suffer.

Reply of the Government

Efforts for the revival of the 5 MW MSW based project at Lucknow
are being continued. M/s. Infrastructure Development Finance Co. Ltd.,
the Financial Institution which provided the loan for the project has
been advised to explore possibilities for a change in management of
the project promoter M/s. Asia Bio-energy Ltd. for expeditious revival
of the project. This apart, officials of the Lucknow Nagar Nigam have
informed that efforts are being continued to improve the waste
collection system through involvement of NGOs, establishing new and
improved waste transfer stations, etc.

The Expert Committee set up on the directives of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has finalized its report on functioning of the project.
In this report the Committee has recommended that the ‘stay’ on
subsidies for projects for energy recovery from MSW may be removed,
and has suggested certain guidelines for taking up waste-to-energy
projects. The report has been filed before the Apex Court in the hearing
held on 02 January 2006. The next hearing in the matter is to take
place after five weeks.

[Ministry’s OM No. 8/5/2005-P&C, dated: 20.01.2006]

New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
July 31, 2006 Chairman,
Sravana 9, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

37


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-2006) HELD ON 31.7.2006 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘B’ PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1545 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri JM. Aaron Raashid

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

. Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

. Shri Prashanta: Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

NQF YN

Rajya Sabha

8. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

9. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
10. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

11. Shri Motilal. Vora

12. Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan _ Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv’ Kumar पे Under Secretary

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of
the Committee.

38


2, The Committee then took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:

(@) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 9th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Implementation of Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (APDRP)” of the Ministry of Power.

(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 8th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Biomass
Power/Co-generation Programme—An Evaluation” of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports with some
modifications.

4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to’ finalise these
Reports and to present/lay the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

39


APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

0)
(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

40

(14TH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:

SL Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16,
18, 20 and 21

Total:
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. 14

Total:
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 1, 11, 17 and 22

Total:
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the final replies of the Government are
still awaited:

Sl. Nos. 13 and 19

Total:

Percentage

22

15

68.18%

4.54%

18.18%

9.10%