STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2004-2005)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

FOURTH REPORT

५
सयमेब जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


FOURTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2004-2005)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005):

we १४
Presented to Lok Sabha on..... १, ::आ*
Laid in Rajya Sabha on .......---न्‍न्‍ल्‍नन्‍न

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


CE. No. 149

Price : Rs. 16.00

© 2005 ४५ Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

CHarTER I

Cnarter II

Cuarter IID

Cuarter IV

Cxarter V

Il.

CONTENTS

Report...

Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ....

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government are still
awaited

“ANNEXURES

Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Energy (2004-05) held on
28.1.2005....

Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Second
Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) .... 5

PAGE

i
w)

10

22

23

28

30

32


9 SS Se

pes foe 140 vente cect
BBSOS>NARDRSRES

235
24.

26.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Ajay Chakraborty
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary

Shri B. Vinod Kumar
Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Khiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkataswamy
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan

(iii)


27.
28.
29.
30.

(iv)

Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri John Joseph. —
2. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni —
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari —
4. Shri N.K. Jha —

Additional Secretary
Joint Secretary
Director

Executive Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf
present this 40 Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 2704 Report
of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

2. The Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy was presented to Lok Sabha on 190 August,
2004. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 270 December, 2004.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sittings held on 28% January, 2005.

4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Detar; GURUDAS KAMAT,
10 February, 2005 Chairman,
21 Magha, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(५)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (14th
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the Demands for
Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
which was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19th August, 2004.

2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SI.Nos., 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16 and 17

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to persue in view of the Government’s replies:

SL No. 15

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
teplies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:

Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 6 and 9

(iv) Recommendations /Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Sl. No. 12

3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of
recommendation for which only interim reply have been given by
the Government ought to be furnished to the Committee within
3 months.

4. The Committee also desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Government to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons,


the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

A. Uneven utilisation of Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.9)

6. The Committee had expressed their concern over the under and
uneven utilisation of Budgetary Allocation during the last two financial
years 2002-03 and 2003-04. Rs. 423.74 crore were utilised during the
year 2002-03 out of the B.E. of Rs, 624.25 crore at the level of G.B.S.
Similarly, Rs. 384.41 crore only could be utilised out of the B.E. of
Rs. 625 crore at the level of G.B.S. during the year 2003-04. Furthermore,
Rs. 14.40 crore only was utilized during the 15 quarter of the year
2003-04. During 27४ and 30५ quarters Rs. 56.74 crore and Rs. 37.45 crore
respectively were spent. Thus, Rs. 108.59 crore only out of
Rs. 384.41 crore spent during the first three quarters of the year
2003-04. The Committee were of the view that it was against the
directions of the Ministry of Finance depicting the need to ensure that
expenditure should be evenly spread over all the four quarters of the
financial year. The Committee were of the considered opinion that
such variations in expenditure was due to inherent lacunas in the
budgetary mechanism of the Ministry which required urgent attention
and intensive discussions with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission to ensure the full utilization of allocated budget in a
uniform manner spreading over all the four quarters of the financial
year.

7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources have stated that the Ministry seek budgetary support
essentially for developing and deploying new and renewable energy
technology systems/devices as also for spurring private investment in
grid interactive renewable power and the sector as a whole. In addition,
the Ministry are electrifying unelectrified villages and hamlets
numbering over 25,000 where grid extension is either not cost effective
or feasible, termed remote villages/hamlets. The Ministry, in turn,
provide Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to a host of agencies,
including State Governments. Thus, for implementation purposes, the
Ministry are solely dependent upon them and consequently the
quantum and pattern of utilization of funds is sometimes affected by
field level constraints over which the Ministry have no direct control.


This issue somewhat gets compounded indirectly since the Ministry
exercise strict control on systems/devices meeting requisite standards
and specifications and that CFA targeting to beneficiaries is effective
in order that public funds are properly utilized. Despite the aforesaid,
every effort shall be made to ensure that the recommendations of the
Committee are complied with.

8. (a) The Committee had recommended earlier that the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should hold intensive discussion
with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission to ensure
full utilisation of allocated budget in a uniform manner over all the
four quarters of a financial year. In their reply, the Ministry have
stated that they are totally dependent upon a host of agencies
including State Governments over which they have no direct control
and therefore the quantum and pattern of utilisation of funds got
affected. The issue is further aggravated since the Ministry exercise
strict control on systems/devices so that requisite standards and
specifications are met and the public funds are utilised properly.
The Committee cannot accept the reply of the Ministry. The basic
purpose of control over the systems is to utilise the allocated fund
fully and uniformly over all the four quarters of a financial year.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have discussions
with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission to evolve
an appropriate, effective and dynamic budgetary mechanism so that
the allocated fund may be utilised fully and uniformly through all
the four quarters of the financial year. The Committee would like to
know the steps taken by the Government in this regard.

8(b). The Committee feel that there is a need to utilise alternate
sources of power even in the villages which are even grid connected
but have not been provided electric connection so far.

B. Over-Optimistic targets set for IEBR
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.10)

9. The Committee had observed that over-optimistic targets, which
were seldom achieved, had been proposed for mobilization of Internal
and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources/IREDA had failed not only on the front
of direct external aid received from KFW and IBRD but also in
mobilizing internal resources form internal accruals, Opening Balance
Cash in Hand, repayment of IREDA loan and bank loan etc. resulting
in erratic variations in BE, RE and actuals at the level of gross IEBR


increasing from Rs. 600.50 crore (BE) to Rs. 976.36 crore (RE) and then
decreasing to Rs. 828.47 crore during 2003-04. Furthermore, net IEBR
decreased form Rs. 454.15 crore (BE) to Rs. 437.52 crore (RE) which
further went down to Rs. 332.31 crore, on account of sharp variations
among BE, RE and actuals in the free bonds (Call & Put) during the
year 2003-04. The Committee had noted that such variations are to
some extent due to the inability of the projects promoters to furnish
the requisite documents before the end of financial years. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the MNES/IREDA should
take effective steps to review their procedures etc. and simplify
requirements of documents so that the targeted utilization of funds
could be achieved.

10. In their reply, the Ministry have, inter-alia, stated the main
reasons for variations are (i) utilization of international lines of credit
is contingent upon drawal of funds by borrowers; and (ii) non-payment
of principal and interest by some borrowers. Despite the fact that
IREDA has been making sustained and vigorous efforts to ensure
projections of a realistic IEBR, the matter is not fully within their
“control and as such there would always be some variation between
estimated and actual IEBR.

11. The Committee had expressed their concern over the failure
of the Ministry to project realistic targets for the Internal and Extra
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) year after year and noted that one of
the reasons attributed for variations at BE, RE and actual level of
the IEBR was due to the difficulties faced by the promoters/borrowers
to furnish the requisite documents before the end of the financial
year. The Committee, therefore, had recommended earlier that the
MNES/IREDA should take effective steps to review their procedures
etc. and minimise the requirement of documents so that the projected
target for IEBR could be achieved. Extending the same reasons, as
furnished by the Ministry in their earlier reply, the Ministry have
repeated that the utilisation of international lines of credit is
contingent upon drawal of funds by the borrowers/promoters. The
Committee disapprove the reply of the Ministry which are repetitive
in nature. The Committee feel that the Ministry have not paid
adequate attention to this vital issue, as recommended earlier. The
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry
should review their procedures, etc. so that the proposed mobilization
of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) could be achieved
easily and fully.


C. Small Hydro Power Programme
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 2.34)

12. The Committee had found that there exist a potential of 15,000
MW for the Small Hydro Projects up to 25 MW. The Committee had
noted the efforts of the Ministry in the form of providing financial
support ranging between Rs. 15.00 lakhs to Rs. 30.00 lakhs from
2003-04 onwards to identify new potential sites in special category
States containing North-Eastern region, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal as well as in other States/UTs. and the
states like J&K, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, U-P.,
Uttaranchal, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh were taking keen interest
and were preparing proposals under the scheme. The Committee had
recommended that the Government should encourage all these States
to take up the scheme at the earliest. The Committee had felt that the
Government should also examine whether the amount provided as a
financial support for the projects to identify new sites is sufficient or
needs any enhancement.

13. In their reply, the Ministry have stated that the financial
assistance provided under the scheme of identifying new sites has by
and large served its purpose as SHP development has taken off by
meeting the broad aim of 2% additional grid interactive SHP power
generation installed capacity in the country being contributed by this
sector.

14. In order to identify the new potential sites for the small
hydro power upto 25 MW in the country, the Committee had
recommended earlier that the Government should encourage all the
States like J&K, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, U.P.
Utttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh which
were taking keen interest and were preparing proposals under the
scheme, to take up the scheme at the earliest. The Ministry have
replied that the purpose of identifying new potential sites has been
served as the country is going to achieve 2% additional grid
interactive SHP power by the end of 11% Five Year Plan. The
Committee do not accept this type of evasive reply of the Ministry.
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire
that the steps taken by the Ministry to encourage the States to take
up the schemes of identifying new sites should be intimated to the
Committee.


D. Wind Power Programme
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 2.46)

15. The Committee had observed that there had been mis-match
between physical and financial targets and achievements of wind power
programme since the year 2002-03. For example during the year
2002-03, it was found that Rs. 14.56 crore was allocated at the Budgetary
Estimate (BE) stage which was reduced to Rs. 5.60 crore at
Revised Estimate (RE) and the actual amount spent was further reduced
to 5.35 crore. Similarly, during the year 2003-04, the amount
Rs. 14.00 crore (BE) was reduced to Rs. 10.30 crore (RE) and the actual
amount spent was further reduced to Rs. 6.92 crore. The reason
attributed for variations in BE and RE during the years 2002-03 and
2003-04 was the introduction of new components that were envisaged
earlier but were not approved for implementation. However, the
Committee had found that the government were unable to assess the
appropriate amount required even at the stage of Revised Estimate
particularly in the year 2003-04 when the actual amount spent was
further reduced to Rs. 6.92 crore from Rs. 10.30 crore (RE). What was
more surprising that the targets were overachieved during both the
years 2002-03 and 2003-04 (242 MW against the target of 200 MW
during the year 2002-03 and the whopping 615 MW against the target
of 250 MW during the year 2003-04). The variation in the actual
expenditure vis-a-vis BE/RE clearly reflected the faulty budgetary
estimation of the Ministry which in the opinion of the Committee
need to be rectified.

16. In their reply, the Ministry have stated that Wind Power projects
are being set up through private investment as commercial projects by
availing fiscal incentives and facilities of wheeling, banking and third
party sale apart from preferential tariffs being provided by State
Utilities. The budgetary allocations are used only to provide support
services such as wind resources assessment and setting up of limited
number of demonstration projects. Thus, there may not be a one to
one correspondence relation between budget allocation and the target
of grid interactive wind power installed generation capacity target.

17. The Committee have noted that the budgetary allocations are
used only to provide support services such as wind resources
assessment and setting up of limited number of demonstration
Projects. But even for these limited quantity of works which are by
and large not beyond their control and free from other forms of
uncertainties, the Committee find that the Government were unable


to assess the appropriate budgetary requirements even at the stage
of Revised Estimate particularly in the year 2003-04. The Committee
in their earlier recommendation also mentioned that Rs. 14.00 crore
was allocated at the B.E. stage which was reduced to Rs. 10.30 crore
in the R.E. and the actual amount spent was a still lower figure of
Rs. 6.92 crore during the year 2003-04. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Ministry should give adequate attention
towards the appropriate estimation and utilisation of the budget so
that the other important programmes of the Ministry may not suffer.
The Committee desire that development of this sector should not be
left for the private sector alone and the Government should step in
for setting-up wind-power projects identified places.

E. Biomass Power Programme
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 2.71)

18. The Committee had observed that about 540 million tones of
biomass was available in the country. Out of this about 120-150 million
tones i.e., 25 to 30% was available for biomass based power generation
projects. The Committee had further noted that only 2.07 MW could
be achieved out of the target of 10५५ during the year 2002-03 and
4.85 MW out of the target 5.00 MW during the year 2003-04. During
the 90 Plan Period, the position was also not better as only 29.68 MW
could be achieved out of the total target of 40 MW. The reasons
adduced by the Ministry for not achieving the physical targets were
the delayed release of funds for projects due to delay in clearance
from State statutory authorities, delay in financial tie-ups or other
commercial reasons. The Committee desired that ‘Single Window
Clearance System’ should be introduced in each State for dealing with
such projects. As regards other bottlenecks while implementing the
programme, the Committee had been informed that adequate
availability of biomass for grid interactive power generation had been
a problem in some areas and the Ministry were planning to use biomass
for off-grid application in villages where availability and collection of
biomass was not a problem. Further the technology of biomass
gasification for grid interactive power generation was still to be fully
established in commercial mode. However, the Ministry were sustaining
its efforts to take this technology beyond demonstration phase through
technology development. The Committee thrust that Government would
make persistent Research and Development in this regard and a multi-
fold expansion of the deployment of these systems in the coming
years might become a reality.


19. The Ministry in their reply have stated that against the country’s
potential of around 16000 MW form surplus biomass estimated at
120-150 MMT, an installed capacity of around 330 MW has already
been achieved and a capacity of around 300 MW is under various
stages of implementation. The installed capacity of biomass gasification
which is currently around 60 MW appears less when compared to
biomass combustion installed capacity of about 270 MW since systems
for the former are smaller in capacity and the technology is relatively
new. Biomass gasification systems are mainly installed for captive
applications and accordingly do not require any specific approvals at
the state level. On the other hand, grid interactive biomass power
projects need approvals from the state electricity boards and pollution
control authorities, etc. In most states, the State Nodal Agencies for
renewable energy have been authorized by respective Governments to
coordinate such approvals. The Ministry continues its efforts to develop
more efficient and cost effective technologies for converting biomass
to energy through R&D efforts. 26 R&D projects on biomass gasification
related topics are currently underway at various research institutions.
In addition, the first phase of the project on development of biomass
gasification systems has been concluded at the Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore. A major achievement of this effort has been the
licensing of technology so developed to four manufacturers. The second
phase of the project has also been sanctioned for further optimization
of the technology. A list of thrust areas has also been identified for
continuation of research efforts in this direction.

20(a). The Committee are happy to learn that the biomass
gasification technology are making much headway and after the
conclusion of the first phase of the project on development of
biomass gasification system, the licensing of the technology for
manufacturing of the system has been granted to the four
manufacturers. The Committee desire that the question of granting
license to the manufacturers for transfer of technology should be
reviewed and there should not be any need for licensing. Any private
sector firms interested in this field should be encouraged. The
Committee further learn that the second phase for further
optimisation of technology has been sanctioned. The Committee hope
and trust that the biomass gasification technology will come out
from the demonstration phase and will establish fully in a
commercial mode as early as possible. However, the Committee are
perturbed to note that the grid interactive biomass power projects
are still suffering from the ineffectiveness of the State Nodal
Agencies who have been entrusted in most of the States to


co-ordinate the various approvals required for the projects. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Government should
introduce effective ‘Single Window Clearance System’ in the State
so that the harnessing of biomass potential can be expedited.

20(b). The Committee observe that the targets set for the
utilisation of biomass potential are very low as compared to the
potential available and even these are not realised. There is also a
need to examine the different technology options in the field of
biogass/power generation. The Committee need to prioritise.


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation SI. No. 3 (Para No. 2.11)

The Committee note that the Ministry have resoled to achieve the
targets of additional installed capacity of 10 percent ie. 10,000 MW by
the year 2012. In addition, it has also been decided to electrify all the
24,685 remote villages/hamlets through non-conventional energy
sources, which have now increased from the earlier number of 18,000
villages due to revision of the definition of electrified villages. The
Committee note that during 90 Plan, only Rs. 15.13 crore were spent
for Village Electrification Programme when the target was to electrify
18,000 villages. Now that the number of villages have increased, the
Government have proposed an outlay of Rs. 735 crore for 100 Plan.
But, utilization of this amount during the first two years of 10 Plan
is much below the expectation. Against the average utilization of
Rs. 94.59 crore have been utilized. Physically also against an average
target of 2000 villages, only 1133 villages have been electrified in these
2 years. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry should make
all out efforts to achieve the financial and physical and targets set for
various programmes of energy from renewable sources of energy. As
far as possible only realistic targets be set. The Committee also note
that no allocations have been made for R&D sector by the Ministry.
The Committee feel that without R&D efforts, no sector can withstand
competition in today’s liberalized economy. During the discussions the
Committee were of the view that the outlay for Research &
Development will have to be increased so as to bring down the cost
of most of these sources e.g. Wind, Solar, Small Hydro etc. The
Committee is also disturbed to note that the outlay has been decreasing
over the last couple of years and that the ministry has not been able
to make any provision for R&D and new innovations. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should seek budgetary
support for this crucial area and also chalk out the programme to
utilize the amount fully. The Committee may be informed of the action
taken in the matter.

10



ll

Reply of the Government

The Ministry has redefined the scope of its R&D programmes to
focus on technology development so as to support industry to
manufacture complete systems/devices in conformity with international
standards and specifications and also to make industry internationally
competitive. The Ministry has set the following short and medium
term R&D aims:

* Research & Development Activities so as to manufacture :
* Solar Thermal (High Temperature) Power Generation
Systems.
* Solar Thermal Industrial Applications.
Building utilizing renewable energy concepts.
* SPV Systems.
Multi MW wind power systems.

Biomass gasification coupled with micro turbines employing
integrated combined cycle system.

Simulators for RE grid interactive power stations.
Bio-fuels.

* Synthetic fuels.

Hydrogen systems.

Green transport systems.

Desalination and water purifying systems.

%

Geothermal and Tidal energy.

Prototype through development for technology demonstration.
¢ Commercialization of such technologies.

Raising capacity utilization factor of various grid interactive power
generation systems.

* Lowering cost of new and renewable energy systems.

* In accordance with the direction given by the Prime Minister, efforts
are being made to make the country a net foreign exchange earner
in new and renewable technologies, processes, products, raw
materials and services by 2022.


12

In order to achieve the aforesaid, higher budgetary provisions are
being proposed during Annual Plan 2004-05.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
OP&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation SI. No. 4 (Para No. 2.12)

The Committee note that during the 9th Plan, the Ministry could
be able to achieve 43% of the total Plan target of 42 MW and during
the first two years of the 10th Five Year Plan it could be able to
achieve only 25% of the overall plan target of 80 MW under the waste
to energy programme. The Committee further note during the course
of deliberations that huge volumes of garbage generated in metropolitan
cities are a parennial environmental hazard. Not only their disposal
constitutes a problem as there are very few open spaces left in the
metros, garbage seepage also contaminates ground water sources. The
Committee were informed that successful experiments were carried
out by the Mumbai Municipal Corporation in converting this garbage
into energy pellets. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should conduct a detailed study into this issue and formulate a viable
scheme of energy from metropolitan waste.

Reply of the Government

Recommendation of the committee has been noted and action has
been initiated.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation 51. No. 5 (Para No. 2.33)

The Committee find that out of the total estimated potential of
15,000 MW for the small hydro projects (upto 25MW), 10,3324 MW
have already been identified and 1603 have been exploited out of the
sites aggregating to 8721 MW available for exploitation. It is learnt
that 2% or 2000 MW additional capacity in power generation would
come from SHP during the 10th and 11th Plan periods. In tune with
this ambitious target, the Government have planned to achieve 100
MW at the cost of Rs. 35 crore during 2004-05 and 600 MW at the
cost of Rs. 375 crore during the 10th Plan period. Keeping in view the
past performance of the Ministry, the Committee feel that extra efforts
would be required to achieve these targets. During the first two years


mm ©

13

of the 100 Five Plan ie., during 2002-03 and 2003-04, only 164.43 MW
(80.34 MW and 84.09 MW) could be achieved and the remaining 435.57
MW (600 MW-163.13 MW) will have to be achieve during the remaining
three years period of the 10 Five Year Plan. It will require a matching
fund to the tune of 1742.16 crore by taking an average requirement of
Rs. 4.00 crore per MW. The committee, therefore, urge upon the
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to provide matching
fund to the Ministry to achieve the targets 2000 MW by the end of
11" Five Year Plan. The Ministry should also make their own plan of
action to achieve the physical and financial targets set for each financial
year so that the long term target of 2000 MW could be achieved by
the year 2012. The Committee feel that there is a lot of scope for
private participation in small hydel sector. Though IREDA has taken
a number of steps to encourage the private sector participation, but a
lot needs to be done to remove the difficulties faced by them in the
execution of the projects. The Committee recommend that these should
be identified with the help of entrepreneurs and corrective steps be
taken.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry’s aim of additional 2% grid interactive SHP power
generation installed capacity in the country during the 10 and 11"
Plan periods is on track. The capacity addition is envisaged to come
mainly from private investments. Accordingly, private sector
participation is being encouraged. The aim has been fully achieved
during the first two years of the 10% Plan and on current trends it is
expected that the same would be achieved for the 10! Plan period.
The incentive scheme of the Ministry that supports SHP projects has
been reviewed to make it more effective for private investment with
the level of CFA for both the private and public sectors pegged at the
same level. The Ministry encourages feedback from developers and
State Agencies for creating a conductive environment for development
of SHP in the country.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation SI. No. 7 (Para No. 2.35)

The Committee feel that there is also a need to assess and identify
the small hydro potential in relatively untouched and untapped areas
of tail-end flow of water of mega/major, thermal/hydro project, dam-
toes sites of the major/small dams and several tea-estates existing in


14

the country. The Committee find that the potential of tail-end Projects,
dam-toe sites Small Hydro projects stand at 100 MW and it is
1600 MW for Canal based projects. The Committee observe that despite
the incentives offered for assessment of potential in the tail-end flow
sites of mega/major projects and the dam-toes sites and also for canal
based projects, the identification and assessment of potentials are not
picking up. The Committee, therefore, desires that appropriate steps
should be taken to attract the investors to assess and identify the
potential sites.

Reply of the Government

There is very limited potential to set up SHP projects on tail-end
of mega/major thermal/hydro projects, dam-toes sites as the same has
been assessed at only around 100 MW. The potential at the tail-end of
31 thermal power station is estimated at around 20 MW. 41 potential
SHP sites aggregating about 60 MW have been identified in tea estates
of West Bengal. Exploitation of potential depends primarily on the
technical feasibility and commercial viability of such projects.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation 51. No. 8 (Para No. 2.36)

The Committee note that Renovation and Modernization (R&M) of
the small hydro power projects is the cost-effective option requiring
no clearances and having short gestation period to realize the capacity
addition. During the last three years, the Ministry have sanctioned 16
small hydro projects and 314 water mills for R&M. The Committee
desire that a comprehensive survey should be carried out to assess the
requirement of R&M for all the installed small hydro projects and
water mill units which have completed their normal life or are likely
to complete within next 2 to 3 years. The Committee note that out of
the 34 R&M proposals for SHP, 16 were sanctioned, 5 were given ‘in-
principal’ approval, additional information were sought on 8 small
hydro projects and 5 were rejected on account of relatively high cost
involved in the R&M. Similarly, out of the 340 R&M proposals for
water mills, 314 were sanctioned and 26 were rejected for want of
requisite information. The Committee desire that before rejecting any
proposal a proper cost-benefit analysis should be done. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that all the projects which can be renovated and
modernized in a cost-effective manner should be encouraged to
undertake R&M works in a time-bound manner.


15

Reply of the Government

The Ministry is encouraging renovation and modernization of
existing SHP stations. All states have been asked to assess the
requirement of R&M for SHP projects and submit proposals for central
financial assistance (CFA). Approvals for providing CFA for
development/upgradation of 364 watermills in Nagaland and 23 in-
J&K have recently been given. 75 such watermill proposals from
Arunachal Pradesh and 10 from Karnataka are under consideration.

Cost and benefit are an integral input for supporting projects under
R&M. The states are required to submit this information alongwith
R&M proposals. All proposals fulfilling conditions laid down in the
R&M scheme, including a positive benefit cost rates are supported by
the Ministry. p

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation SI. No. 10 (Para No. 2.47)

The Committee note that the gross potential for wind power
generation is estimated at 45000 MW spreading over 10 States and 2
Union Territories namely, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal. Except Orissa, all the 9 States have already declared their
policy for private sector participation. Andaman & Nicobar Islands
and Lakshadweep do not have adequate facilities for power evacuation.
Near about 25000 MW capacity has so far been achieved through the
installation of grid interactive wind power projects. More than 90% of
2500 MW have been achieved through private sector participation.
Now, it has been targeted to install 5% of the additional total power
generation capacity through grid interactive wind power during the
10% and 11" Plan periods. The Committee feel that the Government
would be able to achieve this target particularly because the private
sector response is favourable as result of de-licensing provision for
such power generation under the Electricity Act, 2003 and the past
performance of the Government in the wind power sector particularly
during the year 2002-2003 and 2003-04 is encouraging. However, the
MNES should prevail upon the Government of Orissa to declare its
policy for private sector participation without any further delay.
Moreover, lack of facilities for power evacuation in Andaman & Nicobar
and Lakshadweep Islands, which have a vast potential for wind power
generation, should not come in the way of participation of private


16

sector in the wind energy programme. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Ministry should keep the efforts made to achieve the targets.

Reply of the Government

The matter had been taken up with the Government of Orissa for
expediting its policy for grid interactive renewable power generation.
In this regard, a comprehensive draft state policy paper for grid
interactive renewable power generation has already been prepared and
is being processed by them. However, with the Electricity Act, 2003
coming into force, the role of regulators has gained in importance and
under the new scenario the State Government is only one among the
stake holders.

Wind Resource Assessment of Andaman & Nicobar Islands reveals
that the wind potential at Keating point in Car Nicobar Islands and
the south bay area in Little Andaman appears to be good. Further,
monitoring is to be carried out at another five locations in A&N Islands
for which equipment has already been supplied to A&N Administration
for positioning of the masts at the five identified sites. As soon as the
masts are installed by the Islands authorities, C-WET would commence
wind monitoring activities.

In addition, wind monitoring is being carried out at 10 locations
in Lakshadweep Islands.

It is expected that the installed capacity target of 300 MW for grid
interactive wind power for 2004-05 could be exceeded.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation SI. No. 11 (Para No. 2.48)

The Committee find that the gross potential for wind power
generation is estimated at 45000 MW. However, technical potential has
been estimated at about 13,400 MW on account of grid capacity. The
Committee are, therefore, of the firm opinion that in order to bridge
the gap between the total available potential and technical potential,
R&D plays a very significant role in this respect. However, the
Committee are pained to know that this very important component
has been ignored over the last so many years and only Rs. 62.25 lakh
have been spent on R&D and its related projects covering wind systems
and small aero-generators since 2000-01. The Committee also note that


17

now the Ministry have decided to raise capacity utilization factor of
operating wind turbines from an existing 17% to 25%, reduce the cost
of wind power of below Rs. 2.5 crore per MW, reduce the cost of
generation of wind power to around Rs. 2 per unit, indigenise design
and manufacturer of complete wind turbines and wind manufacturing
industry to become a net foreign exchange earner by 2012 through
Research and Development (R&D) efforts. The Committee strongly
recommend that these efforts should not go waste and sincere effort
should be made to execute the proposed activities/schemes in right
earnest. The Committee, therefore, desire that sufficient funds should
be allotted under this head and Government should ensure that the
funds available are optimally utilized.

Reply of the Government

The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation SI. No. 13 (Para No. 2.61)

The Committee note that much work has not been done to secure
the association of Panchayati Raj Institutions, Cooperative Societies,
NGOs etc. The Committee feel that their participation can contribute
to the effective long term operation and maintenance arrangements
and reliable supply of electricity to meet the various needs of the
people residing in the remote inaccessible villages/hamlets. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should multiply their efforts to
ensure their participation on a large scale.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry enlists supports of Panchayati Raj Institutions,
Cooperatives Societies, NGOs, etc. in implementation of its programmes,
especially in rural areas. Panchayats are to be actively involved in the
implementaiion and operation of the test projects for village energy
security in remote villages.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]


18

Recommendation SI. No. 14 (Para No. 2.62)

The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 735 crore has been
provided to electrify 5000 villages under the Remote Village
Electrification Programme for 10 Five Year Plan. However, the
Committee find that more than 24685 unelectrified villages have been
identified for electrification as on date. The committee feel that there
is a great need to increase the coverage of this programme from 5000
villages to 10000 villages or more during the 100 plan itself. Therefore,
the committee recommend that the Ministry should approach the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for an increase in outlay
under this head. The Committee may also be apprised of the initiatives
taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

It is likely that about 2000 remote villages would get covered
during the first three years against the target of 5000 villages for the
10 Plan. This would leave a balance of 3000 villages to be covered
during the last two years of the Plan period. This apart, around 1500
remote hamlets would also get covered under the programme during
the 100 Plan. In case a higher coverage beyond the target appears
feasible, a higher allocation would be sought for the purpose at the
appropriate stage. However, going by the progress made so far, it
appears unlikely that states would be in a position to achieve a higher
coverage than the existing target of 5000 remote villages during the
final 2 years of the 10 Plan.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Recommendation 51. No. 16 (Para No. 2.71)

The Committee observed that about 540 million tones of biomass
is available in the country. Out of this about 120-150 million tones ie.,
25 to 30% is available for biomass based power generation projects.
The Committee further note that Biomass Conversion Programme did
not make much headway during the last two years. In 2002-03 only
2.07 MW could be achieved out of the target of 10५9 and 4.85 MW
out of the target 5.00 MW during the year 2003-04. During the 9%
Plan period the position was also not better as only 29.68 MW could
be achieved out of the total target of 40 MW. The Committee express
its concerns at the slow pace of the implementation of this vital
programme. The reasons adduced by the Ministry for not achieving


19

the physical targets are the delayed release of funds for projects due
to delay in clearance from State statutory authorities, delay in financial
tie-ups or other commercial reasons. The Committee are not convinced
with these reasons and desire that ‘Single Window Clearance System’
should be introduced in each State for dealing with such projects. As
regards other bottlenecks while implementing the programme, the
Committee has been informed that adequate availability of biomass
for grid interactive power generation has been a problem in some
areas and the Ministry is planning to use biomass for off-grid
application in villages where availability and collection of biomass is
not a problem. Further the technology of biomass gasification for grid
interactive power generation is still to be fully established in commercial
mode. However, the Ministry is sustaining its efforts to take this
technology beyond demonstration phase through technology
development. The Committee thrust that Government would make
persistent Research and Development in this regard and a multi-fold
expansion of the deployment of these systems in the coming years
may become a reality. The Committee may be apprised of the efforts
made in this direction.

Reply of the Government
Biomass co-generation

Against the country’s potential of around 16000 MW from surplus
biomass estimated at 120-150 MMT, an installed capacity of around
330 MW has already been achieved and a capacity of around 300 MW
is under various stages of implementation. The installed capacity of
biomass gasification which is currently around 60 MW appears less
when compared to biomass combustion installed capacity of about 270
MW since systems for the former are smaller in capacity and the
technology is relatively new. Biomass gasification systems are mainly
installed for captive applications and accordingly do not require any
specific approvals at the state level. On the other hand, grid interactive
biomass power projects need approvals from the state electricity boards
and pollution control authorities, etc. In most states, the State Nodal
Agencies for renewable energy have been authorized by respective
Government to coordinate such approvals.

The Ministry continues its efforts to develop more efficient and
cost effective technologies for converting biomass to energy through
R&D efforts. 26 R&D projects on biomass gasification related topics
are currently underway at various research institutions. In addition,


20

the first phase of the project on development of biomass gasification
systems has been concluded at the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore. A major achievement of this effort has been the licensing
of technology so developed to four manufacturers. The second phase
of the project has also been sanctioned for further optimization of the
technology. A list of thrust areas has also been identified for
continuation of research efforts in this direction.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Comments of the Committee
Please see paras 20(a) and 20(b) of the Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation 51. No. 17 (Para No. 2.72)

The Committee also observe that there is a huge variation in
exploiting the potential from biomass based power generation and
bagasse co-generation. The main reasons for higher level of exploitation
of bagasse co-generation inter-alia include the long experience of sugar
industry in operation of co-generation projects, lower risks due to
availability of captive biomass resources ie., bagasse, greater willingness
of financial institutions to finance projects in existing profit making
sugar mills etc. The Committee also note that if all the 500 sugar mills
in the country switch over to modern techniques of co-generation
around 3,500 MW of power can be produced. However, at present
around 11% of the total estimated potential of 3500 MW has been
harnessed through bagasse based co-generation. The Committee
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should draw up an
action plan including technology and research support for exploitation
of bagasse co-generation and Committee would also like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard. Similarly, the Committee feel that
the Ministry should formulate a policy which facilitate single window
clearance for such projects in sugarcane producing States, e.g.,
Maharashtra, U.P., Tamil Nadu etc. The Government could also consider
giving financial incentives for such projects.

Reply of the Government
Biomass Co-generation

The Ministry has been implementing a programme for the
exploitation of potential of bagasse-based co-generation in sugar mills


21

for almost ten years. Bagasse based cogeneration projects require
approvals from state level authorities such as the state electricity utility
and the Pollution Control Board. In addition, cooperative sugar mills
may require approval of the State Government for making investments.
In private sector projects no major delays have been observed in
obtaining clearances by promoters. A committee has been set up in
Maharashtra to suggest remedial measures for accelerated exploitation
of bagasse based cogeneration potential of cooperative sector sugar
mills in the country.

The technology for bagasse cogeneration is fairly well established

and a number of manufacturers offer equipment and services for the
same.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation Sl. No. 15 (Para No. 2.63)

The Committee note that the Government is also running an
Integrated Rural Energy Programme (IREP) which aims at integrating
different rural energy programme and their convergence at grassroots
level for improving the quality of life of the rural people. The
Committee feel that Government should review the two programmes
and see whether these can be run as a unified programmes to that
there is no duplication of efforts. The Committee feel that at least
these two programmes, if kept separate should be supplementary to
each other.

Reply of the Government

The Remote Village Electrification Programme is being implemented
with the specific mandate to electrify all villages and hamlets where
grid extension is either not cost-effective or feasible. IREP, on the other
hand, aims to provide the least cost mix of various energy options for
meeting the energy needs of cooking, lighting and motive power
through non-electrical renewable means in electrified and to be
electrified villages. Currently, IREP implementation strategy is to
saturate a cluster of villages in selected districts of the country. While
REP is expected to cover over 25,000 remote villages and hamlets,
IREP is expected to cover the rest. To further expedite energy provision
to rural areas, it is likely that over 1.7 lakh electrified villages and to
be electrified forest fringe villages might require to be covered under
a separate rural energy programme, termed Forest Fringe Village Energy
Programme. Hence, the coverage and scope of the aforesaid two
existing programmes are different and no useful purpose would be
served by the merger of the two,

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation Sl. No. 1 (Para No. 2.9)

The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have presented
Demands for Grants of Rs. 605.27 crore for the year 2004-05 against
the Budget Estimate (B.E.) of Rs. 630.15 crore and Revised Estimate
(R.E.) of Rs. 395.73 crore during the year 2003-04. During the first two
years of the 10th Five year Plan i.e. over the years 2002-03 and 2003-
04, Rs. 808.15 crore has been spent out of the total plan outlay of Rs.
4000 crore at the level of Gross Budgetary Support (G.B.S.)
corresponding to the achievements of 1268.68 MW out of the total
10th Five Year Plan target of 3075 MW of power from renewables.
Against 4 target of 5000 villages, 1133 remote unelectrified villages
have been electrified through renewable energy sources during the
first two years of the 10th Five Year Plan. For the year 2004-05,
Rs. 21.00 crores, Rs. 19.00 crores and Rs. 36.00 crores have been
allocated to add corresponding aggregate capacity of 350 MW through
wind, 125 MW through Biomass/cogeneration and 100 MW through
small hydro power projects respectively. The target for completion of
electrification projects in 3000 remote villages/hamlets at the cost of
Rs. 200.00 crore has been fixed for the year 2004-05. But the Committee
are not sure whether the physical or financial targets would be achieved
by the Ministry during the year 2004-05 taking into consideration of
their past track record. For instance, Rs. 423.74 crore were spent during
the year 2002-03 out of the B.E. of Rs. 624.25 crore at the level of
G.B.S. Similarly, Rs. 384.41 crore only could be spent out of the B.E.
of Rs. 625 crore at the level of G.B.S. during the year 2003-04.
Furthermore, Rs. 14.40 crore only was utilized during the 1st quarter
of the year 2003-04. During 2nd and 3rd quarters Rs. 56.74 crore and
37.45 crore respectively were spent. Thus, Rs. 108.59 crore only out of
Rs. 384.41 crore spent during the first three quarters of the year 2003-
04. It is against the directions of the Ministry of Finance which entails
the need to ensure that expenditure is evenly spread over all the four
quarters of the financial year. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that such variations in expenditure is due to inherent lacunas
in the budgetary mechanism of the Ministry which require urgent

23


24

attention and intensive discussions with the Ministry of Finance and
the Planning Commission to ensure the full utilization of allocated
budget in a uniform manner spreading over all the four quarters of
the, financial year.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources seeks budgetary
support essentially for developing and deploying new and renewable
energy technology systems/devices as also for spurring private
investment in grid interactive renewable power and the sector as a
whole. In addition, it is electrifying unelectrified villages and hamlets
numbering over 25,000 where grid extension is either not cost effective
or feasible, termed remote villages/hamlets. The Ministry in turn
provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to a host of agencies,
including state Governments. Thus, for implementation purposes, it is
solely dependent upon them and consequently the quantum and pattern
of utilization of funds is sometimes affected by field level constraints
over which the Ministry has no direct control. This issue somewhat
gets compounded indirectly since the Ministry exercises strict control
on systems/devices meeting requisite standards and specifications and
that CFA targeting to beneficiaries is effective in order that public
funds are properly utilized. Despite the aforesaid, every effort shall be
made to ensure that the recommendations of the Committee are
compiled with.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Comments of the Committee
Please see paras 8(a) and 8(b) of Chapter I of the Report.
Recommendation Sl, No. 2 (Para No. 2.10)

The Committee have observed that over-optimistic targets, which
are seldom achieved, have been proposed for mobilization of Internal
and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR). The Ministry in their reply
have stated that continuous efforts are made to make realistic projection
for IEBR. But the Committee find that the efforts of the Ministry do
not bear any fruit. The Committee do not approve of the Ministry’s
failure to spend their full 9th Plan allocations of Rs. 2212.14 crore and
could spend only Rs. 1669.98 crore. The Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources/IREDA failed miserably not only on the front of direct
external aid received from KFW and IBRD but also in mobilizing


25

internal resources form internal accruals, Opening Balance Cash in
Hand, repayment of IREDA loan and bank loan etc. resulting in erratic
variations in BE, RE and actuals at the level of gross IEBR increasing
from Rs. 600.50 crore (BE) to Rs. 976.36 crore (RE) and then decreasing
to Rs. 828.47 crore during 2003-04. Furthermore, net IEBR decreased
from Rs. 454.15 crore (BE) to Rs. 437.52 crore (RE) which further went
down to Rs. 332.31 crore, on account of sharp variations among BE,
RE and actuals in the free bonds (Call & Put) during the year
2003-04. The reasons adduced by the Ministry/IREDA for such
variations are very general and are not as such, which could not be
visualised in advance. The Committee note that such variations are to
some extent due to the inability of the projects promoters to furnish
the requisite documents before the end of financial years. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the MNES/IREDA should take
effective steps to review their procedures etc. and simplify requirements
of documents so that the targeted utilization of funds can be achieved.

Reply of the Government

Reasons for variation in Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource
(IEBR) of IREDA are on account of several components of the same
being projected on the basis of estimates of (i) internal resources and
mobilization of extra budgetary resources to ensure availability of funds
to meet disbursement requirements. (ii) debt servicing, including pre-
payment/swapping of high cost loan, etc. Continuous efforts are being
made to make realistic projection of IEBR. The requirement of resources
undergoes many changes depending upon the actual disbursement to
the projects, actual repayment received from borrowers and the loans
pre-closed by IREDA. The following are main reasons for variations:

© Utilization of international lines of credit is contingent upon
drawal of funds by borrowers; and

* Non-payment of interest and repayment by some borrowers.

Despite the fact that IREDA has been making sustained and
vigorous efforts to ensure projections of a realistic IEBR, the matter is
not fully within their control and as such there would always be some
variation between estimated and actual IEBR.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Comments of the Committee

Please see para 11 of chapter I of the Report.


26

Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Para No. 2.34)

The Committee find that there exist potential of 15,000 MW for
the Small Hydro Projects up to 25 MW. The Committee have noted
the efforts of the Ministry in the form of providing financial support
ranging between Rs. 15.00 lakhs to Rs. 30.00 lakhs from 2003-04
onwards to identify new potential sites in special category States
containing North-Eastern region, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttaranchal as well as in other States/UTs. The Committee
are happy to learn that 100 new sites have been, identified by the
Chhattisgarh with the help of Alternate Hydro Energy Centre, Roorkee,
J&K, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, U.P., Uttaranchal,
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh are also taking interest and are preparing
proposals under the scheme. The Committee recommend that the
Government should enourage all these States to take up the scheme at
the earliest as has been done by Chhattisgarh. The Committee feel
that the Government should also examine whether the amount provdied
as a financial support for the projects to identify new sites in sufficient
or needs any enhancement.

Reply of the Government

The financial assistance provided under the scheme of identifying
new sites has by and large served its purpose as SHP development
has taken off by meeting the broad aim of 2% additional grid interactive
SHP power generation installed capacity in the country being
contributed by this sector.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Comments of the Committee
Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report.
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 (Para No. 2.46)

The Committee observe that there had been mis-match between
physical and financial targets and achievements of wind power
programme since the year 2002-03. For example during the year 2002-
03, it is found that Rs. 14.56 crore was allocated at the Budgetary
Estimate (BE) stage which was reduced to Rs. 5.60 crore at Revised
Estimate (RE) and the actual amount spent was further reduced to
5.35 crore. Similarly, during the year 2003-04, the amount Rs. 14.00
crore (BE) was reduced to Rs. 10.30 crore (RE) and the actual amount


27

spent was further reduced to Rs. 6.92 crore. The reasons attributed for
variations in BE and RE during the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 was the
introduction of new components that were envisaged earlier but were
not approved for implementation. However, the Committee had found
that the government were unable to assess the appropriate amount
required even at the stage of Revised Estimate particularly in the year
2003-04 when the actual amount spent was further reduced to Rs. 6.92
crore from Rs. 10.30 crore (RE). What is more surprising that the targets
were over-achieved during both the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 (242
MW against the target of 200 MW during the year 2002-03 and the
shopping 615 MW against the target of 250 MW during the year 2003-
04). The variation in the actual expenditure vis-a-vis BE/RE clearly
reflected the faulty budgetary estimation of the Ministry which in the
opinion of the Committee needs to be rectified. The Ministry should
also have close monitoring for such activities.

Reply of the Government

Wind Power projects are being set-up through private investment
as commercial projects by availing fiscal incentives and facilities of
wheeling banking and third party sale apart from preferential tariffs
being provided by State Utilities. The budgetary allocations are used
only to provide support services such as wind resources assessment
and setting up of limited number of demonstration projects. Thus,
there may not be a one to one correspondence relation between budget
allocation and the target/aim of grid interactive wind power installed
generation capacity target/aim.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

Comments of the Committee

Please see para 17 of Chapter I of the Report.


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED

Recommendation Sl. No. 12 (Para No. 2.60)

The Committee note that the Village Electrification Programme,
which is now known as Remote Village Electrification Programme,
was initiated by the Ministry of NCES during the year 2001-02 to
electrify all the 18000 un-electrified villages situated in remote and
difficult areas such as forests, hills, deserts and islands by the year
2012 AD. It is further noted that the number of unelectrified villages
to be electrified through non-conventional energy sources has now
increased from 18000 to 24,685 a tentative list of over 24,685 remote
census villages in 24 States/UTs have already been received. As on
30.6.2004, 1695 remote villages and 316 remote hamlets in 10 States/
UTs have been electrified under this programme and 1385 villages
and 721 hamlets are under implementation in 17 States/UTs. Proposal
for another 2100 remote villages and hamlets in various States are
under process. This would take the total number of remote villages/
hamlets electrified through non-conventional energy sources to about
5000 by the end of March 2005. The Committee also note that an
outlay of Rs. 735 crore has been provided to electrify 5000 villages
under the Remote Village Electrification Programme for 10th Five Year
Plan. Out of this, Rs. 200 crore have been earmarked during the year
2004-05 to sanction new projects in 4000 remote villages/hamlets and
to complete electrification projects in 3000 remote villages/hamlets.
But the Committee are perturbed to note that only a paltry sum of
Rs. 4.35 crore was spent out of 20 crore during the year 2001-02.
During the year 2002-03, Rs. 34.77 crore was spent out of allocated
amount of Rs. 75.00 crore to electrify 520 villages out of the target of
500 villages. Similarly out of the earmarked amount of Rs. 100.00 crore,
only 58.79 crore was spent during the year 2003-04 to electrify
613 villages out of the total target of 1000 villages during the year
2003-04. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
should make all out efforts to utilize the allocated amount fully and
informed accordingly.

28


29

Reply of the Government

The actual expenditure on RVEP during 2001-02 was Rs. 15.93
crore against a figure of Rs. 4.35 noted above.

An amount of Rs. 200 crore has been provided for the Remote
Village Electrification Programme for 2004-05. By end September, 2004,
proposals aggregating about Rs. 84 crore had been processed and in
addition proposals for electrification of over 1500 remote villages have
been received from various States, which are currently under process.
Further releases are also anticipated against ongoing projects. At this
stage, it is expected that the entire Revised Estimate allocation of
Rs. 80 crore for the programme would get utilized during 2004-05.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2004-
P&C Dated : 23.12.2004]

New Deut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
10 February, 2000 __ Chairman,

21 Magha, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


ANNEXURE-I

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD ON 28TH JANUARY, 2005 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM NO. ’G-074’, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 11.00 hours to 1215 hours.

PP ep ep ee
ADA ७9 ७४०5

Senor es हुए

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Khiren Rijiju

Shri M. Shivanna

» Shri E.G, Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkataswamy
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

. Shri Kamal Akhtar

» Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Shri Bimal Jalan
Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar
Shri Jesudas Seelam
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. K. Bhandari = Director
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Assistant Director

30


31

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
(2004-05) welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee:

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—

(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the Ist Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Power.

(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 2nd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional-Energy
Sources.

4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports with minor
additions / deletions /amendments.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports after making consequential changes arising
out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and to present
the same to the Houses of Parliament.

6. The Committee considered the issue of poor status of
electrification in villages and decided to undertake detailed discussion
with the Ministries of Power and Non-Conventional Energy Sources
and experts of Power Sector on the subject of ‘Rural Electrification’
during the next sitting of the Committee on 14th February, 2005.

The Committee then adjourned.



ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATION CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

L Total No. of Recommendations 17
पर. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government 1

(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8,
10, 11, 13, 14, 16 and 17)

Percentage of total 65%

Ill. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies 1
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 15)

Percentage of total 6%

1५. Recommendations in respect of which reply of
the Government has not been accepted by the
Committee 4
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 6 and 9)

Percentage of total 23%

v. Recommendation in respect of which final 1
reply of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at 51. No. 12)

Percentage of total 6%

a2