STANDING COMMITTEE

a 2? ON ENERGY
(2007-2008)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT

RATT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

October, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka)

(SRE RST


TWENTY-SECOND REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2007-2008)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS

Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha/Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15.10.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on .
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..

e

é

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

October, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka)



Price : Rs. 105.00

© 2007 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

PaGE
Composition OF THE COMMITTEE (iii)
INTRODUCTION (ix)
PART I
REPORT
Chapter I Introductory Z
Chapter II Development Process of UMPPs “4
Chapter III _Issues involved in Development of UMPPs..... 33
Chapter IV Role of the States in Development of UMPPs
and issues related herewith... se 52
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Energy contained in the Report..... 71
PART II
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twenty Second sitting of the Standing
Committee on Energy (2005-06) held on 02.08.2006 ............ 87
Il Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee
on Energy (2006-07) held on 02.11.2006 90
Il. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Standing Committee
on Energy (2006-07) held on 14.05.2007 93
IV. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee
on Energy (2007-08) held on 01.10.2007 . मु 95

0)


Boe ie he Ss व
PBSEBSREERE BP छ 8

ye PNA HP ww

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2007-08)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MeEmseERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

- Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai
Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkatswamy

. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

(iii)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Motilal Vora

23. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

24. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

25. Shri Keshubhai S. Patel

26. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
27. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

28. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

29. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

30. Dr. Bimal Jalan

31. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri PK. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3, Smt. Juby Amar — Under Secretary

(iv)


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

ao
8 ४ ७छ पे #छ छ॑ # छ छठ 588

21.

9 PNaAaEe ED

(2005-06)
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri B. Vinod Kumar
Shri Chander Kumar
Shri Subodh Mohite
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Prashanta Pradhan
Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

- Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G, Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Vacant*

“Vacancy caused due to death of Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Chowdhury, MP Lok Sabha
‘on 14.4.2006.

(v)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

23. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

24. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
25. Shri Bimal Jalan

26. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

27. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

28. Shri Matilal Sarkar

29. Shri Motilal Vora

30. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

31. Vacant#

#Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Dara Singh Chauhan, MP Rajya Sabha wef.
2.4.2006.

(vi)


s eis & es
PBS BSR EESERE 8

ye PND He wD

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2006-07)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
Meneers
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

- Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

- Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

(vii)


24.
25,
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

(शा)

Rajya Sabha
Shri Motilal Vora
Shri Jesudasu Seelam
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Dr. Bimal Jalan
Shri Syed Azeez Pasha


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 22nd Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Ultra
Mega Power Projects’ relating to the Ministry of Power.

2. The Committee held four sittings in all out of which two were
devoted to oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Power.

3. The Committee wish to thank the representatives of the Ministry
of Power who appeared before the Committee and placed their
considered views on the subject. They also wish to thank the Ministry
of Power for furnishing the replies on the points raised by the
Committee.

4, The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 01.10.2007.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deu; GURUDAS KAMAT,
October 8, 2007 Chairman,
Asvina 16, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(ix)


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
Background

1.1 With 9% plus annual growth of the economy, the energy needs
of India are rising sharply. For meeting the growing needs of the
economy, generation capacity has to double itself for every ten years
in the next three decades at least. However, all the three segments i.e.
Central, State and Private had failed to achieve the targeted capacity
addition during the 10th Plan - against the target of 41,110 MW, the
achievement has been only 21180 MW. As such there is a need to
develop large capacity projects at the national level to meet the power
requirements of the country.

1.2 Keeping this larger canvas in mind, the Ministry of Power
launched a unique initiative to facilitate the development of Ultra Mega
Power Projects (UMPPs) each having a capacity of 4,000 MW and
above, at both the coal pitheads and coastal locations. This initiative,
aims at delivering power at competitive cost to consumers by achieving
economies of the scale. These UMPPs will employ “super critical
technology”, which implies plant efficiency levels of up to 38-40%
(against 30-35% plant efficiency in practice presently in India) leading
to reduction in fuel costs.

1.3 The initiative to develop UMPPs has been taken, as reported.
by the Ministry of Power, for the reasons: (i) The National Electricity
Policy envisage that energy and peaking shortages are to be overcome
by 2012. Large size projects being envisaged under this initiative would
help in creation of required capacities to meet and sustain this objective.
(ii) The electricity and tariff policies under the Electricity Act envisages
that future requirement of power needs to be procured competitively.
The ultra mega projects are expected to be the first few such Projects
to come up through tariff based competitive bidding route and thus
would encourage State utilities also to take up power projects through
this route. (iii) The tariff from large size generation projects would
have the benefit of economies of scale and thus the cost of electricity
generated from these projects is expected to be reasonable. (iv) With
mitigation of risks relating to tie up of land, fuel, water and other
statutory clearances envisaged in the initiative, time for completion of
these projects will be considerably reduced and the expected


competition should result in lower tariff of electricity from these
projects. (v) The size of these projects being large, they will meet the
power needs of a number of States through transmission of power on
regional and national grid. Further, these UMPPs would require an
average investment of around Rs. 16000 to Rs. 18000 Crore.

1.4 The policy to encourage private sector participation in the
power sector was announced by the Government in 1991. The road
for the entry of the private sector was paved by carrying out
amendment in the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. Though initial response
of the private sector was very good but very few projects actually
materialised. Some of the reasons were financially weak State Electricity
Boards (SEBs), subsidized tariffs to certain consumer categories along
with substantial cross subsidies, politicized tariff setting, inadequate
off take and payment guarantee mechanisms, etc. Further delay in
finalization of various contracts as PPAs, Fuel Supply Agreements, high
cost of naptha and other liquid fuel etc., led to the failure of the
private sector to achieve the targets during Sth and 9th Plans. In fact,
the plans were quite ambitious, the expectation from private sector
was too much, in too little, time. Achievement of the private sector in
capacity addition vis-a-vis the targets is as follows:—

(in MW)
Plan Target Actual
VILIth 2808 1430
IXth 17588 5061
Xth 7121 1930

1.5 However, the enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003 with
provisions such as de-licensing generation, open access in transmission
and distribution, fully free captive generation, determination of tariff
by regulatory commissions, etc. is expected to provide a congenial
environment for the increased participation of private sector. Reforms
have also been carried out in the States to attract participation by
private sector, such as unbundling/corporatisation of SEBs, constitution
of SERCs, etc. With this background it is expected that the private
sector participation in power sector would substantially increase.

Policy Framework

1.6 The promotion of competition in the electricity industry in
India is one of the stated key objectives of the Electricity Act, 2003

2


(the Act). Competitive Procurement of electricity by the distribution
licensees is expected to reduce the overall cost of procurement of power
and facilitate development of power markets. Internationally,
competition in wholesale electricity markets has led to reduction in
prices of electricity and significant benefits for the consumers. As
enumerated, hereinafter, various policies framed under the Act further
reinforce this position:

(i) Provisions of National Electricity Policy

1.7 One of the issues sought to be addressed by the National
Electricity Policy is ‘Competition aimed at Consumer Benefits’. The
Policy recognizes that competition will bring significant benefits to
consumers; in which case, it is competition which will determine the
price rather than any cost plus exercise on the basis of operating
norms and parameters. The policy stipulates that all efforts will need
to be made to bring the power industry to this situation as early as
possible, in the overall interest of consumers.

(ii) Provisions of Electricity Tariff Policy

1.8 One of the main objectives of the tariff policy is to promote
competition, efficiency in operations and improvement in quality of
supply. The policy mentions that introducing competition in different
segments of the electricity industry is one of the key features of the
Electricity Act, 2003 and that competition will lead to significant benefits
to consumers through reduction in capital costs and also efficiency of
operations. It will also facilitate the price to be determined
competitively.

1.9 The policy inter alia stipulates that all future requirement of
power needs to be procured competitively by distribution licensees,
except in cases of expansion of existing projects or where there is a
State controlled/owned company as an identified developer and
where regulators will need to resort to tariff determination based on
norms.

(iii) Guidelines on Competitive Bidding for Determination of Tariff
for Procurement of Power by Distribution Licencees

1.10 Sections 61 and 62 of the Act provide for tariff regulation
and determination of tariff of generation, transmission, wheeling and
retail sale of electricity by the Appropriate Commission. Section 63 of
the Act states:

“Notwithstanding anything contained in section 62, the Appropriate
Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been determined
through transparent process of bidding in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Central Government.”



1.11 The introduction of competition is one of the key objectives
of the Electricity Act, 2003. Section 63 provides for the adoption of
tariff obtained through competitive bidding in accordance with the
guidelines notified by the Central Government. The Tariff Policy notified
under the Act in Jan., 2006 envisages that future requirement of power
should be procured competitively by the distribution licensees.
Guidelines have been issued by GOI through Gazette Resolution dated
19th Jan. 2005 under the aforesaid provisions of section 63 of the Act
for the procurement of power by distribution licensees.

112 The main objectives of these guidelines are promoting
competitive procurement, facilitating transparency and fairness, reducing
information asymmetry, protecting consumer’s interests, enhancing
standardization and reducing time for procurement and finally
providing flexibility to suppliers on availability of power while ensuring
certainty of tariffs for buyers. The guidelines provide both for long
term procurement of electricity for a period of 7 years and above and
also for medium term procurement for a period ranging from one to
seven years.

113 The guidelines permit procurement which is location,
technology or fuel neutral and also allows development of projects
based on specific location or fuel tie-ups.

Procedure for Development of UMPPs

1.14 The Ministry of Power has identified Power Finance
Corporation (PFC) as the nodal agency for the UMPP initiative. In
order to enhance investors’ confidence, reduce risk perception and get
good response to competitive bidding, PFC has formed nine Shell
Companies/Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for undertaking the bidding
process on behalf of the power procuring (beneficiary) States. The
purpose of the SPVs is to carry out the bid process management and
obtain various clearances/consents for the projects so that the same
are transferred to the successful developer at the time of transfer of
SPV to the Developer, who will be selected through a tariff based
International Competitive Bidding (ICB). The SPVs have been assigned
the following role prior to award of these projects to Developers:

« Appointment of consultants to undertake preparation of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).

¢ Acquire land for the project.

* Allocation of fuel linkages/fuel blocks for pit head projects.


* Getting clearance regarding allocation of water by State
Government for pit head locations,

¢ Approval for use of sea water from Maritime Board /other
Government Agencies for coastal locations.

* Appointment of Consultant for International Competitive Bid
(ICB) document preparation and evaluation.

* Obtaining various approvals and statutory clearances from
the Central Government and State Government (incl.
environmental clearances) as are required to be obtained
for the project & coal mines.

* ‘Tie-up for off take/sale of power as per provisions of Section
63 of the Act.

1.15 Under the ICB, a two-step process that involves Request for
Qualification (RFQ) and subsequently Request for Proposal (REP) is
being followed. The price bids sought during the RFP stage will be
analysed to select the successful bidder, with whom the final agreement
will be signed. At the end of the bid process, the SPV played a role
in getting requisite clearances/ approvals relating to the project then it
was transferred to the successful bidder.

1.16 Ministry of Power is playing an important role as a facilitator
to coordinate with concerned Ministries and State Governments for
ensuring coal linkages, environment and forest clearances, and in
evolving a proper payment security mechanism with State Govt./State
Utilities and monitoring the progress of Shell Companies/SPVs with
regard to pre-determined timelines.

1.17 The States are required to facilitate various inputs for the
UMPPs, such as:

* Providing authorization to PFC/SPV to carry out the bidding
process on behalf of distribution utilities.

* Participate through their representatives in various
committees for bid process and also are constituent of SPV
Board.

* Identification of suitable site.

* Facilitate acquisition of land and implementation of R&R
Plan.

* Allocation of water.


« Environment and forest clearances at State level.
© To facilitate PPA and proper payment security mechanism
with State utilities.

1.18 In addition, the States have been consulted at various stages
of the process including the sale of power, payment security
mechanism, drafting of bid documents, association with evaluation
process etc. It has been informed by the Ministry of Power that in the
last few months several rounds of discussions have been held with
states who have agreed to support Ultra Mega Power Projects.
Experience of this initiative would facilitate development of state
specific projects in the range of 1000-2000 MW through competition
on similar lines.

1.19 The Central Electricity Authority in consultation with States
has identified 9 sites suitable for development of Ultra Mega Power
Projects with a capacity of 4000 MW each. Out of these, 5 are at
coastal locations and remaining 4 are pit head sites. The details of
sites are as follows:

(a) Five coastal locations:
(i) Mundra in Gujarat
(ii) Krishnapatnam in A.P
(iii) Cheyyur in Tamil Nadu
(iv) Girye in Maharashtra
(v) Tadri in Karnataka
(b) Four pit head locations:
(i) Sasan in M.P.
(ii) Tilaiya in Jharkhand
(iii) Sundergarh (Ib Valley) in Orissa
(iv) Akaltara in Chhattisgarh.

1.20 Out of these projects, Mundra in Gujarat and Sasan in Madhya
Pradesh have been awarded to the developers.


CHAPTER II
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS OF UMPPs
(i) Bidding Process

2.1.1 Guidelines on competitive bidding for determination of tariff
for procurement of power by distribution licencees framed under the
provisions of the Electricity Act stipulates that the tariff based bidding
can be invited by distribution utilities or their authorised representative,
This concept of authorised tepresentative has been forming part of
Standard Bidding Document as well,

2.1.2 The bid process adopted for development of Ultra Mega
Power Projects in the country is in line with guidelines issued by
Ministry of Power for procurement of power by distribution utilities
through tariff based competitive bidding. The SPVs set up for the
development of the UMPPs are conceived as ‘Authorised
Representatives’ and are required to carry out various activities as
specified in the guidelines on behalf of the Procurers i.e. Distribution
Licencees. Accordingly, the State distribution utilities’ have provided
authorisation to SPVs of Sasan and Mundra UMPP for off-take of
power allocated, endorsing the Proposed three tier mechanism as
detailed below and for taking up tariff based bidding on their behalf.

Expression of Interest (80): These UMPPs are to be awarded on
tariff based competitive bidding. This being a new concept and
requiring large investment from domestic as well as international
investors, expression of interest (Fol) needed to be invited initially to
generate wider awareness and global publicity.

qualifying criteria for selection of bidders to participate in the second
stage. The second stage of bidding will invite Request For Proposals
(REP) from the qualified bidders which will further be evaluated by
the SPVs with the help of appointed Bid Process Management
Consultants. Here it may be noted that the REQ and REP documents
are in line with the standard bidding document issued by MoP in this
regard in order to take benefit of the Provisions of Sec-63 of Electricity
Act. In this regard, the Ministry of Power informed that the entire bid

‘ 7


process is transparent and involves the bidders at both the stages of
RFQ and RFP through Pre-bid Conferences. Such conferences are
organized before RFQ to decide the RFQ criteria and before RFP to
finalise PPA by considering views of bidders, procurers and financial
institutions in the presence of MoP, CERC and CEA.

Empowered Committee: A Committee of Purchasing States,
Ministry of Power (MoP), Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC), SBI, PFC headed by Member, Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) had been formed to finalise REP/ PPA document to be issued
to potential bidders.

High Level Committee: consisting of members from Financial
Institutions (FIs) and CEA has been constituted to finalise the
recommendations submitted by the consultants in both the stages of
bidding ie. RFQ stage and RFP stage. This Committee consists of
Member(Thermal) CEA, Director (Projects) PFC and Representatives of
FIs (MD SBI, MD IDFC and MD IDBI).

(ii) Eligibility Criteria for Bidders

2.2.1 Bidders’ Conference for Sasan & Mundra was held at
New Delhi on 21/02/2006 and for Girye on 17/04/2006 at Mumbai.
The Conference was attended by about 35 companies including
Overseas Companies and representative of छा5/ Banks. Major RFQ
criteria arrived through consultation are:

* Technical Criteria—The Bidder must meet technical
requirement of having experience of developing projects (not
necessarily in the power sector) in the last 10 years whose
aggregate capital costs must not be less than Rs. 3000 Crore.
Out of these projects, the capital cost of at least one project
should be equivalent or more than Rs. 500 Crore.

¢ Financial Criteria—The developer should have:

(i) Internal Resource Generation: Equal to at least Rs. 1140
Crore or equivalent US$ computed as five times the
maximum internal resource generated during any of the
last five years business operations;

(ii) Networth: Rs. 1000 Crore or equivalent US$. The above
computation shall be derived from any of the past three
years annual accounts; and


(iii) Annual Turnover: Rs. 2400 Crore or equivalent US$.
The above computation shall be derived from any of
the past three years annual accounts.”

2.2.2 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry as to
whether there were any guidelines to debar the companies that had
already bagged an UMPP - from bidding for subsequent projects -
which were yet to be awarded, the Ministry, in a post-evidence reply
submitted as under:

“Presently, the provisions in the RFQ and RFP documents for
UMPPs do not debar companies that have already bagged an
UMPP from bidding for subsequent projects.”

2.2.3 On the ongoing proposal of the Ministry of Power to make
some changes in the criteria for bidding and the reasons therefor, the
Committee were informed:

“The proposed change in the bidding guidelines is for providing
option of signing of PPA and other documents before date for
submission of bids to give bidders higher degree of confidence in
projects where procurers are located in more than one State. The
procurers collectively are represented in the evaluation committee.”

(iii) Funds Requirement and Involvement of Financial Institutions

2.3.1 The Ultra Mega Projects are being developed on super critical
technology and CEA has estimated that it would entail substantial
investment to the tune of about Rs. 15,000 crore for each project. In
this regard, the Committee were informed that from the initial rounds
of discussions held with the financial institutions, it emerged that for
good and credible developers and for power projects offering less
expensive power debt funding may not emerge as a constraint at all.
To keep the financial institutions update about the developments in
setting up of Ultra Mega Projects, FIs are being involved at various
stages including the final evaluation of the bids. However, development
of these large projects would have to have the involvement of large
private business groups in our country, who either on their own or
through consortiums with parties and agencies from outside could
take up implementation of these projects. To keep the financial
institutions update about the developments in the setting up of Ultra
Mega Projects, Fis are being involved at various stages including the
selection of consultants and final evaluation of the bids for the selection
of developers.


2.3.2 As regards Final Bid Evaluation for the Selection of Developer,
the Committee were informed that the same will be decided by Apex
Evaluation Committee which consists of :

* Chairperson/CEO of the lead FI,

* Chairperson, CEA

° CMD, PFC

¢ Representative of the power purchasers

(iv) Role of the Ministry of Power

2.4.1 While SPV is acting on behalf of the state utilities, the Ministry
of Power is facilitating the whole process through the Power Finance
Corporation especially with respect to:—

* Allocation of power to different States from UMPPs in
consultation with the States.

¢ Coal Block Allotment/ Coal Linkage
* Environment/ Forest clearances
¢ Required support from State Govts. and their agencies

* Co-ordination with concerned Ministries/agencies and State
Governments for ensuring:

* Coal block allotment for pit head projects
* Environment, Forest & other clearances
¢ Water allocation

¢ Regular monitoring of progress of UMPPs and facilitate
resolving key issues of concern.

2.4.2 The Committee noted that the Ministry of Power would play
the role of a facilitator before the project is awarded. On being asked
whether the Ministry would play any role or exercise any control after
the project has been set up, the Ministry clarified:

“Ministry of Power would continue to monitor the progress of
UMPPs with a view to ensure that projects are commissioned well
within the time-frame stipulated in the RFP document. There shall
be no active role of Ministry of Power after operationalisation of
the projects. The selected developer and the concerned procurers
shall comply with the provisions of the applicable law in particular

10


grid code as amended from time-to-time regarding operation &
maintenance of the power station and all matters incidental
thereto.” हु

(v) Selection of Sites for UMPPs

2.5.1 On being questioned by the Committee about the selection of
sites for the development of UMPPs, they were informed:

“Through a preliminary scrutiny by CEA, of a number of potential
sites were identified in the country, in the first phase, three projects
at pit head site and four projects at coastal locations were identified
for development of Ultra Mega Projects. Later two more sites were
identified - one each for pit head and coastal locations. The projects
at pit head locations will be based on domestic coal whereas those
at coastal sites would have the option to use imported coal as

fuel.”

2.5.2 Again, on being asked about the criteria for selection of site
for Ultra Mega Power Projects and how far the potential sites meet
the criteria, the Ministry in a written reply submitted:

“@)

@)

Due to various techno-economic advantages, pit head &
coastal are the most preferred locations for the coal based
power plants. While, the pit head power plants shall use
indigenous low-grade non-coking coal available in
abundance in the country, the coastal location can use
imported coal or a blend of imported and indigenous fuel
to have flexibility.

Central Electricity Authority has identified potential sites
for very large capacity power plants through specific studies
based on the satellite remote sensing data. One such study
was carried out for pit head locations through Central Mines
Planning & Design Institute (CMPDI), Ranchi. A separate
study for coastal plant is being carried out by National
Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) Hyderabad.

Following criteria has been considered while selecting
potential sites for the coal based power plants at pit head
locations:

(a) Nearness to coal block in case of pit head site.

(b) Accessibility by road, and rail;

(० Availability of land, water & coal for the rated capacity;
1


12

ii)

(d) Coal transportation logistics;
(e) Availability of corridors for Power evacuation lines.
(£) No significant involvement of forest or Agricultural land.

(g) Preliminary environmental feasibility including R&R
requirements, if any;

(h) For coastal sites, nearness to the existing or proposed
ports.

For coastal locations following specific criteria is considered

in addition to those relating to land & environmental aspects

for the pit head projects:

(a) The site need be away from restricted Coastal Regulation
Zone area as per MOE&F Notification dated 19.2.1991
as amended upto 3rd Oct. 2001.

(b) Nearness to the existing or proposed ports.

2.5.3 In addition to the above, it was specifically stated by the
Ministry that the following essential inputs are ensured before selecting
a site for ultra mega project of 4000 MW:

“@)
(b)

(०)

(१)

(e)

(9

Land of about 2000 acres for main power plant block.

Land of about 1000 acres for dumping unutilized ash for
pit head location and about 500 acre for coastal location
since ash content in imported coal is low. It is envisaged
that fly ash must be utilized for cement manufacturing and
other useful purposes.

Land of about 200-300 acres for construction of colony for
housing operation & maintenance staff.

In addition to above, additional land is required for corridor
for water and ash pipelines, coal conveyor/rail lines etc.

Availability of water of about 150 cusecs (cubic feet per
second) throughout the year for pithead location based on
closed cycle cooling system using cooling tower. In case of
non-perennial sources adequate storage of water to be kept.

For coastal location, seawater is to be used for cooling as
well as raw water. Desalination of sea water is envisaged
to get raw water for boiler make up & other requirement.”


(vi) Fuel arrangements for UMPPs

2.6.1 In view of the fact that the projects at pithead locations will
be based on domestic coal whereas those on coastal sites would have
the option to use imported coal as fuel, the Committee were interested
in knowing as to whether Ministry of Power had made any definite
plan regarding securing Coal linkages, which was a very vital input
for these power projects. The Ministry in a written reply informed:

“Ministry of Power is facilitating the whole Process through the
Power Finance Corporation especially with respect to:

a. Coal block allotment
b. Environment/ forest clearances

c. Required support from State Govt. & its agencies on various
issues.

For the pithead projects, MoP is co-ordinating allocation of captive
coal blocks with the Ministry of Coal. In respect of Sasan project,
Ministry of Coal has already allocated Mohar, Mohar Amlori and
Chhattarsal blocks in the name of Sasan Power Limited. Similarly
they have also allocated coal blocks in respect of Orissa Ultra
Mega Power Projects as well.

In case of imported coal based projects, the responsibility of
arranging fuel linkages from different sources in the international
coal market at the most competitive Prices rests with the successful
bidder.”

2.6.2 When asked about the total annual requirement of imported
coal for these projects:

“The Annual Requirement of imported coal for one Ultra Mega
Power Project of 4000 MW capacity is estimated to be about 12 to
14 million tonnes.”

2.6.3 The Committee wanted to know as to whether the same
quality coal or different quality of coal would be used in different
projects. The witness clarified during evidence held on 04.05.2006:

“The quality of coal could vary because the Indian coal is telatively
high in ash content and imported coal has much lower ash content.
But our coal has low sulphur whereas the imported coal has higher
sulphur content.”

13


2.6.4 The Committee were in particular interested to know whether
there would be consistency in the quantity and quality supplied. They
were informed:

“The developers are expected to enter into long term coal supply
contracts to ensure consistency in the quantity and quality of coal
supplied.”

2.6.5 When further asked about the strategy which has been
formulated to meet the imported coal demand and how the Ministry
would ensure that the coal imported will not be diverted for other
use, the Ministry in a written reply stated:

“In case of imported coal based projects, bidders will be responsible
for arranging fuel linkages from different sources in the
international coal market at the most competitive prices.

As per the provisions of Request for Proposal and Power Purchase
Agreement developers are expected to secure long term fuel supply
agreement and there are ample safeguards in the PPA to ensure
that imported coal is not diverted for other uses. Firstly Capital
cost of developer is recoverable wholly at 80% availability on year-
to-year basis; secondly in case availability is less then 75% apart
from loosing capital cost recovery provision of further penalty is
put in place. Thirdly under the PPA provision if availability is less
then 65% due to any fault of procurer to take the power then
procurer though has to pay the capacity charges, the first right on
the imported coal which has not been utilized due to lesser
utilization of the existing capacity also rests with him.”

2.6.6 On being asked about the exact quantum of funds which
would be required annually for the import of coal, the Ministry in a
written reply informed:

“The total requirement of coal estimated for each imported coal
based project is around 12 Million Tonnes per annum. Since the
bidders are expected to tie up the fuel supply, the annual
expenditure on coal would depend on the fuel supply agreement
and the source of coal. However, current market price of coal in
the international market is US$ 45 per ton.”

2.6.7 Making a pertinent observation that India is spending more
than 70% on the import of crude oil annually, the Committee wanted
to know in particular as to whether the import of coal would not

14


disturb the Balance of Payment position of the country, the Ministry,
however, clarified:

“Integrated Energy Policy inter-alia recommends, ‘India would need
to augment domestic production and encourage thermal coal
imports to meet its energy needs. The Committee has concluded
that along the western and southern coasts of India imported coal
is more cost competitive compared to domestic coal and further,
imported coal is far more cost competitive compared to imported
gas at these coastal locations. Such a cost advantage of imported
coal over imported gas is likely to continue for some time in the
future.

Thus, prime-facie, import of coal would ease pressure on balance of
payment as it is intended to replace the imported gas which is
much costlier and volatile in the international market. Apart from
this direct positive effect on balance of payment, availability of
required electricity at cheaper rates would certainly provide distinct
edge to Indian industry which could become more competitive
and export oriented.”

2.6.8 From the replies of the Ministry, it was not clear whether the
use of imported coal for coastal projects is mandatory or whether the
projects would have the option to use imported coal as fuel. When
the clarification was sought from the Ministry. The Ministry stated:

“This is to clarify that the coastal project of Mundra which is at
advance stage of bidding is to run on imported coal only. However,
the techno-economic feasibility of using imported coal after blending
with indigenous coal is being examined so as to have flexibility in
sourcing imported coal vis-a-vis imported coal with indigenous coal.
This module could be put into implementation in subsequent
coastal locations depending upon the feasibility made available by
Central Electricity Authority.”

2.6.9 On this issue, during evidence held on 02.11.2006, the
Secretary, Ministry of Power, further clarified:

“We are trying to balance coal-based thermal power development
both through indigenous coal and coastal based imported coal
power stations. That is because though it is claimed that we have
huge reserves in the country but it has been demonstrated only to
the extent of 50 billion tones. Therefore, we should not be oblivious

15


of the fact that our indigenous resource also is not unlimited.
Therefore, a happy blend of both indigenous coal as well as
imported coal would stand us apart. That is why our policy is to
have a chain of pithead power stations and also coastal power
stations and at the same time not being too much in favour of
imported coal because it also has the foreign exchange component
involved into it.”

2.6.10 Again being asked about the views of the Ministry of Power
on this, the Ministry in a written reply submitted:

“The initiative to set up power plants at coastal locations was
taken up using imported coal due to following reasons:

(i) Indigenous coal production is not matching with the demand
of coal in power sector due to large capacity addition
planned. In 2005-06, 10.443 MT of coal was imported and
in year 2006-07 (up to 28.02.2007), 9.331 MT of coal has
been imported. Further at the end of 11th Plan, about 40
MT of coal is required to be imported to meet the capacity
addition planned taking into account the production by coal
companies and captive mining,

(ii) Although as per proven reserves, we can meet the Country’s
requirement for next 80 years, it is preferable to conserve
the same for future use. Hence it is considered prudent to
use imported coal for part of our requirement,

(iii) In coastal locations imported coal is a better option keeping
in view transportation logistics,

(iv) Option of using blended coal can also be used in future
projects for which issue of limitation on type of coal to be
procured and handled is to be resolved.”

2.6.11 When asked whether the import of coal will be under any
obligation to inform the authority about the quality of coal being
imported. The Ministry in a written reply clarified:

“The importer of the coal will not be under any obligation to
inform the authority about the quality of coal being imported. The
developer will be under obligation to import coal of consistent
quality in regard to ash and sulphur content so as to comply with
the stipulations of MOEF. The State Pollution Control Board
Authorities monitor regularly to have a check on the emissions.”


(vii) Availability of Infrastructure for Development of UMPPs

2.7.1 FICC] has expressed concems to the Committee that the ports
in the country are not large enough to handle import requirements.
When the Ministry was asked to clarify the position in this regard, it
stated:

“It is true that the existing ports do not have the required facilities
to handle the imported coal requirement of the UMPPs. However,
the sites for coastal UMPPs are being identified either closer to
the existing port where additional facilities could be created to
handle the imported coal or closer to such locations where new
ports or jetties could be set up to handle the imported coal. In
regard to Mundra UMPP, the nearby Adani Port has committed to
the creation of additional facilities to handle the imported coal.
Similarly, for Krishnapatnam UMPP, the Krishnapatnam Port
Company Ltd. has confirmed that they would be able to create
additional facilities at their Krishnapatnam Port to handle the
imported coal.”

(viii) Tariff-fixation for Power from UMPPs

2.8.1 Asked whether SERCs of the Host States will play any role
in fixing the yearly tariff for the Power obtained from the projects.
The Ministry of Power in a written reply explained:

“Under Section 63 of EA 2003, the appropriate Regulatory
Commission is to adopt the tariff arrived through tariff based
competitive bidding.”

2.8.2 During evidence, while explaining the role of Regulatory
Commissions, the Secretary, Ministry of Power further elaborated as
follows:

“Electricity is a concurrent subject. Just as you have the Central
Electricity Regulatory ‘Commission, there are State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions in the States, The tariffs to the consumers
are settled before those Commissions. Those Commissions will
deliberate on this issue. These are public hearings in which the
distribution companies have to place before the Commissions in
open court as to what has been their procurement process, what
is the cost to them, what is the cost to the company and thereafter
tariff is fixed. It is very transparent mechanism.”

7


2.8.3 During evidence, held on 02.08.2006, the Committee wanted
to know about the per unit cost of power, likely to be obtained from
the UMPPs. The Secretary, Ministry of Power stated:

“Tt would be less than Rs. 2/-. 1 expect that it would be much less
than Rs. 2/- per unit. In the NTPC pithead power stations you are
now getting a tariff of 165 to 170 paise.”

2.8.4 He further added:

“We expect, in either of the situations whether it is pithead power
plants or coastal power plants, the tariff should definitely be less
than Rs. 2/-. The cost in case of the pithead power plants would
be lower as compared to the coastal areas power plants because of
the imported coal component. But in both cases it should be lower
than Rs. 2/- per unit of electricity.”

2.8.5 When asked as to whether the tariff will be different for
pithead & coastal projects, the Secretary, further clarified, during
evidence held on 02.08.2006:

“The variation in cost of power in terms of coastal locations would
be a factor for competition. It is based on how best the 12 likely
bidders are able to tie up their fuel cost and transportation cost.
The way we are trying to provide it should lead to similar type
of consumption provided the coal colour and the value is the
same. But the price would depend on how best they are able to
tie up.

Regarding pit-head locations, I think, there is not too much of
change in the characteristics of coal in Sasan or in Orissa. Therefore,
it should lead to more or less, one or two paise difference in
similar types of price per unit of power in terms of pithead power
stations. Coastal locations will present a different type of a picture.
But there again the competition will drive down the prices.”

2.8.6 In the light of the fact, as was informed by the Ministry of
Power, that the tariff arrived through the competitive bidding has to
be adopted by the Regulatory Commission, the Committee in particular
desired to know as to whether the tariff of Rs. 1.19 in case of Sasan
Project will go to Regulatory Commission for clarification. The Secretary,
Ministry of Power clarified during evidence:

This was sent to them for adoption and within a few days we
expecting their reply.”

18


(ix) Time Schedule for Development of UMPPs

2.9.1 The time-schedule for development of four UMPPs given by
the Ministry of Power is as follows:

Project EOL Issue of Issue of Submission Selection of

RFQ RP Draft) of Rip successful
Bidder

1. Sasan 31.106 313.06 22.6.6 07.12.06 31.12.06
2. Mundra 1.2.06 313.06 2.6.06 07.1206 31.12.06
3... Krishnapatnam 12.07.06 15.10.06 15.03.07 30.04.07

(Notice)
4. Orissa-Pit head* 31.07.06 15.10.06 15.03.07 30.04.07

“State agreed ‘in principle’, formal confirmation regarding site is awaited.
“The qualified bidders are asking for at least 8 months for preparation in terms of Ec,

coal/mining etc. It is proposed to give bidders 5 months after issue of RiP to give their
tariff bid.

2.9.2 In the Budget 2006-07, it has been announced that:

“It is our intention to award these projects before 31st December,
2006.”

2.9.3 In the ‘Implementation of Budget Announcements’ (2006-07),
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance while giving the
status of implementation of budget announcements has stated:

“The bidding process has been initiated in respect of four projects
in Sasan (Madhya Pradesh), Mundra (Gujarat), Krishnapatnam
(Andhra Pradesh) and Jharkhand. In respect of Sasan (MP) and
Mundra (Gujarat), the financial bids were evaluated on 18.12.2006
and letters of intent were handed over to successful developers on
December 28, 2006. For Krishnapatnam Project, successful developer
would be finalized by end of April, 2007 and for Jharkhand the
date for selection of final developer is July 15, 2007. For other
projects necessary inputs from respective States are being tied up.

2.9.4 While explaining the time schedule for the development of
UMPPs, the Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence held on
02.08.2006 had initially stated:

“Two projects we are trying to allot by December, 2006 and two
more projects by March-April 2007. These are 800 MW unit Projects.

19


There will be some flexibility. Therefore, they will take a little
more time, maybe four year. We are allowing them six months for
their own preparation and tenders, etc. and then four to five years
to complete the project. Within the 11th Plan we should definitely
get some units of the first crop of the project that we would be
allotting.”

2.9.5 However, subsequently the Ministry of Power during evidence

held on 21.03.2006 stated as follows:

“In respect of the ultra mega projects, a point was made that we
had proclaimed that we would do it in the Eleventh Plan. I would
not like to comment on that issue at the moment. But as things
stand today, keeping in view the work schedule that has gone
with those logics and plans, these projects are to give fruit in the
Twelfth Plan. Work will begin very soon in the Eleventh Plan but
they have to fructify in the Twelfth Plan. In respect of the impact
of these projects not coming up on the Eleventh Plan, these projects
are not included in the Eleventh Plan target.”

2.9.6 As regards the time schedule, the Ministry of Power in a

post-evidence reply further elaborated:

20

“Bid documents for UMPPs provide that first unit would be
commissioned not later than 69 months from the effective date of
PPA, and balance units within next 24 months ie., last unit not
later than 93 months (7 years & nine months) 93 months for coastal
projects and 105 months for pit head projects from the effective
date of PPA. According to this prescribed timeline, any UMPP in
case of which effective date of PPA has been attained by first
quarter of 2009-10 is likely to be commissioned fully within 12th
Plan (which ends in March, 2017).”

2.9.7 The Ministry, however, added:

“The time-schedule for the development of these Ultra Mega Power
Projects depends on:

(a) Time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and
identification and acquisition of land for the Project;

(b) Time taken in completion of bidding process; and

(c) Time-schedule for commissioning of various units submitted
by the selected bidder in his bid, in accordance with
provisions of the bidding documents.”


2.9.8 The Committee finally desired to know from the Ministry of
Power as to whether all the projects would be operational during the
12th Plan. The Ministry of Power submitted:

“According to indicated timeline, al! units of the Mundra Ultra
Mega Project would be operational during the 12th Plan. The
Commissioning schedule for Sasan UMPP would depend on the
date of transfer of the project to the Selected Developer. The bidding
Process in respect of Krishnapatnam UMPP and Tilaiya UMPP has
started. Given the timeline in the bidding documents, it could be
said with fair degree of certainly that four Projects shall be
operational well within 12th Plan. In case of remaining five UMPPs
there is again fair chance of completing them within 12th Plan.
However, firm timelines would be known on completion of bidding
Process in each case. For this to happen, it is imperative that the
concerned States shall provide necessary clearances, particularly
site clearance urgently.”

(x) Present Status of Development of UMPPs

2.10.1 On being questioned by the Committee about the status of
development of UMPPs, the Ministry informed the Committee that
the bidding process in respect of Sasan & Mundra projects was
completed on schedule. The following information was, however,
submitted:

Bidding process in respect of Sasan & Mundra UMPPs.

Project Issue/Submission Issue/Submission Issue of — Submission Selection of
of EOL of RFQ RFP of Bid —_Bidder/
Proposals Issuance
of Lol
1. Sasan

Target - 31.11.06/28.2.06 — 31.3.06/15.5.06 30.6.06 22.11.06 31.12.06
Actual ~ 31.1.06/28.2.06 31.3.06/1.6.06 22.6.06 07.12.06 28.12.06

2. Mundra
Target - 1.2.06/28.2.06 31.5.06/145.5.06 — 30.6.06 22.11.06 31.12.06

Actual - 1.2.06/28.2.06 31.3.06/1.06.06 2.6.06 07.12.06 28.12.06

21


2.10.2 However, as regards the status obtaining in respect of all
the UMPPs, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply added:

“The present status of Nine Ultra Mega Power Projects identified
for development is as follows:

@

Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project in Madhya Pradesh: Letter
of Intent (LOI) has already been issued to Globeleq - Lanco
consortium on 28.12.2006 for development of the project.

Mundra Ultra Mega Power Project in Gujarat: Letter of
Intent (LOI) has already been issued to the Tata Power
Company Limited on 28.12.2006 for development of the
project.

Akaltara Ultra Mega Power Project in Chhattisgarh: The
development of Akaltara UMPP is contingent upon the
availability of requisite clearances and confirmation with
regard to availability of land and water for the project by
the Government of Chhatisgarh.

Girye Ultra Mega Power Project in Maharashtra: It appears
that some local people are agitating against the setting up
of Ultra Mega Power Project at Girye project site. The
development of UMPP in Maharashtra therefor is contingent
upon the availability of requisite clearances and confirmation
with regard to availability of land for the project by the
Government of Maharashtra.

Tadri Ultra Mega Power Project in Karnataka: It appears
that there is some local agitation against the Tadri UMPP.
Hon’ble Chief Minister had constituted a committee in May,
2006 consisting of MP, MLAs and other Stake holders, CEA,
PFC, Govt. of Karnataka, KPCL, Deputy Commissioner,
Uttara Kannada District to examine various issues pertaining
to the proposal. It is proposed by the Committee that a
study may be carried out to assess impact of the power
plant on the environment by a reputed consultant. Further
decision will be taken after the Study is carried out.

Krishnapatanam Ultra Mega Power Project: The Request for
Qualification bid document has been issued on 01.08.2006
and RfP bids by the qualified bidders are to be submitted
by 10.04.2007. Letter of Intent to the selected bidder is
expected to be issued before 30.04.2007.


(vii) Orissa Ultra Mega Power Project: The development of Orissa
UMPP is contingent upon the availability of requisite
clearances and confirmation with regard to availability of
land and water for the Project by the Government of Orissa.

(viii) Tilaiya Ultra Mega Power Project in Jharkhand: Desein Pvt.
Limited have been appointed as technical consultants for
this project. The Request for Qualification bid document
has already been issued on 01.02.2007 and is to be submitted
by 20.03.2007. REP documents are to be issued on 02.04.2007.
Submission of RfP document is 02.07.2007. Selection of
successful bidder by 15.07.2007.

(ix) Tamil Nadu Ultra Mega Power Project: Site near Cheyyur
was identified for setting up of Ultra Mega Power Project
in Tamil Nadu subject to feasibility for development of port
being established by government of Tamil Nadu. However
Government of Tamil Nadu has now vide letter dated
5.03.2007 intimated that GOTN prefers that the site at
Nagapattinam may be considered by CEA for setting of
UMPP. The site was not preferred by CEA as the site was
low lying and filled with back water from sea. Further, the
sea coast near the project site was shallow and setting up
of a port would be more expensive. This was also
communicated to GOTN by CEA in the meeting taken by
Hon'ble Minister of Power, Tamil Nadu on 02.12.2006
wherein Chairperson, CEA also Participated.”

2.10.3 The Committee noted that for the Krishnapatnam Project,
Letter of Intent was to be issued to the selected bidder by 30.04.07.
However, the Ministry of Power failed to meet the deadline. The
following was submitted before the Committee by the Ministry in a
post-evidence reply:

“REP documents were issued on 10-11-2006. The submission date
of Request for Proposal (REP) for the Krishnapatnam UMPP has
been postponed to 25th May, 2007. Further Progress of bid process
will depend on finalization of Rapid EIA Report which is necessary
for obtaining the MoEF clearance.”

2.10.4 When asked about the reasons for this postponement, the
Ministry replied:

“Further progress in the bid process depends on the finalization of
the Rapid EIA Report which is a pre-condition for obtaining MoEF

23


clearance. The same is awaited from EPTRI, an agency of
Government of Andhra Pradesh.”

2.10.5 During evidence, regarding the Mundra Project, the Ministry
of Power further added:

* “Letter of Intent (Lol) has been issued to M/s Tata Power
Co. Ltd. under Tariff based Competitive Bidding Process on
28.12.2006 is Rs. 2.26/unit (imported coal based UMPP).

* Land for the project has been acquired and all clearances —
Environmental, CRZ, Sea-water, Civil Aviation, Defence have
beer. obtained. However, forest clearance is under process.

« Adoption of tariff by CERC is expected shortly.

*® Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) has been signed on

22.04.2007. The selected bidder has quoted five units of 800
MW each proposed to be commissioned as per following

schedule:
Unit No. Months from PPA — Scheduled COD
signing

1 64 22.8.2012

2 70 22.2.2013

3 76 22.8.2013

4 82 22.2.2014

5 88 22.8.2014

However, bidder has an option under PPA to advance the
above commissioning schedule.

© Project has been transferred and the documents (PPA etc.)
have been handed over to successful bidder, Tata Power
Co. on 23.04.2007.”

2.10.6 Sasan UMPP was bagged by Globeleq Lanco Consortium
who quoted the lowest bid of Rs.1.19/unit. The Ministry of Power
had informed the Committee that the Lol was issued on 28.12.2006.
The land had also been acquired and Relief and Rehabilitation (R&R)
package finalized. All the clearances for this project were also stated
to be obtained.

2.10.7 However, in February 2007, Globeleq Ltd. sold its entire
70% stake in Sasan Project to Lanco Infratech and Jindal Steel and
Power Ltd.

24


2.10.8 In the light of this document, the Committee wanted to
know the present status of the project in the light of this development.
PEC, the nodal agency for UMPPs in a written reply gave details of
the present status of this Project as follows:

“M/s Globeleq Singapore Pte Ltd. vide Letter dated 12th February,
2007 addressed to Sasan Power Ltd. intimated that its Holding
Company, Globeleq Ltd. has sold its entire stake in Globeleq
Singapore Pte Ltd. to M/s Prince Stone Investments Ltd., Mauritius
(60%) which is also the Holding Company of M/s Lanco Infratech
Ltd. (the other partner of the Globeleq - Lanco Consortium) and
to M/s Jindal Steel and Power Ltd., India (40%).

Letter dated 14th February, 2007 was also received by Sasan Power
Ltd. from M/s Lanco Infratech Pvt. Ltd. (Consortium Partner)
conveying their willingness to take over Sasan Power Ltd. and to
provide Performance Bank Guarantee of Rs. 300 crore latest by
26th February, 2007, that is within 60 days of award of Lol.

Letters from L-2 bidder ie. M/s Reliance Energy Generation Ltd.
dated 5th, 14th, 25th, 26th February, 2007, were also received by
Sasan Power Ltd. raising a number of issues regarding qualification
of successful bidders that is Globeleq — Lanco Consortium and
requesting for cancellation of Lol issued to the Consortium and
requesting for award of the project to them as the L-1 bidder.

Sasan Power Ltd. vide letter dated 20.02.07 sought clarification from
M/s Globeleq Singapore Pte. Ltd. The reply was received vide
their letter dated 23.02.07.

These developments were discussed in the meeting of Board of
Directors of Sasan Power Ltd. held on 17.0207 and 26.02.07, wherein
it was decided to get the entire matter contractually and legally
examined based on which the next course of action would be
decided.”

2.10.9 The Committee categorically wanted to know from the
Ministry of Power as to whether the award of Sasan Project to Globeleq
was valid in the light of this development. The Ministry of Power in
a post-evidence reply stated:

“The matter is being contractually and legally examined in
consultation with the Attorney General of India. A view on the
same would be taken after due consideration of the same.”

25


2.10.10 When the Committee further enquired about the status of

legal opinion sought, the Ministry in a written reply informed:

“PFC has informed that it has received a communication dated
23.03.2007 from the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) in which
the CVC has informed that it nas deputed its officials to examine
the tender documents of the Sasan UMPP. Further more, the CVC,
vide its letter dated 26th March, 2007 addressed to this Ministry
has also directed the ..... of this Ministry to conduct an
investigation into a complaint received by the CVC regarding the
controversy concerning the Sasan UMPP. The CVC has sought the
investigation report within 12 weeks from the receipt of its order
by this Ministry.”

2.10.11 Asked whether the Ministry has received the legal opinion

sought by it on the Sasan Project, the Ministry in a post-evidence
reply just repeated:

“The matter has been referred to the Ministry of Law and Justice.”

2.10.12 The Committee wanted the Ministry to assure them in

particular over the per unit cost of production of Rs.1.19 quoted for
the Sasan Project by the bidder was financially viable. On this the
Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence held on 14.05.2007
explained:

26

“The point that was raised the essence of the argument was that
we should come and explain as to whether this 1.19 is viable.
There is a clause in the Standard Bidding Document, which says
that ‘the bidder who has quoted lowest level of tariff as per the
evaluation procedure shall be considered for the award. The
Evaluation Committee shall have the right to reject all price bids
if the rates quoted are not aligned to the prevailing market price.’
That option is there for the Evaluation Committee. However, in
the present case, you will observe that while one of the bids from
Globeleq Lanco was Rs. 1.19 per unit, the other bid was Rs. 1.29.
It was not far off.

The efforts of the Ministry of Power and the Power Finance
Corporation, which is the nodal agency, have been to procure the
lowest possible tariff for the procuring States and ultimately for
the consumer. So, that is, in fact, a measure of satisfaction for us
and I think, the Evaluation Committee in their own wisdom
decided to recommend the issue of Lol to the lowest bidder, and
the bid was not rejected. I do not think, at the moment, occasion


has arisen for us to explain. In fact, may be if the bid had been
rejected, then probably there was a cause to explain why it was
rejected or we did not accept it. So, I think, in that situation, I
would beg to submit that I do not think that occasion has arisen.
The bidder is not obliged to indicate how he has arrived at that
figure. He may be having his own entrepreneurial skills, his own
strengths and his own future strategic planning. It is a principle of
the market that if somebody wishes to enter a market with a
certain price to bid or something, he can sustain it because if he
cannot sustain it, the loss is his.”

2.10.13 Being concerned with the power situation in the country,
the Committee wanted to know how long will it take to settle the
issues involved in award of the Sasan Project. The Secretary, during
evidence held on 14.05.2007 assured the Committee in the following
terms:

’There are opinions on both sides; I am talking about the Sasan
issue. So, if it had been an issue that was as simple as has been
made out that somebody offered 1.19 and let him do it, no. There
are certain RFQ requirements in the whole process and that RFQ
is meant to give you that confidence whether whoever is quoting
is not just shooting from the hip, he has done something in the
past, he has executed some projects, he knows what he is talking
about.

So, those are some of the issues which have a bearing on the legal
opinions that are being sought. I would agree with you that we
need to expedite legal advice in the matter at the earliest and that
has been our request also. I shall certainly communicate the
sentiments of this Committee that the process needs to be brought
to a logical end at the earliest.”

2.10.14 It has been reported that the Empowered Group of Ministers
(EGoM) on Ultra Mega Power Projects has declared the Lanco-Globeleq
consortium’s bid for the Sasan project invalid ab-initio. It, however left
the decision on the future course of action on the project to Sasan
Power Ltd., the company floated by PFC. The EGoM was set up to
resolve the Sasan impasse.

2.10.15 The Board of Sasan Power Ltd. called for a second round
of bidding. In this bidding Reliance Power Ltd. (RPL) submitted the
lowest tariff of Rs. 1.196 per unit, against bids submitted by NIPC &
Jaiprakash Industries. Finally, RPL has been given the Letter of Intent
(Lol).

27


“At present no changes are contemplated in the Guidelines in this
regard.”

2.10.17 Making an observation on this, all the 9 UMPPs envisaged
by the Government are sagas, The Committee wanted to know the
reasons for contemplating the evelopment of thermal Ultra Mega
Projects and not also hydel considering the fact that there is huge
hydro potential in the country, which remains yet to be exploited. The
Ministry in a written reply explained:

“There are a number of uncertainties and risks associated with
construction of hydro electric projects. It is, therefore, extremely
difficult to make bids quoting a precise figure for the cost of power
from these projects. Secondly, under the Constitutional provisions,
the right of allocation of sites for development of hydro electric
projects vests with the States. Further, the distribution companies
cannot initiate the process of tariff based bidding without site
allocation by the State having control over the site as it is an
essential requirement under the Bidding Guidelines of January, 2005
issued by Ministry of Power. The tariff based bidding can be
initiated only after allocation of the site by host State for this
purpose and availability of a very reliable DPR. This has not
happened so far.”

2.10.18 Concerned over the slow pace of capacity addition and
poor achievement during the 10th Plan, Hon’ble Prime Minister
announced setting up of a dedicated, professionally managed National
Power Project Management Board in the recently held Conference of
Chief Ministers. This Board would keep track of all projects which are
to be completed during the 11th Plan and will assist State and Central
Utilities in ensuring that project implementation milestones are met
for every single power project. He also announced, setting up of a
Taskforce on hydro power to develop hydro-electric power projects.

2.10.19 The Committee welcome the new initiative of the Ministry
of Power to embark on the path of huge capacity addition by way
of developing UMPPs. Being a new concept, there are no models to
emulate. Hence, the improvements will have to be made by learning
through experience. Failure of capacity addition targets in the
8th, 9th and 10th Plan, by the Private Sector leaves much to be
desired. The achievement of Private Sector in all these Plans have
been less than 30% of the targets. This leaves ample scope for soul
searching on the part of Government. The Committee recommend
that the factors which led to the debacle of capacity addition targets

28


particularly capacity addition by the Private Sector should be
analysed by the Government in depth and corrective steps in way
of development of UMPPs be taken in right earnest. Going by the
experience in the award of Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project, the
Committee feel that certain changes are warranted in the bidding
guidelines to plug the loopholes therein, and making them foolproof.
In the considered opinion of the Committee, the precious time lost
in the Sasan Project on this count is simply disconcerting —
considering the immense strategic importance and generation
potential of the development of these projects. The Committee desire
this project to see light of the day as early as possible. They would
further like the Ministry to try in all sincerity and make up for the
time lost owing to this controversy so that this project comes up as
scheduled earlier.

Further, since the whole purpose of resorting to competitive
bidding is to encourage competition, the Committee are of the
opinion that the developers who have already bagged a project
should not be allowed to bid for another project, on the basis of the
same balancesheet on which he has got one project. However, if the
balancesheet is so strong that it can meet the eligibility criteria for
the two projects together, they may be permitted to bid. Because
besides encouraging competition, it will also ensure that the power
sector is not monopolized by only a few companies.

2.10.20 The Committee had expressed concern in their 20th Report
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2007-
08 as regards the coming up of UMPPs on time was concerned as
was envisaged by the Ministry of Power earlier. While taking review
of the functioning of the Ministry of Power similar concerns have
also been reported to be expressed by the Prime Minister in regard
to meeting targets by the Ministry of Power in the setting up of
UMPPs.

Thus, the Committee feel deeply concerned with the pace of
progress in the development of UMPPs. Initially the Government
had announced four UMPPs in the Budget for the year 2006-07, with
the intention to award these projects before December, 2006. Out of
these, the Government was able to stick to the deadline with regard
to only two projects, namely Sasan and Mundra. Both of these
projects were awarded before the target of 31st December 2006—
though further progress on Sasan project suffered due to the
controversy regarding the validity of the award of the project. The
remaining two projects—one in Andhra Pradesh and another in

29


Orissa were scheduled for being awarded by 30th April. 2007. The
submission date for R£P for Andhra Pradesh project has been
postponed and regarding the project to be developed in Orissa, the
site is yet to be finalised.

Later five more projects have been added to the list. However
the way in which their development is progressing leaves much to
be desired. In most of the cases selection of site is the main reason
for delay. There are agitations by local people in Karnataka and
Maharashtra and certain technical problems in Tamil Nadu. The
Committee feel that the State Governments should have been
associated with the selection of sites in the beginning itself to avoid
any last minute disagreement on the sites. The Committee desire
that the sites for UMPPs should be finalized at the earliest so that
these projects can come up within 12th Plan as envisaged and
promised. The site for UMPPs should be selected only after the
State Government has agreed to the same.

The Committee observe that in PPA for Mundra Project
64 months, that is more than five years, have been given to the
developers for commissioning the first unit of the power project
and the last unit would be commissioned after 88 months, that is
after more than seven years from signing the PPA. The Committee
feel that in the present age of fast development it should not take
such a long time for setting up of these projects.

The Committee further note that this time schedule also depends
on time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and acquisition of
land for the project; time taken in bidding process and time schedule
submitted by the bidder in his bid. There is no time limit fixed
within which clearances shall be available and the land shall be
acquired. In addition to this, it has been stated that time fixed for
start of various units would be calculated from signing of PPA. The
Committee, therefore, feel that such an open ended fixation of
completion schedule will not serve any purpose. The Committee
thus desire that exact dates/periods should be provided for setting
up of each project at the time of issue of Letter of Intent and
penalties should be provided in case of default so that the projects
can be set up in a time-bound manner.

The Committee further desire that there should be proper
coordination between the Central and State Governments so that the
issues involved in the various projects can be resolved and more so,
in future the coordination between the Central and State

30


Governments should begin right from the conceptual stage of the
Project itself, Considering the urgent need of power, the Committee
strongly recommend that these Projects should become fully
operational by all means in 12th Plan itself. Recently constituted
National Power Project Management Board should also, in Particular,
be assigned the tesponsibility to ensure the timely completion of all
these projects. For this, it is very important that this Board should
be sufficiently empowered to take project related decisions and also
it must be ensured that these are implemented without any
bottlenecks from any quarters.

2.10.21 The Committee observe that the sites for the setting up
of the coastal projects have been selected by keeping in mind the
import of coal for these projects. The Committee, however, observe
that the ports at these locations do not have enough infrastructure
to handle the huge volumes of the imported coal. The Ministry of
Power, while acknowledging this, has stated that at existing ports
additional facilities can be created to handle the imported coal and
at some locations new ports could also be set up. It implies that the
required infrastructure for some of these projects is yet to be
developed. The Committee feel that delay in the development of
infrastructure can lead to further delay in development of UMPPs,
which in turn, can derail the capacity addition targets and jeopardise
growth of the economy as such. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all works relating to development of infrastructure
particularly the port capacity to handle the huge volumes of imported
coal be completed in a time bound manner and the same should be
reflected in L.O.I, etc. The Committee also desire that the various
project related works which are to be facilitated by SPVs, should
also be made available by the time L.O.1 is issued to the successful
bidder.

2.10.22 The Committee note that the pit head Ultra Mega Power
Projects will be based on domestic coal, whereas the coastal projects
would be based on the imported coal. The justifications given by
the Ministry for using imported coal are that the indigenous resources
of coal are limited, which, need to be conserved for the future use
and imported coal would be more cost competitive at Western &
Southern coasts, as compared to domestic coal.

However, the Committee observe that each project would require
around 12-14 million tones of imported coal per-annum. Considering
the current market price of coal in the international market, the
expenditure on importing coal would thus be quite huge. Though

31


the Mundra Project—the first UMPP to be developed—will run on
imported coal only, the Committee desire that techno-economic
feasibility study of using imported coal after blending it with
indigenous coal, which is being examined, should be expedited and
completed at the earliest so that rest of the coastal projects could be
planned with the option of using the blended coal.

2.10.23 The Committee observe that all the Ultra Mega Power
Projects which have been envisaged by the Government are thermal
projects. The Committee note that there is a huge hydro power
potential in our country—which yet remains to be exploited.
Moreover, use of coal for power generation should be done keeping
in mind the future requirement of coal for other purposes as well.
Hence, the Committee feel that a policy for hydro Ultra Mega Power
Projects should also be formulated by the Government on top
priority. In the recently held Conference of Chief Ministers, the Prime
Minister had asked the Union Power Minister to set up a Task Force
on hydro power to lend special focus on this area. The Committee
desire that this Task Force be also assigned the task of working out
the modalities for the development of hydro based Ultra Mega Power
Projects. Development of UMPPs based on hydel power can greatly
benefit the North-Eastern region of the country—which abounds in
the hydel potential.

32


CHAPTER Ill
ISSUES INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT OF UMPPs
(i) Financial Issues

3.1.1. The Committee were interested in knowing about the average
investment required for an Ultra Mega Power Project and how these
projects are to be funded. The Ministry in a written reply informed as
follows:

“Based on the current cost trend in setting up of power projects
in the country, it has been assessed that average investment
required for these projects will be around Rs. 16000 to Rs. 18000
crore. In case of pithead projects, the cost is assessed keeping in
view the integrated nature of project i.e. power plant and coal
mining. However, cost of setting up of a power Project at coastal
site would have different assumptions for calculating the cost. These
are only tentative assessments and real picture would emerge only
after tariff based bidding process in respect of Sasan and Mundra
is over and final bidder is selected on the basis of lowest quoted
tariff.

With regard to funding issues, it is to mention that Ministry of
Power has facilitated discussion with leading banks and Fis and
sensitized the financial market about the funding needs of Ultra
Mega Power Projects. Financial Institutions have been involved in
the bidding process. Beyond this, no budgetary support or grant
from either Government of India or States is being envisaged. The
onus of tying of funds and also about sources of funds lies with
the developer and in this regard Government has no role to play.”

3.1.2 Asked whether any incentives and exemptions have been
given under Budget 2006-07, for the development of Ultra Mega Power
Projects, the Ministry clarified:

“No special incentive or exemptions require to Ultra Mega Projects
are being extended through budget or otherwise. However, benefits
available to Mega Projects of over 1000 MW unit rating are
available to these projects as well.”

33


3.1.3 FICCI has expressed concern that not many private developers
of UMPPs may have the capacity to get 30% (Rs. 4,500 crore) in equity.
Expressing concern as to whether the Indian Capital Market can
support such a huge initiative, the FICCI have expressed the view
that we may have to allow unconditional access to international capital
markets for the purpose. When response of the Ministry of Power to
the concern expressed by FICCI was sought, the Ministry stated:

“The equity is to be arranged by the selected developers. However,
the fact that 16 bids have been received (jointly) for first two
UMPPs itself is indicator about the appetite and capability of
various bidders.”

3.1.4 The Committee wanted to know in case of delay in the
development of project whether there was any penalty clause in it.
The Secretary, Ministry of Power explained during evidence held on
14.05.2007:

“Rs. 10,000 per MW per day—4,000 MW into Rs. 10,000 that comes
to about Rs. 4 crore per day for the Ist 60 days, after which it
goes upto Rs. 6 crore per day.”

3.1.5 When asked further about the salient features of the Power
Purchase Agreements signed between the Government and State
Governments for purchase of power from Mundra & Sasan Power
Projects the Ministry added:

“PPA documents have been finalized and have been initiated by
the power procuring States and the SPV. The RfQ and RfP
documents including the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for
Sasan and Mundra projects has been issued.”

3.1.6 The payment security mechanism, in the Power Purchase
Agreement provision in relation to UMPPs, is stated to be made for:

* “Letter of credit (LC) by distribution utilities
* Escrow on the receivables of distribution utilities.
In the event of default by any procurer:

¢ Other procurers have the first right to buy power share for
which payment default has occurred.

¢ In case of unwillingness of other procurers to buy default
power, the same can be sold in the All India market through
prevailing open access in transmission either directly or
through traders.

34

=


If any further power share is still unsold, direct supply
to HT consumers as Per provisions of the Electricity Act,
2003 to be accepted upfront.”

3.1.7 As informed by the Ministry, the salient features of the PPA
Sasan and Mundra UMPPs are:

“Capacity

> Unit flexibility with the bidder, Super-critical Technology to

be used.

The contracted capacity (net capacity) between 3500 MW to
3800 MW.

COD of the first Unit within 69 months of the signing of
the PPA,

COD of the Power Station with 93 months of the signing of
the PPA (for Mundra) and 105 months of the signing of the
PPA (for Sasan)

° Tariff

>

Capacity Charges

* Escalable Capacity Charge

* Non-Escalable Capacity Charge

Energy Charges

* Escalable Energy Charge

* Non-Escalable Energy Charge

Forex variation allowed on Energy Charges for Mundra

Escalable components to be escalated as per escalation rates
notified by CERC

Bidder free to quote firm capacity and energy charges
PPA—Payment Security Mechanism:

Letter of Credit

° 110% of Monthly Tariff Payment

* To reduce to 100% on achievement of Trigger Events
Default Escrow


36

© To cover 100% of Monthly Tariff Payment

* Tripartite Escrow between Procurers’ Lenders, Seller and
Procurer to be entered with PPA. Operational 30 days prior
to COD. Charge on incremental revenues.

© To fall away on achievement of trigger at sellers options.
* Third Party Sale on Payment Default
* Recourse on payment default by a Procurer

* Letter of Credit and Escrow Account, if inadequate

After 7 Days:

2. 25% of allocated Capacity of Default Procurer offered
to other Procurers: if decline

b. Offered to third parties
c. Defaulting Buyers to continue to pay Capacity Charges

* After 30 days third party sales relating to 100% of Allocated
Capacity permissible.

* PPA Penalty for Delay in COD
* Liquidated Damage for each unit @
For 60 days Rs. 10000/ MW per day of delay
There after Rs. 15000/ MW per day of delay
* Limited to 12 months of delay
* Delay beyond twelve months to lead to termination

* Equity Lock In Restrictions for the selected bidder in the
SPV

© 51% up to 2 yrs post COD

.

26% for a period of 10 yrs thereafter

> Lead Member (in case of a consortium) to hold at least
26% for at least 12 years post COD

* For each Rs. 50 crore (and not part thereof), non
escalable capacity charges shall be varied by 0.267%.
Seller to provide documentary proof

* During Operation Period


* Impact to be determined by CERC whose decision shall
be binding

* Non extension of Mega Power Benefits, change in R&R
package deemed to be a change in law.”

3.1.8 The Committee desired to know for how long the tariff offered
by project developers will continue initially, the Ministry replied:

“The tariff offered is for entire period of PPA (25 Years) of the
Project.”

3.1.9 On being further asked about the different stages/interval
when the project developer may tequest for increase in tariff due to
increase in variable costs of the project and whether increase in tariff
due to decrease in the efficiency of Plant will be taken into account,
the Ministry replied categorically:

“No change in tariff is permitted except on account of escalation
as per CERC’s declared norms. With decreased availability of plant
the capacity charges will be reduced as per PPA.”

3.1.10 When asked as to whether there was any provision of buy-
back of the project by the Government in case the project developer
fails to deliver as per the contract signed and whether the Government
was planning to introduce such provision, the Ministry informed:

“There is no provision of buy-back. However, in case of failure of
developer, as per provisions of PPA, lenders will have option to
step in his shoe to run the plant.”

(ii) Technical Issues Involved in Development of UMPPs

3.2.1 The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry has
explored the availability of latest technology in the world and has tied
up for it with any country. The Secretary, during evidence held on
02.08.2006 clarified:

“We will not because in this competitive process, we cannot tie up
with a particular supplier. That is left to the bidder. But we can
prescribe the technology in terms of being energy efficient. The
point is, it should facilitate competition. It should not happen that
Wwe prescribe a particular figure which is relevant to only one
supplier. There are many manufacturers in the world today who
have already come out with more energy efficient power generation
systems, turbines etc. We would be prescribing energy efficient
technologies for the super thermal power projects and ultra mega
power projects.”

37


3.2.2 As reported by the Ministry of Power, the UMPPs were to be
based on the super-critical technology. In this light, the Committee
were interested in knowing as to whether this technology is presently
being used by power projects in the country and is freely available in
case it is not how, the same is proposed to be made available to
UMPPs, the Ministry of Power in a post-evidence reply submitted:

“The super-critical technology is being used for 660 MW super-
ciritcal units at Sipat and Barh TPP of NTPC. The super-critical
technology has also been envisaged for large size units in Ultra
Mega Power Projects (UMPP) in view of its better efficiency as
compared to the conventional sub-critical units and resultant
benefits in terms of reduced coal consumption and less
environmental pollution. This technology has been in use world
wide for many years in Europe, USA, Russia, Japan, China, Korea
etc. and over the years the technology has been providing
satisfactory performance in terms of availability, reliability and
efficiency.

With a view to achieve the large capacity addition programme it
is envisaged to use larger unit sizes with super-critical technology
for UMPP. There are many manufacturers in the world who provide
the boilers and steam turbines based on this technology. However,
to ensure indigenous manufacturing capability, BHEL have entered
into collaboration with Alstom for manufacture of super-critical
boilers. They have ongoing collaboration with Siemens, Germany
for super-critical turbo-generators of large size.

The ultra mega power projects are being set up through ICB route
and developers are free to source the equipment from any
manufacturer including the indigenous manufacturer viz. BHEL.
‘As such, there are no constraints in the availability of super-critical
technology for use in UMPPs.”

3.2.3 When asked further about the alternatives available, the
Ministry informed:

“At present super-critical technology as envisaged for the UMPPs
is well proven with adequate manufacturing capabilities in the
world. Other alternative is to use Ultra Super-critical Technology
which is more efficient but is costlier and not so widely used so
far. The ultra super-critical technology could be used in future if
the same is techno-economically established.”

38


3.2.4 During evidence held on 02.11.2006, the Secretary, Ministry of
Power, further clarified as follows:

“So far as the super-critical issue is concerned, BHEL does not
manufacture high pressure and high temperature boiler turbine
and generators. Only now they have entered into collaboration for
boiler with Alstom and for turbine generators with Siemens. In
fact, they even missed 660 mw when we tendered. That is one of
our concerns that while the power development capacity should
take place in the country our engineering industry should hand-
in-hand go on upgrading their design and manufacture capability.
But progress cannot stop for that reason, We are facilitating that in
a different way. The temperature and pressure that we have put
as condition here provides flexibility in terms of unit size. It could
be 660 or 800. It is the pressure and temperature parameters that
we have prescribed. In fact, this matter was discussed in the Energy
Coordination Committee right at the Prime Minister level and it
was decided that instead of saying 660 or 800 which reduces the
flexibility of competition, it is better we lay down the condition of
efficiency of combustion, coal use, head consumed rather than
prescribing this.”

(iii) Environmental Impact of UMPPs

3.3.1 Since UMPPs may have to arrange equity from the
International capital Market as well, the Committee wanted to
categorically know whether the Ultra Mega Power Project will adhere
to Indian environment regulations or regulations of World Bank. The
Ministry in a written reply clarified:

“The Ultra Mega Power Projects will adhere to Indian Environment
regulations. No relaxation in this regard has been sought.”

3.3.2 When asked about the measures which have been evolved
for carbon emission reduction, the Ministry stated:

“The proposed Ultra Mega Power Projects will be based on the
latest super critical technology which will have higher plant
efficiency thereby reduction in the carbon emission.

The thermal power-generating unit proposed to be set up at ultra
mega power projects will be of super-critical technology having
better thermal efficiency compared to conventional sub critical
technology for thermal power generation presently under operation
in India. Due to better thermal efficiency the carbon emission will
be less. Presently there is no carbon emission reduction technology
in use.”

39



3.3.3 The Secretary further explained during evidence held on

02.11.2006:

“In fact, imported coal, in a sense has lesser of ash content and
lesser of ash content has environmental advantage. At the same
time, we are also saying that ultra mega power project would use
super critical technology which will consume lesser amount of
coal for the same amount of power. That means the thermal
efficiency of the power station will be higher. In the range of 660
MW or 800 super critical technology, the heat and coal consumption
are less. Less coal consumption means less emission of Carbon
dioxide,”

3.3.4 On the environment impact aspect of UMPPs, the

representative of the Ministry added during evidence held on
02.11.2006:

40

“When we burn coal two things happen. One is the ash, which is
the solid waste disposal issue, is generated and another is Carbon
dioxide is emitted in the atmosphere. In these projects because we
are using a more efficient technology of higher temperature and
pressure, so for the same amount of electricity generated, Carbon
dioxide which will go in the air will be little less. That is the first
point.

The second point is that, internationally the power stations using
coal of 4,000 MW have been in existence at one site for a few
decades now. It has been in operation in other parts of the world
for a few decades now. It is not too large for one site.

As far as fly ash utilization is concerned, the Environment Ministry
has been pushing of the use of fly ash utilization and the country
has made a good progress. The first progress is the Pasadena
cement. ISI standards have been prepared. Many cement plants
today are taking fly ash from coal fired stations for cement
production in many parts of the country. The practice is increasing.

The other use of fly ash is in actual construction, in roads and
buildings. In fact, the expectation is that the brick in the manner
in which we see it should become obsolete in the country soon
enough and we should have either concrete building blocks or fly
ash bricks. We are moving in the direction of fuller and fuller
utilization of fly ash and it is also a good nutrient in the wasteland.
It supports vegetation and it has been demonstrated.”


3.3.5 The Secretary, Ministry of Power, further supplemented during
evidence held on 02.11.2006:

“I had a meeting with my colleague, the Secretary of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. A Presentation was made to the
Thermal Expert Committee of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. We are taking all possible precautions so that all
environmental norms of our country are met, in terms of PPM,
SPM and all emissions. Whatever technology has to be provided,
will be provided. It will not create unbearable burden. As I said,
so far as the system of 3,000 or 3,600 megawatts etc. is concerned,
this country is already used to this.”

(iv) Relief and Rehabilitation Issues involved in Development of
UMPPs

3.4.1 Development of UMPPs at some sites involve displacement
of the local people. Asked whether Government has formulated any
policy for relief and rehabilitation of the people who will be displaced
because of the development of Ultra Mega Power Projects, the Ministry
in a written reply informed:

“The draft R&R policy formulated for UMPPs based on the national
R&R policy has been circulated with the appropriate state
authorities. In case of Sasan project the draft R&R policy and the
R&R package is being finalized in consultation with the State
Government. In Mundra Project, displacement of people is
reportedly not involved. Whatever, R&R implications are there are
being sorted out in consultation with State Government.”

3.4.2 When asked whether the funds required for rehabilitation
have been earmarked, the criteria followed in earmarking the same &
by whom the R&R cost will be borne out, the Ministry in a post-
evidence ३९०1५ stated:

“The cost of R&R is to be decided by respective State Governments
based on National R&R policy or the States policy and the same
will be borne by the developer. This has to be factored in the
tariff.”

3.4.3 On this issue, the Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence
held on 02.11.2006 further clarified:

“We have made a part of our tender document, the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement policy as a condition that every

4


developer will meet the requirement of National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement while putting his cost together, because he has to
put his tariff. So, while making his costing he has to take full
account of what the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement policy
is. But to be on a safer side we have made another provision. If
for some reason they have to make extra expenditure that will be
passed through. The Central Government notified Rehabilitation
and Resettlement policy is required to be taken into account at the
time of bidding. If there is any change in the policy, that would
be appropriately adjusted.”

3.4.4 The representative of the Ministry during the evidence held
on 02.11.2006, however, further added:

“In terms of relief and rehabilitation package what is happening is
that in each project, since this is being done in a particular State,
in case of the first two projects what has happened is that, I can
assure you that the experience has evolved in the Sassan case in
Madhya Pradesh that the Relief and Rehabilitation package has
been prepared and the State Government is in the process of
approving it and the approved R&R package is in position. The
cost of that has been intimated to the bidders with the
understanding that if there is an increase in cost, then it will go
through the tariff. Similarly for environmental reasons, if there is
an additional cost it will go through the tariff. The approved
package of rehabilitation also includes the real benefits which the
people in the neighbouring areas should get through some local
facilities. In case of Madhya Pradesh, this is done.

To some extent it will be project specific and to some extent it
would be State specific. Clearly, without working with the State
Governments, the projects will not happen. Within the broad
parameters of the national policy, it is State and project specific.
But within the State Government they need to take uniform
standards. They cannot have one package. They cannot have one
plant of coal and another plant of steel or something else.”

3.4.5 Since the Sasan and Mundra Projects have already been
awarded to the bidders, the Committee wanted to know whether the
Relief and Rehabilitation policies in connection therewith have been
firmed up as yet or not. Since the host States have their own policies
as well, when asked whether any role has been assigned to the
respective State Governments in this regard, the Ministry in a post-
evidence reply submitted:

“The R&R packages for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs have been
finalized by the respective State Governments. The cost of such

42


Packages was conveyed to the bidders well in advance. Any change
in R&R package is to be adjusted in tariff under ‘change of law’
as per provisions of the PPA, The PPA Provides that the State
Government authorities would be implementing the resettlement
and rehabilitation package (“R&R”) in respect of the site for the
Project, for which the cost is to be borne by the Seller.”

3.4.6 When asked about the specific component of the Relief &
Rehabilitation in the projects to be developed at Sasan & Mundra, the
Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated:

“The R&R package approximate cost as conveyed by Madhya
Pradesh Government & by Gujarat Government for Sasan &
Mundra UMPPs respectively is Rs. 136 Crore and Rs. 10 Crore
Tespectively in accordance with National R&R Policy and State
R&R Policy. The final R&R cost as decided by respective State
Governments will be borne by selected developers and the
difference would be covered under the provisions of “Change in
Law” in PPA.”

(v) Issue of Monopoly

3.5.1 TERI in a note submitted had expressed concern over the
monopolization of power sector by the developers of UMPP as follows:

“Government is facilitating the prospective bidders through SPV
and by extending commitment of potential buyers in the form of
Letter of Credits (LC) and escrow on the receivables of distribution
utilities. These conditions also form part of the PPAs. Undoubtedly,
such efforts by the government would enhance the Prospects of
UMPP but at the same time would lack the true competitive
business environment. Once they (developer) enter the market, it
will become like a monopoly business (with all off-take and
payment guarantees already in place). They should be asked to
sell certain % of total capacity in the free market as the whole
idea of the EA 2003 is to increase the competition in the sector.”

3.5.2 In the light of this concern, the Ministry of Power was asked
about its plans to ensure that the project developers do not monopolise
the power sector, the Ministry in a written reply stated:

“As per the Power Purchase Agreement to be entered between the
selected developers and the procurers the entire contracted capacity
of the power station shall at all times be for the exclusive benefits
of the procurers and the procurers shall have the exclusive right

43


to purchase the entire capacity from the seller at the rates obtained
through competitive bidding subject to other provisions of the PPA.
The project developer shall not grant to any third party or allow
any third party to any entitlement except as per the provisions of
the PPA.

The Electricity Act provides for powers to the Regulatory
Commission to issue directions as it considers appropriate to a
licensee or a generating company if such licensee or generating
company enters into any agreement or abuses its dominant position
or enters into a combination which is likely to cause or causes an
adverse effect on competition in electricity industry.”

3.5.3 On this issue, during evidence held on 02.11.2006, the
Secretary, Ministry of Power further clarified before the Committee as
follows:

“What we are giving is not all that much. Take for example
Mundra. We are giving a piece of land and the successful bidder
will put up a 4000 megawatt power station putting his equity and
so on. He has no monopoly over anything because he is going to
sell electricity to some distribution companies in five States. These
distribution companies will buy electricity from many other sources.
The demand for electricity will keep on rising. By the time this
4000 megawatt comes into position, it will be about 200,000
megawatt. However, the bid is for a price for the supply of
electricity for 25 years. So, the price at which this electricity will
be purchased is indicated is for 25 years whereas there is an
indexation formula as to how indexation will operate. In the
bidding process, we are putting some stiff penalties. The first is
that I am a successful bidder and I find that I have got the bid
very aggressively but my economics is not working out. In that
case, there are very tough bank guarantees which he has to give
and it can be encashed. The second eventuality is that I have put
up a plant and it runs for a few years and then for some reason,
I want to get away and so, I come up with a tale of woes. Then
at this stage, if he is defaulting in the supply, then this problem
is between him and his lenders. At the macro level, if the plant
has worked well for three to four years, then it remains a
reasonably valuable asset which a prudent management or even
with a change of management of promoters can run reasonably
well and provide reasonably good electricity.

We have tough penalty clauses and bank guarantees for non-
performance but buy-back issue is not there because it is his money,
the lender’s money.

It is there in a different way in the case of coal mines rights.”


(vi) Issue of Accountability

3.6.1 Considering that the Ministry of Power will play role only at
the initial stage i.e. till the bidders are selected, the Committee wanted
to know who will then be accountable for ensuring, in particular, that
the development of projects is smooth and the deadlines are met, the
Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated:

“For development of Ultra Mega Projects, project specific Shell
Companies as fully owned subsidiaries of PFC have been
formulated for the following developmental works till handing over
the project to the selected developer:

1, Identification of Site in consultation with CEA.

2. Preparation of Project Report including geo-technical study,
topographical survey, area drainage study, socio-economic
study, EIA study, water intake study, fuel transport study
ete.

3. Obtaining environment and forest clearance for the power
station.

4. Allocation of captive coal blocks in case of pithead projects.
5. Tying up water linkages.

6. Preparation of Bid documents including PPA, Default Escrow
Agreement etc.

7. Land acquisition for Power Station and Preparation of
Resettlement & Rehabilitation package.

8. Power System studies to identify the transmission system
for evacuation of power.

Once the Project developer is selected, the Shell Company shall be
taken over by the selected developer by purchasing 100% of the
equity share holding of the Shell Company. Subsequently the project
construction shall be governed by the Power Purchase Agreement
between the selected developer and the procurers.

As per the PPA it shall be the responsibility of the selected
developer to execute the project in accordance with applicable law,
the Grid Code, the terms and conditions of PPA and prudent utility
practices and shall make available the contracted capacity to meet
the procurers scheduling and dispatch requirements throughout
the term of the PPA. The procurers who shall be the distribution

45


licensee/State Utilities/ of the Power Purchasing States shall
coordinate and monitor the construction and operation of the
project.

Ministry of Power shall facilitate smooth construction of the project
by providing any assistance required for obtaining any inputs from
Government agencies.

The selected developer has to provide performance guarantee for
an aggregate amount of Rs.300 crore and the procurers have the
right to encash the same and appropriate in their favour as
liquidated damages in case the selected developer fails to
commission the units on their scheduled CODs. Additional
performance guarantee at the rate of Rs.15 crores per week is
required in case of delay in achieving the financial closure.”

(vii) Transmission & Distribution

3.7.1 The Ministry of Power was asked to give details of the plan
that has been chalked out by the Ministry of Power regarding the
transmission and distribution of power from the UMPPs. The Ministry
of Power, in a written reply, stated:

“The responsibility of transmission of power from these projects
has not been put with the developer. The developer will be
providing the power at the bus bar. PGCIL will be implementing
the transmission facilities for these projects. The work on the
finalization of transmission system for Sasan and Mundra project
has already started and the execution and implementation of
transmission lines will be matched with the power plant
implementation schedule.”

3.7.2 The Secretary, Ministry of Power, further added during
evidence held on 02.08.2006 before the Committee:

“So far as these ultra mega-power projects are concerned, we
decided that let this be done by Power Grid Corporation of India
for which an integrated planning should be done along with the
CEA so that evacuation does not become an issue for these
investments because they are large investments. So many parallel
streams of discussions, to try to find solutions have been started
and one such parallel streams of discussions is to discuss with the
likely off-takers of this power.

Basically the Ministry of Power facilitates - the PFC is facilitating;
but this exercise is being done on behalf of the distribution


companies or the distribution utilities of the State. In Rajasthan,
we have 3-4 distribution companies; in Andhra Pradesh, there will
be a few distribution companies, we do this. So, we are bringing
the SEB distribution companies, the SEBs and the State
Governments into the picture.”

3.7.3 When asked to give their comments on evacuation of power
from UMPP, FICCI was of the view that to ensure viability of Ultra
Mega Power Projects, the grid capacity to evacuate and transmit power
across States and availability of capacity in case of default to facilitate
third party sales has to be greatly enhanced. On being asked about
the views of Ministry of Power in this regard and steps being taken
by the Ministry to ensure evacuation of power from UMPPs, the
Ministry informed as follows:

“Powergrid is carrying out the open access system study. The
transmission system will be augmented accordingly to ensure
evacuation of power from these UMPPs. Also as per Electricity
Act, States have to provide open access by 2009 to consumers
having load of more than one MW to allow third party sale by
Generation plants.”

3.7.4 On this issue the Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence
held on 02.08.2006 explained further:

“We have already started preparing this Central Electricity
Authority power system group and the Power Grid Corporation
of India because in addition to many uncertainties that go with
development of power projects, we do not want the transmission
to add one more uncertainty, though the Ministry of Power in
future and very soon we are going to put some transmission
projects also on competition and private sector investment.

But so far as these ultra mega-power projects are concerned, we
decided that let this be done by Power Grid Corporation of India
for which an integrated planning should be done along with the
CEA so that evacuation does not become an issue for these
investments because they are large investments. So many parallel
streams of discussions, to try to find solutions have been started
and one such parallel streams of discussions is to discuss with the
likely off-takers of this power.

Basically the Ministry of Power facilitates - the PFC is facilitating;
but this exercise is being done on behalf of the distribution
companies or the distribution utilities of the State. In Rajasthan,

47


we have 3-4 distribution companies; we are working on their behalf;
in UP we have 3-4 distribution companies; in Andhra Pradesh,
there will be a few distribution companies. Wherever the SEBs
have been restructured in terms of distribution companies, we do
this. So, we are bringing the SEB distribution companies, the SEBs
and the State Governments into the picture.”

3.7.5 He elaborated:

“We are going further. We are also reviewing with every State, not
only in the context of ultra-mega project, but as a general approach
to the problem of power distribution and transmission in every
State. How are they going to work their sub-transmission systems?
We are being instrumental in advising almost all the States and
we are putting Powergrid or any other Central Electricity Authority
to their assistance so that they strengthen their sub-transmission
and distribution network so that power is pumped into the State.
There is necessary distribution of power through sub-transmission
system and distribution network.”

3.7.6 The Committee note that under the Payment Security
Mechanism for UMPPs in case of default by any procurer there is
a clause of third party sale. As per this clause other procurers would
have the first right to buy power share for which payment default
has occurred. However, in case the other procurers are unwilling to
buy default power, the same would be sold in the all India market
through prevailing ‘open access’ in transmission either directly or
through traders. The Committee, however, feel that for selling it in
the market there is need for the speedy and proper implementation
of ‘open access’ in States as envisaged under the Electricity Act,
2003. Further, in order to avail the ‘open access’ - both for Intra and
Inter-State open access, without any infrastructural bottlenecks, the
transmission system (national grid) needs to be suitably strengthened
and congestion points be removed. Powergrid is stated to be carrying
out the open access system study. The transmission system will be
augmented accordingly to ensure evacuation of power from these
UMPPs. The Committee desire that this study should be completed
within a specific time frame so that the transmission system is ready
by the time the first unit of UMPPs becomes operational. Further
the States, particularly, the States procuring electricity from the
UMPPs should be able to provide open access by 2009 as per the
Electricity Act, 2003. To achieve this goal, the Committee recommend
that all efforts in this direction be made on in a mission mode
manner.

48


The Committee further observe that for successful implementation
of such a payment security arrangement, it is essential to speed up
the pace of electricity reforms in the States. The Committee feel that
improving the commercial viability of the power sector in the States
is very important for the success of such a payment security
arrangement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concrete
steps be taken in this direction urgently.

Evacuation of power from UMPPs is another area which need
attention from the beginning itself as it also needs large investments.
The Committee note that PowerGrid Corporation of India Ltd.
(PGCIL) has been assigned this job. The Committee desire that
advance planning and provision of funds should be done by PGCIL
in consultation with CEA so that there are no bottlenecks in
evacuation of power. The Committee are of the considered opinion
that the private investment should be encouraged in this sector, At
the same time, the Committee feel that State distribution utilities
should be encouraged to take up transmission and distribution
network in their respective States.

3.7.7 The Committee note that there is an apprehension of
monopolization of power sector by the developers of UMPPs. It has
been suggested to the Committee that to encourage competition
UMPPs should be asked to sell certain percentage of their capacity
in the open market. Also that there should be a provision to buy
back/take over of the plant in case the developers resort to some
sort of blackmail, etc. The Ministry of Power has informed the
Committee that the Electricity Act provides for sufficient powers to
the Regulatory Commission to issue directions to the licencee. The
Committee, however, feel that this aspect needs to be gone into and
desire that specific powers may also be provided to the State
Governments to deal with such situations.

The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the view of the
Ministry of Power that in case of failure of developer as per provision
of Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), lenders will have the option to
step in his shoes, to run the plant. The Committee, desire that specific
provisions should be made in PPA/LOI as to what action the
Government/Regulatory Commission shall be authorized to take in
case the promoters of the project fail to perform as per the agreement.
The Committee further desire that a report on the status of
development of all UMPPs; reasons for delay in their development,
if any, and the penalties imposed in case of delays should be
furnished to the Committee every 6 months by the Government.

49


The Committee feel that since the projects will be set up in States
and State utilities are the procurers of power generated from these
projects, there can be a provision in the contract that in case the
developer fails to develop the projects as per the provision of PPA,
the respective State Governments would be entitled to take over the
project and run it and refer the matter to the concerned Regulatory
Commission for final settlement.

3.7.8 The UMPPs will be based on super-critical technology. As
stated by the Ministry of Power, there are no constraints in the
availability of super-critical technology for use in UMPPs as it is
used worldwide. The developers can source the equipment from any
manufacturer either from abroad or from indigenous manufacturer.
BHEL, the only indigenous manufacturer which provides equipment
for power sector, has recently made a foray into manufacturing super-
critical technology based equipment by entering into collaboration
with Alstom and Siemens. The Committee while noting this with
satisfaction desire that such collaborations should be suitably
encouraged in the future as well. The Committee feel that
Government should encourage other indigenous manufacturers/
players since BHEL already has its hands full. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that some new companies should also be
encouraged to be set up or already existing companies be encouraged
to be set up or already existing companies be encouraged to enter
into joint ventures with foreign manufacturers of super-critical
technology — in order to ensure that this technology is easily available
in the country.

3.7.9 Development of UMPPs at some sites would involve
displacement of the local people. The Committee note that it has
been provided in the tender document that every developer will
meet the requirement of National Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy while putting his cost together. The cost of R&R is to be
decided by respective State Governments and the same will be borne
by the developer. The Committee further note that packages for Sasan
and Mundra UMPPs have been finalized by the respective State
Governments. However, the Committee note the provision in PPA
that any change in R&R package is to be adjusted in tariff under
‘Change in Law’ in PPA. The Committee feel that this provision can
be misused and the major part of R&R expenditure can be adjusted
in tariff by the corrupt officials and the developers. Hence, it is
suggested that a limit of say 5 to 7% should be placed to which
extent the R&R cost can be adjusted in tariff. If the expenditure
exceeds this limit, it should be borne by the State Government and

50


the developer. The Committee also desire that for the remaining
projects R&R studies should be done in advance as soon as the
sites are finalized so that accurate estimates can be given to the
developers at the time of bidding itself.

3.7.10 The Committee note that due care has to be taken of the
environment impact of such large UMPPs. These thermal stations
are likely to generate huge amount of ash and large carbon dioxide
emissions. The Ministry of Power has stated that since these UMPPs
shall be using super-critical technology and imported coal with less
ash content, the environment impact will be duly taken care of. The
Committee desire that there should be strict compliance of
environmental norms and ash disposal should be decided in advance
of the generation in each case. The Committee further desire that
the use of fly ash in cement industry, building of roads etc. and
other projects should be encouraged.

51


CHAPTER IV

ROLE OF THE STATES IN DEVELOPMENT OF UMPPs
AND ISSUES RELATED THEREWITH

4.1 As informed by the Ministry of Power, the home State
Governments/agencies will facilitate in identification of site &
acquisition of land for the Project, in getting water allocation, getting
Environment, Forest and SPCB clearance at the State level & finalisation
of R&R package. State Governments will also provide local
administration’s support as and when required and will also coordinate
with Maritime Board of the State Government.

4.2 Wherever the State Governments are willing to participate by
way of part equity in these projects, it should be possible to provide
for the same in the bid conditions while inviting competitive bidding
for selecting the developers. This, however, would be optional for the
States. In the Shell Companies, which would deal with the initial issues
of sanctions, clearances, land acquisition etc, the concerned States have
been approached to ascertain their willingness to become equity
partners.

4.3 Similarly, States which are likely buyers of electricity generated
by these plants have to evolve consensus and basic agreement regarding
broad framework of the Power Purchase Agreement with mutual rights
and obligations properly structured therein.

4.4 The Ministry has stated that right at the initial stage, the Chief
Secretaries/Power Secretaries of the States have been kept apprised of
the above initiative with the request that during the initial phase of
these projects, for the purpose of investigation etc., necessary support
should be provided to the Shell Companies and to CEA and other
agencies. In the meeting held on 10th July 2006, procuring States agreed
to provide funds at the rate of Rs 1 crore per 100 MW for the tentative
State-wise allocation agreed to , to the SPV as Commitment Advance
for temporary infusion as equity in the SPV to enable it to leverage
these funds to borrow and pay fully for land acquisition and R&R.
The SPV is required to aim at completing land acquisition and obtain
full possession of land before the successful bidder takes over the
SPV. The successful bidder would be required to buy out this equity
so that funds received from the States could be returned to them. The
States have been requested to provide the commitment advance within
a month positively.

52


4.5 The Ministry of Power has informed that representatives of
the following State Governments/Utilities have been inducted in SPV
Boards of Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam & Tilaiya Projects.

*°  Sasan UMPP — MP, UP and Haryana
* Mundra UMPP — Gujarat, Punjab & Maharashtra
¢  Krishnapatnam UMPP — AP, TN & Karnataka
¢  Tilaiya UMPP — Jharkhand, UP, Bihar (awaited)

Role of State Government/Agencies

* Representatives of State Governments/Utilities on SPV Boards:-

* Sasan UMPP — MP, UP and Haryana
* Mundra UMPP — Gujarat, Punjab & Maharashtra
¢  Krishnapatnam UMPP — AP, TN & Karnataka
¢  Tilaiya UMPP — Jharkhand, UP, Bihar (awaited)

¢ Representatives of State Governments/Utilities on SPV Boards of
other UMPPs shall be inducted as and when the project takes off.

(i) Role of State Governments in selection of sites for UMPPs

4.1.1 The Committee categorically enquired as to whether the local
public or their elected representatives have been consulted on the site-
specific proposals. The Ministry in a written reply submitted:—

“Respective State Governments have been kept fully involved in
the site selection process. Public Hearing have been held in regard
to Sasan and Mundra Ultra Mega Projects and the observations of
the local people have been considered by the State Pollution Control
Board before recommending the proposals to Ministry of
Environment & Forests for clearance. Similar Public Hearings shall
be held for other Ultra Mega Projects.”

4.1.2 During evidence, the Committee desired to know from the
Ministry of Power the role envisaged for the State Governments in the
selection of sites for the development of UMPPs. The Secretary, Ministry
of Power, during evidence held on 02.08.2006 explained:—

“With regard to the question as to whether it starts with a study
by the CEA or by the State Government, I would say both. The

53


Central Electricity Authority (CEA) starts identifying different sites.
They also get assisted by State electricity Boards and State
companies. Then, we send our team. That team sees whether
sufficient land is there, whether water can be brought there,
whether coal can be brought there and then after they are satisfied,
environmentally it should not be an insurmountable problem
because compensation of forest will make it totally uneconomical.
Then, they come to a conclusion after evaluating a few aspects.”

4.1.3 When asked whether the State Government was consulted
prior to selection of site, the State Government of Madhya Pradesh in
a written reply stated:—

“Yes. Based on studies done by CMPDI, two sites in Sidhi District
of M.LP. i.e. Sasan and Waidhan were identified by Government of
India. After site visit with Government of Madhya Pradesh officials,
Sasan site was selected.”

4.1.4 In this context, the Government of Orissa informed:—

“Government of India/CEA have intimated to the State
Government that they have identified the site in the districts of
Sundergarh/Jharsuguda would be suitable for development of
Orissa Ultra Mega Power Project.”

4.1.5 However, Government of Chhattisgarh in this regard
submitted:

“Prior to selection an official team comprising officers from CEA
visited the site and on their request State Government provided
logistic support such as arrangement for stay, travel and site visit
etc. However with regard to selection and finalisation of Akaltara
as the site for Ultra Mega Power Project (UMPP) in Chhattisgarh,
formal consultation with the State Government were not held. After
reaching a final decision on the location of UMPPs, Ministry of
Power started holding meetings with the stakeholders to complete
formalities related to allocation of power, formation of special
purpose vehicle and bid invitation etc.”

4.1.6 When the Ministry was asked about the reasons for not
holding any formal consultation with the State Government of
Chhattisgarh while selecting and finalizing the project site, the Ministry
in a written reply stated:—

“The site for Akaltara UMPP was identified in consultation with
CSEB officials. This was informed to the Government of

54


Chhattisgarh vide CEA letter dated 20.12.2005. Further, the officers
of CEA and PFC had held a meeting with Principal Secretary
(Energy), Govt. of Chhattisgarh on 9th Dec 2005 at Raipur in his
office wherein the whole process of development of UMPP was
explained to him and he was requested to confirm the availability
of land and water for the identified site. This was followed up
with a letter dated 16 January 2006 from CEA to him. The process
of development of UMPP in Akaltara is held up for want of specific
confirmation from the State Government regarding availability of
land and water.”

4.1.7 When State Government of Tamil Nadu was asked about the
reasons for preferring the site at Nagapattinam rather than at Cheyyur,
as identified by the Central Government, the State Government in a
written reply explained:—

“About 3500 acres of land is available at the Nagapattinam site.
Most of the lands are poramboke lands. It is ascertained from the
District Collector/Nagapattinam that the lands could be acquired
in a very short duration. Further the land cost is cheaper

The Nagapattinam District is an industrially backward area. Setting
up of a power project in this district will boost the economy of
the region as a whole.

As regards, Cheyyur site, major extent of lands are wet patta lands,
with paddy cultivation. As such acquisition of lands may pose
problems.

In the Principal Secretary, Energy Department, GOTN’s
D.L.Lr.No.6787/B2/07, dt.5.3.07 addressed to Chairperson, CEA,
GOI, the Principal Secretary, Energy Department, GOTN informed
the Chairperson, CEA, that the Government of Tamil Nadu is of
the opinion that the proposed Ultra Mega Power Project may be
put up in Vilundamavadi village, near Thirukuvalai in
Nagapattinam District.

The response of Ministry of Power, GOI is awaited.”

4.1.8 Due to some agitations by the Local people regarding the
selection of Girye as a site for development of UMPP in Maharashtra,
the work is held up. The Committee wanted to know how Girye was
selected as a site. The representative of the Ministry of Power during
evidence held on 14.03.2007 explained:—

“It was suggested by the Central Electricity Authority.”
55


4.1.9 The Committee pointed out that the reason why the projects
have been struck is because the sites for the projects have been
identified by an authority who is not in touch with the State
Government and the local problems.

41.10 The Ministry of Power explained that the sites were not
selected out of the blue. The representative of the Ministry of Power
clarified during the evidence held on 14.03.2007, in the following
terms:—

“We have a Committee comprising the Central Electricity Authority,
the CMPDI, the NRSA, and Railways, and we look into the
probable sites. After that, detailed investigations are done. This
was one of the probable sites. It was not that we have done the
detailed analysis, detailed investigation of the site. It is based on
initial investigation and it was the probable sites.”

4.1.11 The Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence held on
14.03.2007, added:—

“Normally, it is not in total vacuum that these sites are evaluated.
First, the project promoting agency does its own scouting. At that
stage, they try and see on merits which is the best site. If
Government land of that dimension is available somewhere, we
will try to go there and we will also see whether a port is nearby,
but of course, ultimately if concerned state is not willing, it will
never happen.”

4.1.12 He further added:—

“Even if I may concede for a moment that we have not gone
about it in a manner, in a full consultative way, however, the
States themselves know the huge energy shortages or some of
them know that they are sitting on coal reserves, and if the country
has to develop, then the onus lies on them to show some degree
of concern, as you have, Sir, for development of power and to
suggest, ‘okay, if not Girye, let us have Site X,Y or Z.’ We would
not be found wanting in taking action immediately.”

(ii) Availability of water for development of UMPPs

4.2.1 Thermal power plants consume large quantities of water. The
Committee wanted to know whether feasibility of water availability at
various sites has been examined and whether water used for irrigation
and drinking will be diverted for use at power plants at any site. The

56


Secretary, Ministry of Power, explained during evidence held on
02.11.2006:

“The process is before a site is offered we try to ascertain both
from the State Government and the Ministry of Water Resources
and the Central Water Commission that adequate water without
affecting the other uses like irrigation and drinking water that is
available for the power project because coal-based thermal power
project, as the hon. Chairman is fully aware, require water
consistently throughout its life. Unless this confirmation is achieved
both from the State Government level and the Central Water
Commission level. It is not proceeded with. So, that concern has
been fully addressed.”

4.2.2 When asked, how much water is expected to be required by
power projects in Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh per day. The
Ministry informed as follows:—

“Water requirement for Ultra Mega Power Project at Sasan in M.P
is estimated to be 3.6 lakhs m® per day.”

4.2.3 When enquired about the arrangements made by the
Government to meet the demand, the Ministry in a written reply
submitted:—

“For Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project water requirement is
envisaged to be met from the Govindbalab Pant Sagar (Rihand
Reservoir). State Irrigation Deptt. Government of M.P has confirmed
availability of water out of its share. Central Water Commission
had conducted inter-state meeting on setting up of 4000 MW Ultra
Mega Power Project at Sasan on sharing of water resources of
Rihand Reservoir on 6.7.2006.

The proposed source of water for Akaltara Ultra Mega Power
Project in Chhattisgarh is Mahanadi and Hasdeo rivers by
constructing barrages. The Government of Chhattisgarh is yet to
confirm the requirement of water for the Ultra Mega Power
Project.”

4.2.4 The Committee wanted to know whether water used for
irrigation and drinking would be diverted for use at these power
plants or not. The Ministry in a written reply clarified:—

“As per the discussions held in the inter state meeting called by
Central Water Commission the existing utilization of Rihand Water

57


by M.P and Chhattisgarh is 0.472 MAF for irrigation, power etc.
as against the total allocation of 0.7 MAF to erstwhile M.P. The
tequirement of Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project is about
0.108 MAF which can be easily accommodated within the overall
allocation to erstwhile M.P. As such water being used for existing
irrigation and drinking is not proposed to be diverted for Sasan
Ultra Mega Power Project.

For Akaltara Ultra Mega Power Project in Chhattisgarh, it is
proposed to construct new barrage to harness surplus water during
monsoon and hence existing supplies to irrigation and drinking
will not be affected.”

4.2.5 However, when asked about the Government of Chhattisgarh’s

objections on the development of UMPP in the State, The Government
of Chhattisgarh informed that despite its objection; the Government of
India and Government of Madhya Pradesh proceeded ahead with
providing water from Rihand river to UMPP at Sasan in Madhya
Pradesh.

4.2.6 In light of the objection made, the Ministry of Power was

asked about the factual position and its plan of action to resolve this
issue. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated:—

58

“Central Water Commission had conducted Inter-State Meetings
on sharing of water resources of Rihand reservoir for setting up of
UMPP at Sasan. Representatives of Government of Chhattisgarh
participated in these meetings. It was stated by the representative
of Chhattisgarh Government in these meetings that the division of
0.78 million acre feet of Rihand water allocated to erstwhile MLP.
should be on the basis of catchment area and that nearly 85% of
the drainage area of Rihand lies in their State. He further stated
that Chhattisgarh has no objection regarding the use of water from
Rihand reservoir for UMPP provided the basin State would not
oppose any project being taken up by Chhattisgarh in the catchment
area of the reservoir. CWC had observed that Band Sagar
Agreement, 1983 about distribution of water in Sone basin amongst
co-basin States is not based on catchment areas lying in the States.
Based on the deliberations, it was inter alia decided in the meeting
held on 6th July 2006 that the water requirement of 0.109 million
acre feet of UMPP could be met from the share of Rihand water
of MP by curtailing their future requirement of 0.216 million acre
feet earmarked for medium irrigation projects.”


(iii) Allocation of power from UMPPs to states

4.3.1 When asked whether the State Government of Gujarat has
signed any agreement regarding procurement of power from the power
generated by the Ultra Mega Power Project in the State, the State
Government informed:

“Yes, State Government through GUVNL has signed an Escrow
agreement for Procurement of 1900 MW power from power
generated by the Mega Power Project. PPA is also initiated by
GUVNL.”

4.3.2 In this regard, the Government of Chhattisgarh informed:

“Chhattisgarh has desired firm allocation of power from Ultra Mega
Power Project planned in Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. Despite
paying the commitment charges as per the requirement, Chhattisgarh
has been denied allocation of power from these projects.”

4.3.3 On being enquired about the reasons for denying allocation
of power to the State Government of Chhattisgarh in spite of paying
the commitment charges, the Ministry of Power explained:

“Chhatisgarh was allocated 250MW from Sasan UMPP. However,
due to non-payment of commitment advance within the stipulated
time frame, their share from Sasan UMPP was reallocated to MP.
Chhattisgarh’s payment of Rs. 2.5 crore received after due date
was duly refunded.”

4.3.4 Seeking one of the direct benefits from the project, the State
Government of Chhattisgarh has requested the Centre for higher
allocation of power to the host State. When asked about the policy of
the Centre to this effect and the response of the Centre to the request
made by the Government of Chhattisgarh, the Ministry in a post-
evidence reply stated:

“Allocation of Power from the UMPP proposed in Chhattisgarh
has not yet been made considering the fact that the State
Government had not confirmed the availability of land and water
for the UMPP project proposed in Chhattisgarh State. It may
however, be mentioned that major allocation of power from the
UMPP is being made to the host State only. Therefore, as and
when Chhattisgarh Government conveys its decision with regard
to tying up of necessary inputs, allocation from this Project would
be decided in consultation with the States while major portion
from the Project would be earmarked to Chhattisgarh.”

59


4.3.5 The Government of Orissa has demanded at least 1/3 power
from the UMPP to be developed in the State. Asked about the opinion
of the Ministry of Power in this regard the Ministry stated:

“From the Orissa UMPP an allocation of 1300 MW has been made
to Orissa which is about 1/3rd of the total capacity. The allocation
of power is decided on consensus being arrived at in consultation
with the States. Allocation of power largely depends on the
considerations of the project being in a particular region and
prevailing electricity shortages.”

4.3.6 Considering the fact that the host States have demanded
higher allocation of power, the Committee wanted to know as to
whether any formula has been laid down for allocation of power from
UMPPs to the States, the Ministry of Power stated:

“So far as these ultra mega-power projects are concerned, we
decided that let this be done by Power Grid Corporation of India
for which an integrated planning should be done along with the
CEA so that evacuation does not become an issue for these
investments because they are large investments. So many parallel
streams of discussions, to try to find solutions have been started
and one such parallel streams of discussions is to discuss with the
likely off-takers of this power.

Basically, the Ministry of Power facilitates - the PFC is facilitating;
but this exercise is being done on behalf of the distribution
companies or the distribution utilities of the State. In Rajasthan,
we have 3-4 distribution companies; we are working on their behalf;
in UP we have 3-4 distribution companies; in Andhra Pradesh,
there will be a few distribution companies. Wherever the SEBs
have been restructured in terms of distribution companies, we do
this. So, we are bringing the SEB distribution companies, the SEBs
and the State Governments into the picture.”

4.3.7 On this issue the Secretary, Ministry of Power further
explained during evidence:

“T will cover this point also as te how is the allocation done; this
does not follow the Gadgil formula which NTPC is doing. No, all
the 14-15 States have shown their interest in buying power. We
had several rounds of meetings with these States and we are
coming to a consensus as to who will take how much power, etc.
because unless we have a tentative idea of the off-take of this
power, we would not be able to do a good transmission system

60


project. In Orissa or in Madhya Pradesh where this power will
flow, they will put all these inputs into a computer and see how
the power system flow will be and see how the transmission lines
will emerge. On the basis of the discussions and the consensus
that we are arriving at, by now, we have fairly a good idea of
how much power these projects will have; it may require some
fine-tuning but we have fairly a good idea of how much power
would go to whom. We are also looking into the States’ ability to
service these off-takers of power.”

(iv) Free power to host States

4.4.1 The States of Orissa and Chhattisgarh have demanded 12%
free power to the host States on the lines of hydro power generation.
When asked about the Ministry’s views on this, the Secretary, Ministry
of Power stated during evidence held on 02.08.2006:

“At the same time, I may like to clarify that this question of free
power is not today there in thermal power projects nor in the
nuclear power projects. It is only in hydro, where 12 per cent free
power policy was introduced by the Government, and that too,
under the consideration that good part of this revenue would be
utilized to take care of the displacement problems, community
development problems in these States and in these areas.

Though we have been discussing with the States that this revenue
is not being utilized in that manner, the fact is that 12 per cent
free power equivalent revenue goes to the State, but utilization of
that revenue for the purpose for which it was primarily meant is
not happening. That is a different issue on which we will have a
presentation before this august Committee, sometimes later and
seek your guidance and assistance as to how to go about it.”

4.4.2 He further added:

“If we introduce this system, the whole thing opens up as a
Pandora Box and it will mean inevitable excessive increase in tariff;
12 per cent free power means 12 per cent increase in generation
tariff across the Board. It will have its eftect on distribution tariff
in a much bigger way. I am happy to report to this august
Committee that the hon. Chief Minister of Orissa did appreciate
the point made by our Minister and he is not insisting on it and
he says that definitely Orissa would be the one which would host
an ultra-mega project. Until that time a decision is taken on any
extent of free power, if at all, that will have to be in NDC as

61


for
the

national decision. It cannot be in one or other State. So, that point
is not there. By virtue of this we are proceeding our effort in
Orissa. All the States will be allocated power and that power they
could use, they could trade.”

4.4.3 Stating that the issue of 12% free power is the cause of delay
finalizing UMPP at Orissa & Chhattisgarh, the Secretary during
evidence held on 02.08.2006 explained:—

“As 1 said, the second pithead power station in Orissa, initially
the Chief Minister of Orissa did talk about 12 per cent free power.
When this issue was still not resolved, it would not have been
wise on our part to publicise. Once that issue has been done, we
have some evaluations to do, Last year we sent CEA team. We
notify Orissa as soon as confirmation from State is made available.
Akaltara, Chhattisgarh was another pithead power station but that
for the present we have put on hold because State is demanding
12% free power. We are discussing with the Government of
Chhattisgarh. It has not so far agreed by the State to totally take
away that 12 per cent free power request or demand.

With 12 per cent free power, obviously for the reason that I
informed the august Committee, it is not possible. We have 80,000
megawatt thermal capacity in the country. We are doing ultra mega-
projects and mega-projects in other parts of the country. So, we
cannot agree to 12 per cent free power without creating problems
all over. We are trying to resolve this issue with the Government
of Chhattisgarh. We are trying to tell them that they should not
insist on this. I am hopeful that we should be able to resolve this
issue and there would not be further delay in Akaltara project.”

44.4 On the broad issue of consulting State Goyernments in the

entire development process of UMPPs, the Secretary, Ministry of Power
during the evidence held on 02.08.2006 submitted before the
Committee:—

62

“It is not that we are not consulting them. I may also mention as
an approach to this whole subject, we are taking all the State
Governments fully into confidence. We have institutionalized the
mechanism of discussion at the Chief Secretary and my level. Now
we have also institutionalized another mechanism. The Principal
Energy Secretary of the State would take a periodic meeting on
issues concerning development of this project in so far as State
level things are concerned like public hearing for Pollution Control
Board, environmental clearance, land acquisition, relief issues,


District Forest Officers issues, any certification, water availability
and water clearance are concerned. These are the points which
were made in the beginning. In this type of initiative we are not
taking any chances.”

(v) Involvement Local issues in Development of UMPPs

45.1 The Committee, during the course of their study visit to
Maharashtra and Karnataka found that a number of local issues are
holding up the setting up of UMPPs. The local people of Tadri
(Karnataka) are not in favour of development of UMPP at Tadri. A
delegation led by Smt. Margaret Alva, the MLA and others met the
Committee and put forth their point of view on the issue as follows:—

“We have already got in the district four hydroelectric power plants,
one nuclear power plant; all are in one district. Now a sixth plant
is again sought to be located in the same district. Sir, 80 per cent
of the district is reserved forest. We have got added to this the
huge naval base, the Sea Bird Naval Base. All these projects have
taken away whatever land is available to the people. Almost, 1
think, one-lakh hectares of land has been taken away or submerged
or occupied. Thousands and thousands of families are in
rehabilitation camps and they have lost their livelihood. This is an
area near Tadri, which is one of the most sensitive and ecologically
important areas. We realize that power is important, but I think
they have to take into consideration the livelihoods of the local
people, the environment and the justice of dumping every single
power plant in one district which should have been developed
otherwise for tourism or something else.

The water resource identified for this project is the river called
Agnashini, one of the mother rivers which ecologically is very
sensitive and which is identified as one of the hotspots in terms
of biodiversity. It gives at least ten lakh families their daily bread
in terms of approximately 5000 to 6000 people in traditional fishing
in this river; and approximately, 2,000 to 2,500 people harvesting
shell crabs.

It also gives livelihood to about 1,500 people in terms of
aquaculture and about 1,000 people in salt making. Now, it would
bring in harm because of coal dust and fly ash into the river.
Apart from this, we have a high security seabird naval base within
15 nautical miles of this project site. This project would entail
bringing of coal. It would also be taking iron ore from Bellary, etc.

63


It is one of the most thickly populated area. Here, because of
these factors, we have been opposing this.”

45.2 The Government of Karnataka was asked about the response
of the State Government and the Ministry of Power to the objections/
concerns of the local people regarding development of the project at
the proposed site at Tadadi. The Government of Karnataka informed
the Committee as under

“Gcvernment of Karnataka has constituted a Committee consisting
of MP, MLAs and MLCs of Uttara Kannada District, some
Environmentalists and Local Leaders to clarify the doubts in the
minds of the Local People and to convince the Local People so
that they support for implementation of this project. The Process
is still on. Most of the opposition to the project is due to ignorance
about Thermal power plants. Some Environmentalists and some
persons who are involved in Shell collection have given false and
misleading information to the local Fishermen and have created a
scare that Fishermen will lose their livelihood. The replies of the
State Government to the objections are as follows:

(a) No, adverse impact is expected on surrounding Environment
as imported coal with very low Ash content of about 8 to 10%
(Indigenous Coal contains about 35% Ash) is proposed to be used
with advanced State of Art Technology. Entire fly Ash generated,
will be utilized in cement manufacturing units as well as other
value added products like bricks etc.,

(b) MoEF has prescribed certain guidelines and emission norms in
line with international practices. These shall be fully complied.
Also, Super Critical Units are proposed to be used in the plant so
as to minimize emission of flue gases.

(c) Orly make up water will be drawn from the river since closed
cycle system with cooling tower are proposed. In this system, there
will be no discharge of hot water into river. As such there will not
be any impact on aquatic life including fishing. However, this issue
and other environmental concern shall be studied in detail during
Environmental Impact Assessment Studies and suitable measures
shall be taker: as per this study report, so that fishing activity will
not be affected.

(d) Collection of Shells in the area acquired by Government of
Karnataka, which is under water, may be affected. However, people
cannot claim a right to remove shells from Government land.


(e) This site has been selected, taking into consideration availability
of land, possibility of developing Port for importing coal and
availability of water. Also, it is away from Ecologically sensitive
areas, Archaeological sites and Historical sites, etc.,

(0 Imported coal with low Ash content is proposed to be used
and particulate emission shall be kept much below permissible
limits. No such diseases are expected once the particulate emission
is kept under control. If it is true that every Thermal power plant
causes diseases, then all the Thermal power plants in India would
have to be shut down.

(g) Tree felling for the transmission lines shall be avoided while
finalizing the right of way for the transmission lines. In case trees
need to be cut, compensatory afforestration will be done as per
MoEF guidelines.”

4.5.3 During the study-visit of the Committee in October 2006, the
Committee visited the proposed site for the Ultra Mega Power Project
at Tadadi (Karnataka). The local MP (Smt. Margaret Alva), MLA, local
politicians and local people were present during the on-the-spot visit
of the Committee. The Committee were informed that the proposed
project site happened to be the second best natural site for paddy
growing, after Vietnam. Water at the site was also best suitable for
fishery. Area was also quite rich in salt pans. It was also informed to
the Committee that if the Tadadi Power Project comes up on this site,
around 10,000 families had to be displaced from this area and about
35,000 people might loose their livelihood. The area was also stated to
have rich mangrove forests and many good varieties of sea food were
also available there. The representatives of all the political parties,
almost, in unison opposed the proposed site for the proposed Ultra
Mega Power Project and requested the Committee that the same may
be shifted at some other suitable place in the State. The Committee
put across the concerns and fears of the local people to the officials of
State Government and also to the representatives of the Ministry of
Power for taking appropriate action in the matter and to chose an
alternative site.

45.4 The Committee sought clarification from the Ministry as to
whether the issues involved in development of Project at Tadri in
Karnataka have since been resolved and if not, the action plan being
contemplated by the Government in this regard, the Ministry in a
written reply submitted before the Committee:

“The local issues involved in the development of project at Tadri
are yet to be resolved by the State Government.

65


Hon’ble Chief Minister of Karnataka had conducted a meeting on
28 May 2006 with the M.P, MLAs, MLCs of Uttara Kannada District,
environmentalists, representatives of fisherman and other persons
from Uttara Kannada District, CEA, PFC and Government of
Karnataka to discuss the local issues regarding development of
UMPP at Tadri. After hearing all the parties, Hon’ble Chief Minister
constituted a Committee consisting of M.P, MLAs and other stake
holders CEA, PFC and Government of Karnataka, KPCL,
Dy. Commissioner Uttara Kannada District to examine various
issues pertaining to the proposal. Three meetings of the Committee
have already been held. It has been proposed by CEA/PFC/
Government of Karnataka that a Study may be carried out to
assess impact of the power plant on the environment by reputed
consultant. However, no decision in this regard has so far been
taken. Parliamentary Standing Committee on Energy had already
visited the site on 10.10.2006 and had interaction with the local
public. Further action on this project would be taken after the
local issues are redressed and Govt. of Karnataka confirms the
same.”

4.5.5 The Government of Maharashtra informed the Committee
that the local people are agitating against the project. When the
Committee enquired about the issues involved in Maharashtra UMPP
and measures taken or being taken to address them, the Ministry
informed:

“Local people have raised environmental issues relating to Alphanso
mango which are being addressed by State Govt. Bidding process
in respect of Girye UMPP (Maharashtra) is contingent upon
clearance from the State Government after resolving the local
environmental issues.”

4.5.6 The Ministry further added:

“The apprehensions of the local residents are related to the
environment impact of the project, particularly with regard to the
Alphonso mango crop for which this area is well-known. A
consultant, M/s Desien was appointed for environmental studies
but was not allowed to carry out the work at site by the local
people. In the wake of continuing shortages in the State,
Maharashtra Government has been requested again on 10.05.07 to
suggest additional sites in the State.”

4.5.7 In view of the local issues involved in the setting up of
UMPP, the Committee understand that the State Government of

66


Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have suggested some alternative sites to
CEA for the purpose.

4.5.8 The Committee observe that development of Ultra Mega
Power Projects require support and coordination between the various
players involved i.e, the Central Government, State Governments,
PEC, project developers, Consultants, etc. Lack of support from any
of these players can lead to delay in the development of these
projects and as such can derail capacity addition programme and, in
turn, economic growth of the country as envisaged ~ because power
is the key driver for any growth agenda set for the country.

The Committee further observe with concern that the Ministry
of Power is facing some problems in finalisation of sites in States
such as Orisssa, Karnataka and Maharashtra. Though the Ministry
has stated that the State Electricity Boards and State Companies are
involved while the site is selected, the Committee, however, feel
that the involvement of the State Governments has just been a
formality. Central Electricity Authority (CEA) which had a major
role in selection of sites did not seem to have given a serious thought
before selecting project sites. As stated by the Government of Orissa
that the Government of India/CEA had “just intimated” to the State
Government about the identification of site. It implies that the State
Government was not involved in identification of site. Similarly, the
Government of ‘Chhattisgarh has stated that no formal consultations
with the State Government were held. Regarding the site in
Maharashtra, the statement of the Ministry that it was just one of
the probable sites and not the final one, raises questions as to the
manner in which the Central Government has gone about the
selection of sites for the UMPPs. The Committee feel that since the
State Governments have better knowledge of the feasibility of
making a particular land and other resources available for the
development of power projects - also considering the environmental
and other aspects - the State Governments should be involved in
the development process of UMPPs right from the conceptual stage.
This, in turn, will ensure that the projects are not unnecessarily
held up due to land and other related disputes. Further, the sites
should be formally announced only when the finality in this regard
has been reached - after the due consultation process - with the
respective State Government.

The Committee understand that in view of the local issues
involved in the setting up of UMPP at Tadri, the Central Government

is considering certain alternative sites for the purpose which is in

67


line with what the Committee also felt after their visit at the
Proposed site for UMPP at Tadri. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry of Power takes an urgent action in the matter so that
the UMPPs can be established both in Maharashtra and Karnataka
at the earliest, at the alternative sites.

4.5.9 The Committee observe that water requirement of Sasan
UMPP at Madhya Pradesh will be met from the Govindballabh Pant
Sagar (Rihand Reservoir). As stated by the Ministry of Power, water
used for drinking and irrigation will not be diverted in this case,

The Committee further observe that there was some dispute
between the Governments of Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh
regarding the use of water, required for Sasan UMPP in Madhya
Pradesh. The Government of Chhattisgarh had objected to the use
of water of Rihand reservoir for Sasan project. Thereafter, the Central
Water Commission had conducted Inter-State Meetings in which it
was decided that “the water requirement of 0.109 million acre feet
of UMPP could be met from the share of Rihand water of Madhya
Pradesh by curtailing their future requirement of 0.216 million acre
feet earmarked for medium irrigation projects.”

The Committee, therefore, desire that such disputes should be
resolved in advance so that the project developer may not have to
face any difficulty in availability of water at a later stage. If need
be, the concerned States should enter into a written agreement on
the use of water for UMPPs, to avoid any controversy in future,
which should be then made available to the developer.

4.5.10 The Committee observe that the ‘Host States’ have
demanded a major share from the power allocated from UMPPs in
the States. The Ministry while on its part has assured that major
allocation of power is made to the host State only, the Committee,
however, note that there is no particular formula for allocation of
power and it is done on the basis of consensus arrived at in
consultation with the State Governments. The Committee feel that it
leaves a lot of scope for bias. The Committee recommend that a
formula be devised by the Ministry according to which the host
State should get a reasonable share of the power generated from
UMPP located therein. This formula be devised by taking into
consideration various factors like power shortages in the State, status
of infrastructure for evacuation of power, etc. The Committee strongly
feel that the allocation on the basis of a formula should be
completely objective leaving no scope for any grievance from the

68


States. The Committee further want that the involvement of the State
Governments should be maintained by the Centre in the whole
process of development of UMPPs.

4.5.11 The Committee are concerned to note that the project at
Chhattisgarh is being held up because of the demand of 12% free
power made by the Government of Chhattisgarh. The Committee
understand that there is no policy regarding giving free power to
the Host States from the thermal projects as is the case with the
hydro projects. The Committee desire that this point should be
impressed upon all the Host States and Chhattisgarh in particular.
The delay on account of demand of the Chhattisgarh Government is
disheartening. The Committee desire that the matter be taken up
with the State Government and the issue be resolved at the earliest.
The Committee note that any demand for free power by State would
have to be borne by the electricity consumers by way of increased
tariff. This may even make the project economically unviable and
uncompetitive leading to dropping of the project. The Committee
desire that these facts should be clearly brought to the notice of the
States which are demanding free power from UMPPs.

4.5.12 The Committee observe that projects at Karnataka and
Maharashtra have been held up due to some objections from the
local people of the area. The people of Tadri in Karnataka are against
the development of Ultra Mega Project there because of this being
an ecologically sensitive area and also in view of the fact that this
area already has four hydroelectric power plants and one nuclear
plant. The local people also have a fear of losing their livelihood.
Now the Government of Karanataka has constituted an Expert
Committee on 28.05.2006 consisting of MP, MLAs and other
stakeholders, PFC and Government of Karnataka KPCL, etc. to
examine various issues involved. In one of the meetings of the
Committee, it is learnt that CEA/PFC/Government of Karnataka had
proposed that a study be carried out to assess impact of the power
plant on the environment by a reputed consultant. However no
decision in this regard has so far been taken. The Committee desire
that the Expert Committee expedite the process so that clear picture
in regard to the development of project emerges. The Committee
feel that engaging a consultant to carry out a study, as proposed by
CEA/PFC/Government of Karnataka should also be considered by
the Expert Committee. In case if it comes out that the development
of power project will have an adverse effect on the environment, an
alternative site be finalised at the earliest. Similarly in case of
Maharashtra where the local people have raised certain environmental

69


issues relating to the growing of Alphanso mangoes, the Committee
desire that the consultant appointed for carrying out environment
studies should submit its report at the earliest. Considering the
importance of these projects, the Committee strongly recommend
that these projects should not be unduly held up and finalised at
the earliest in the larger interest of the country.

The Committee also desire that before announcing any site for
UMPP, it should be ensured that there is a broad consensus amongst
the various stakeholders for a particular site. The cases of generation
of opposition after the announcement of sites as that of Tadri in
Karnataka and Girye in Maharashtra should not be allowed to
happen. The Committee desire that all the local issues should be
decided in advance by State Governments, before offering a site to
set up UMPP.

New Dew; GURUDAS KAMAT,
a Chairman,
Asvina 16, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

70


STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY CONTAINED

IN THE REPORT

SL. Reference Conclusions/Recommendations
No. Para No.
of the
Report
1 2 3
Ay 2.10.19 The Committee welcome the new initiative of

the Ministry of Power to embark on the path
of huge capacity addition by way of developing
UMPPs. Being a new concept, there are no
models to emulate. Hence, the improvements
will have to be made by learning through
experience. Failure of capacity addition targets
in the 8th, 9th and 10th Plan, by the Private
Sector leaves much to be desired. The
achievement of Private Sector in all these Plans
have been less than 30% of the targets. This
leaves ample scope for soul searching on the
part of Government. The Committee
recommend that the factors which led to the
debacle of capacity addition targets particularly
capacity addition by the Private Sector should
be analysed by the Government in depth and
corrective steps in way of development of
UMPPs be taken in right earnest. Going by the
experience in the award of Sasan Ultra Mega
Power Project, the Committee feel that certain
changes are warranted in the bidding guidelines
to plug the loopholes therein, and making them
foolproof. In the considered opinion of the
Committee, the precious time lost in the Sasan
Project on this count is simply disconcerting -
considering the immense strategic importance
and generation potential of the development
of these projects. The Committee desire this
project to see light of the day as early as

71


3

2,

2.10.20

possible. They would further like the Ministry
to try in all sincerity and make up for the time
lost owing to this controversy so that this
Project comes up as scheduled earlier.

Further, since the whole purpose of resorting
to competitive bidding is to encourage
competition, the Committee are of the opinion
that the developers who have already bagged
a project should not be allowed to bid for
another project, on the basis of the same
balancesheet on which he has got one project.
However, if the balancesheet is so strong that
it can meet the eligibility criteria for the two
Projects together, they may be permitted to bid.
Because besides encouraging competition, it will
also ensure that the power sector is not
monopolized by only a few companies.

The Committee had expressed concern in their
20th Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Power for the year 2007-08 as
regards the coming up of UMPPs on time was
concerned as was envisaged by the Ministry of
Power earlier. While taking review of the
functioning of the Ministry of Power similar
concerns have also been reported to be
expressed by the Prime Minister in regard to
meeting targets by the Ministry of Power in
the setting up of UMPPs.

Thus, the Committee feel deeply concerned
with the pace of progress in the development
of UMPPs. Initially the Government had
announced four UMPPs in the Budget for the
year 2006-07, with the intention to award these
Projects before December, 2006. Out of these,
the Government was able to stick to the
deadline with regard to only two Projects,
namely Sasan and Mundra. Both of these
projects were awarded before the target of 3ist
December 2006 — though further progress on

72


3

Sasan project suffered due to the controversy
regarding the validity of the award of the
project. The remaining two projects - one in
Andhra Pradesh and another in Orissa were
scheduled for being awarded by 30th April
2007. The submission date for RFP for Andhra
Pradesh project has been postponed and
regarding the project to be developed in Orissa,
the site is yet to be finalised.

Later five more projects have been added to
the list. However the way in which their
development is progressing leaves much to be
desired. In most of the cases selection of site is
the main reason for delay. There are agitations
by local people in Karnataka and Maharashtra
and certain technical problems in Tamil Nadu.
The Committee feel that the State Governments
should have been associated with the selection
of sites in the beginning itself to avoid any
last minute disagreement on the sites. The
Committee desire that the sites for UMPPs
should be finalized at the earliest so that these
projects can come up within 12th Plan as
envisaged and promised. The site for UMPPs
should be selected only after the State
Government has agreed to the same.

The Committee observe that in PPA for Mundra
Project 64 months, that is more than five years,
have been given to the developers for
commissioning the first unit of the power
project and the last unit would be
commissioned after 88 months, that is after
more than seven years from signing the PPA.
The Committee feel that in the present age of
fast development it should not take such a long
time for setting up of these projects.

The Committee further note that this time
schedule also depends on time taken in

73


3

5.

2.10.21

obtaining necessary clearances and acquisition
of land for the project; time taken in bidding
process and time schedule submitted by the
bidder in his bid. There is no time limit fixed
within which clearances shall be available and
the land shall be acquired. In addition to this,
it has been stated that time fixed for start of
various units would be calculated from signing
of PPA. The Committee, therefore, feel that such
an open ended fixation of completion schedule
will not serve any purpose. The Committee
thus desire that exact dates/periods should be
provided for setting up of each project at the
time of issue of Letter of Intent and penalties
should be provided in case of default so that
the projects can be set up in a time-bound
manner.

The Committee further desire that there should
be proper coordination between the Central and
State Governments so that the issues involved
in the various projects can be resolved and
more so, in future the coordination between
the Central and State Governments should
begin right from the conceptual stage of the
project itself, Considering the urgent need of
power, the Committee strongly recommend that
these projects should become fully operational
by all means in 12th Plan itself. Recently
constituted National Power Project Management
Board should also, in particular, be assigned
the responsibility to ensure the timely
completion of all these projects. For this, it is
very important that this Board should be
sufficiently empowered to take project related
decisions and also it must be ensured that these
are implemented without any bottlenecks from
any quarters.

The Committee observe that the sites for the
setting up of the coastal projects have been

74


3

4,

2.10.22

selected by keeping in mind the import of coal
for these projects. The Committee, however,
observe that the ports at these locations do not
have enough infrastructure to handle the huge
volumes of the imported coal. The Ministry of
Power, while acknowledging this, has stated
that at existing ports additional facilities can
be created to handle the imported coal and at
some locations new ports could also be set up.
It implies that the required infrastructure for
some of these projects is yet to be developed.
The Committee feel that delay in the
development of infrastructure can lead to
further delay in development of UMPPs, which
in turn, can derail the capacity addition targets
and jeopardise growth of the economy as such.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all
works relating to development of infrastructure
particularly the port capacity to handle the
huge volumes of imported coal be completed
in a time bound manner and the same should
be reflected in L.O.I. etc. The Committee also
desire that the various project related works
which are to be facilitated by SPVs, should also
be made available by the time L.O.I. is issued
to the successful bidder.

The Committee note that the pit head Ultra
Mega Power Projects will be based on domestic
coal, whereas the coastal projects would be
based on the imported coal. The justifications
given by the Ministry for using imported coal
are that the indigenous resources of coal are
limited, which, need to be conserved for the
future use and imported coal would be more
cost competitive at Western & Southern coasts,
as compared to domestic coal.

However, the Committee observe that each
project would require around 12-14 million
tones of imported coal per-annum. Considering

75


5.

2.10.23

3.7.6

3

the current market price of coal in the
international market, the expenditure on
importing coal would thus be quite huge.
Though the Mundra Project—the first UMPP
to be developed—will run on imported coal
only, the Committee desire that techno-
economic feasibility study of using imported
coal after blending it with indigenous coal,
which is being examined, should be expedited
and completed at the earliest so that rest of
the coastal projects could be planned with the
option of using the blended coal.

The Committee observe that all the Ultra Mega
Power Projects which have been envisaged by
the Government are thermal projects. The
Committee note that there is a huge hydro
power potential in our country—which yet
remains to be exploited. Moreover, use of coal
for power generation should be done keeping
in mind the future requirement of coal for other
purposes as well. Hence, the Committee feel
that a policy for hydro Ultra Mega Power
Projects should also be formulated by the
Government on top priority. In the recently held
Conference of Chief Ministers, the
Prime Minister had asked the Union Power
Minister to set up a Task Force on hydro power
to lend special focus on this area. The
Committee desire that this Task force be also
assigned the task of working out the modalities
for the development of hydro based Ultra Mega
Power Projects. Development of UMPPs based
on hydel power can greatly benefit the North-
Eastern region of the country—which abounds
in the hydel potential.

The Committee note that under the Payment
Security Mechanism for UMPPs in case of
default by any procurer there is a clause of
third party sale. As per this clause other

76


3

procurers would have the first right to buy
power share for which payment default has
occurred. However, in case the other procurers
are unwilling to buy default power, the same
would be sold in the all India market through
prevailing ‘open access’ in transmission either
directly or through traders. The Committee,
however, feel that for selling it in the market
there is need for the speedy and proper
implementation of ‘open access’ in States as
envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003.
Further, in order to avail the ‘open access’—
both for Intra and Inter-State open access,
without any infrastructural bottlenecks, the
transmission system (national grid) needs to be
suitably strengthened and congestion points be
removed. Powergrid is stated to be carrying
out the open access system study. The
transmission system will be augmented
accordingly to ensure evacuation of power from
these UMPPs. The Committee desire that this
study should be completed within a specific
time frame so that the transmission system is
ready by the time the first unit of UMPPs
becomes operational. Further the States,
particularly, the States procuring electricity from
the UMPPs should be able to provide open
access by 2009 as per the Electricity Act, 2003.
To achieve this goal, the Committee recommend
that all efforts in this direction be made on in
a mission mode manner.

The Committee further observe that for
successful implementation of such a payment
security arrangement, it is essential to speed
up the pace of electricity reforms in the States.
The Committee feel that improving the
commercial viability of the power sector in the
States is very important for the success of such
a payment security arrangement. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that concrete
steps be taken in this direction urgently.

We


3

3.7.7

Evacuation of power from UMPPs is another
area which need attention from the beginning
itself as it also needs large investments. The
Committee note that Power Grid Corporation
of India Ltd. (PGCIL) has been assigned this
job. The Committee desire that advance
planning and provision of funds should be
done by PGCIL in consultation with CEA so
that there are no bottlenecks in evacuation of
power. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that the private investment should be
encouraged in this sector. At the same time,
the Committee feel that State distribution
utilities should be encouraged to take up
transmission and distribution network in their
respective States.

The Committee note that there is an
apprehension of monopolization of power sector
by the developers of UMPPs. It has been
suggested to the Committee that to encourage
competition UMPPs should be asked to sell
certain percentage of their capacity in the open
market. Also that there should be a provision
to buy back/take over of the plant in case the
developers resort to some sort of blackmail, etc.
The Ministry of Power has informed the
Committee that the Electricity Act provides for
sufficient powers to the Regulatory Commission
to issue directions to the licencee. The
Committee, however, feel that this aspect needs
to be gone into and desire that specific powers
may also be provided to the State Governments
to deal with such situations.

The Committee are, however, not satisfied with
the view of the Ministry of Power that in case
of failure of developer as per provision of
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), lenders will
have the option to step in his shoes, to run the
plant. The Committee, desire that specific
provisions should be made in PPA/LOI as to

78


3

3.7.8

what action the Government/Regulatory
Commission shall be authorized to take in case
the promoters of the project fail to perform as
per the agreement. The Committee further
desire that a report on the status of
development of all UMPPs; reasons for delay
in their development, if any, and the penalt
imposed in case of delays should be furnished
to the Committee every 6 months by the
Government.

The Committee feel that since the projects will
be set up in States and State utilities are the
procurers of power generated from these
projects, there can be a provision in the contract
that in case the developer fails to develop the
projects as per the provision of PPA, the
respective State Governments would be entitled
to take over the project and run it and refer
the matter to the concerned Regulatory
Commission for final settlement.

The UMPPs will be based on super-critical
technology. As stated by the Ministry of Power,
there are no constraints in the availability of
super-critical technology for use in UMPPs as
it is used worldwide. The developers can source
the equipment from any manufacturer either
from abroad or from indigenous manufacturer.
BHEL, the only indigenous manufacturer which
provides equipment for power sector, has
recently made a foray into manufacturing
super-critical technology based equipment by
entering into collaboration with Alstom and
Siemens. The Committee while noting this with
satisfaction desire that such collaborations
should be suitably encouraged in the future as
well. The Committee feel that Government
should encourage other indigenous
manufacturers/players since BHEL already has
its hands full. The Committee, therefore,

79


10.

3.7.9

3.7.10

3

recommend that some new companies should
also be encouraged to be set up or already
existing companies be encouraged to enter into
joint ventures with foreign manufacturers of
super-critical technology—in order to ensure
that this technology is easily available in the
country.

Development of UMPPs at some sites would
involve displacement of the local people. The
Committee note that it has been provided in
the tender document that every developer will
meet the requirement of National Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Policy while putting his cost
together. The cost of R&R is to be decided by
respective State Governments and the same will
be borne by the developer. The Committee
further note that packages for Sasan and
Mundra UMPPs have been finalized by the
respective State Governments. However, the
Comunittee note the provision in PPA that any
change in R&R package is to be adjusted in
tariff under ‘Change in Law’ in PPA. The
Committee feel that this provision can be
misused and the major part of R&R expenditure
can be adjusted in tariff by the corrupt officials
and the developers. Hence, it is suggested that
a limit of say 5 to 7% should be placed to
which extent the R&R cost can be adjusted in
tariff. If the expenditure exceeds this limit, it
should be borne by the State Government and
the developer. The Committee also desire that
for the remaining projects R&R studies should
be done in advance as soon as the sites are
finalized so that accurate estimates can be given
to the developers at the time of bidding itself.

The Committee note that due care has to be
taken of the environment impact of such large
UMPPs. These thermal stations are likely to
generate huge amount of ash and large carbon



3

ll.

45.8

dioxide emissions. The Ministry of Power has
stated that since these UMPPs shall be using
super-critical technology and imported coal
with less ash content, the environment impact
will be duly taken care of. The Committee
desire that there should be strict compliance of
environmental norms and ash disposal should
be decided in advance of the generation in each
case. The Committee further desire that the use
of fly ash in cement industry, building of roads
etc. and other projects should be encouraged.

The Committee observe that development of
Ultra Mega Power Projects require support and
coordination between the various players
involved i.e, the Central Government, State
Governments, PFC, project developers,
Consultants, etc. Lack of support from any of
these players can lead to delay in the
development of these projects and as such can
derail capacity addition programme and, in
turn, economic growth of the country as
envisaged—because power is the key driver for
any growth agenda set for the country.

The Committee further observe with concern
that the Ministry-of Power is facing some
problems in finalisation of sites in States such
as Orisssa, Karnataka and Maharashtra. Though
the Ministry has stated that the State Electricity
Boards and State Companies are involved
while the site is selected, the Committee,
however, feel that the involvement of the
State Governments has just been a formality.
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) which had
a major role in selection of sites did not seem
to have given a serious thought before selecting
project sites. As stated by the Government of
Orissa that the Government of India/CEA had
“just intimated” to the State Government about
the identification of site. It implies that the

81


3

2

45.9

State Government was not involved in
identification of site. Similarly, the Government
of Chhattisgarh has stated that no formal
consultations with the State Government were
held. Regarding the site in Maharashtra, the
statement of the Ministry that it was just one
of the probable sites and not the final one,
raises questions as to the manner in which the
Central Government has gone about the
selection of sites for the UMPPs. The Committee
feel that since the State Governments have
better knowledge of the feasibility of making a
particular land and other resources available
for the development of power projects—also
considering the environmental and other
aspects—the State Governments should be
involved in the development process of UMPPs
right from the conceptual stage. This, in turn,
will ensure that the projects are not
unnecessarily held up due to land and other
related disputes. Further, the sites should be
formally announced only when the finality in
this regard has been reached—after the due
consultation process—with the respective State
Government.

The Committee understand that in view of the
local issues involved in the setting up of UMPP
at Tadri, the Central Government is considering
certain alternative sites for the purpose which
is in line with what the Committee also felt
after their visit at the proposed site for UMPP
at Tadri. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Power takes an urgent action in
the matter so that the UMPPs can be
established both in Maharashtra and Karnataka
at the earliest, at the alternative sites.

The Committee observe that water requirement
of Sasan UMPP at Madhya Pradesh will be met
from the Govindbalab Pant Sagar (Rihand
Reservoir). As stated by the Ministry of Power,

82


3

13,

4.5.10

water used for drinking and irrigation will not
be diverted in this case.

The Committee further observe that there was
some dispute between the Governments of
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh regarding
the use of water, required for Sasan UMPP in
Madhya Pradesh. The Government of
Chhattisgarh had objected to the use of water
of Rihand reservoir for Sasan project. Thereafter,
the Central Water Commission had conducted
Inter-State Meetings in which it was decided
that “the water requirement of 0.109 million
acre feet of UMPP could be met from the share
of Rihand water of Madhya Pradesh by
curtailing their future requirement of
0.216 million acre feet earmarked for medium
irrigation projects.”

The Committee, therefore, desire that such
disputes should be resolved in advance so that
the project developer may not have to face any
difficulty in availability of water at a later stage.
If need be, the concerned States should enter
into a written agreement on the use of water
for UMPPs, to avoid any controversy in future,
which should be then made available to the
developer.

The Committee observe that the ‘Host States’
have demanded a major share from the power
allocated from UMPPs in the States. The
Ministry while on its part has assured that
major allocation of power is made to the host
State only, the Committee, however, note that
there is no particular formula for allocation of
power and it is done on the basis of consensus
arrived at in consultation with the State
Governments. The Committee feel that it leaves
a lot of scope for bias. The Committee
recommend. that a formula be devised by the

83


5

14.

15.

45.11

45.12

Ministry according to which the host State
should get a reasonable share of the power
generated from UMPP located therein. This
formula be devised by taking into consideration
various factors like power shortages in the
State, status of infrastructure for evacuation of
power, etc. The Committee strongly feel that
the allocation on the basis of a formula should
be completely objective leaving no scope for
any grievance from the States. The Committee
further want that the involvement of the State
Governments should be maintained by the
Centre in the whole process of development of
UMPPs.

The Committee are concerned to note that the
project at Chhattisgarh is being held up because
of the demand of 12% free power made by the
Government of Chhattisgarh. The Committee
understand that there is no policy regarding
giving free power to the Host States from the
thermal projects as is the case with the hydro
Projects. The Committee desire that this point
should be impressed upon all the Host States
and Chhattisgarh in particular. The delay on
account of demand of the Chhattisgarh
Government is disheartening. The Committee
desire that the matter be taken up with the
State Government and the issue be resolved at
the earliest. The Committee note that any
demand for free power by State would have
to be borne by the electricity consumers by way
of increased tariff. This may even make the
project economically unviable and
uncompetitive leading to dropping of the
project. The Committee desire that these facts
should be clearly brought to the notice of the
States which are demanding free power from
UMPFPs.

The Committee observe that projects at
Karnataka and Maharashtra have been held up



3

due to some objections from the local people
of the area. The people of Tadri in Karnataka
are against the development of Ultra Mega
Project there because of this being an
ecologically sensitive area and also in view of
the fact that this area already has four
hydroelectric power plants and one nuclear
plant. The local people also have a fear of
losing their livelihood. Now the Government
of Karanataka has constituted an Expert
Committee on 28.05.2006 consisting of MP,
MLAs and other stakeholders, PFC and
Government of Karnataka KPCL, etc. to
examine various issues involved. In one of the
meetings of the Committee, it is learnt that
CEA/PEC/Government of Karnataka had
proposed that a study be carried out to assess
impact of the power plant on the environment
by a reputed consultant. However no decision
in this regard has so far been taken. The
Committee desire that the Expert Committee
expedite the process so that clear picture in
regard to the development of project emerges.
The Committee feel that engaging a consultant
to carry out a study, as proposed by CEA/
PFC/Government of Karnataka should also be
considered by the Expert Committee. In case if
it comes out that the development of power
project will have an adverse effect on the
environment, an alternative site be finalised at
the earliest. Similarly in case of Maharashtra
where the local people have raised certain
environmental issues relating to the growing
of Alphanso Mangoes, the Committee desire
that the consultant appointed for carrying out
environment studies should submit its report
at the earliest. Considering the importance of
these projects, the Committee strongly
recommend that these projects should not be
unduly held up and finalised at the earliest in
the larger interest of the country.

85


3

The Committee also desire that before
announcing any site for UMPP, it should be
ensured that there is a broad consensus
amongst the various stakeholders for a
particular site. The cases of generation of
opposition after the announcement of sites as
that of Tadri in Karnataka and Girye in
Maharashtra should not be allowed to happen.
The Committee desire that all the local issues
should be decided in advance by State
Governments, before offering a site to set up
UMPP.

86


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE 22ND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON
2ND AUGUST, 2006 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’,

PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
. Shri Prashanta Pradhan
Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
', Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Kiren Rijiju
. Shri M. Shivanna
. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
. Shri M.K. Subba
. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Vedprakash P.Goyal
15. Shri Bimal Jalan
16. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
17. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
18. Shri Motilal Vora
19. Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam

weaeananeren

rPRer
S2RES

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri PK. Bhandari — Joint Secretary

2. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary


WInesses

Ministry of Power

1. Shri R.V. Shahi — Secretary (Power)

2. Shri Ajay Shankar — Addl. Secretary

3. Shri U.N. Panjiar — Addl, Secretary

4. Shri Harish Chandra — Joint Secretary

5. Shri 6.8. Pradhan — Joint Secretary

6. Shri Arvind Jadhav — Joint Secretary

7. Shri A.K. Kutty — Joint Secretary

8. Shri Mrutunjay Sahoo — Joint Secretary

9. Shri Rakesh Nath — Chairperson, Central
Electricity Authority

16. Dr. V.K. Garg — CMD, Power Finance
Corporation

वा, Shri Anil Kumar Lakhina — CMD, Rural Electrification
Corporation

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed a delegation from
Karnataka led by Shrimati Margret Alva, Secretary of Ministry of Power
and other officials accompanying him to the sitting of the Committee
and apprised them of the provision of Direction 58, of Directions by
the Speaker.

3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the grievances of the delegation
from Karnataka on the proposed site of Ultra Mega Power project at
Tadadi in Karnataka. They expressed their apprehensions regarding
the development of power project at the proposed site due to many
reasons which inter alia includes, fear of losing their livelihood (as the
area has rich paddy fields and is also the best for the fisheries) and
non-provision of satisfactory alternate employment, adverse impact on
the environment of the ecologically important area and tourism as
also non-preferential treatment given to the people of the district with
respect to the power generated from the power projects already located
in the district. The Committee were informed that in addition to the
four hydroelectric projects and one nuclear power project, this was
going to be the sixth power plant in the same district. The delegation
also submitted a written memorandum to the Committee to this effect
and also invited the Committee to have an on-the-spot study visit of
the proposed site for the Ultra Mega Power Project. The delegation

88


wanted this proposed project to be shifted to another more viable area
in the State after proper study.

The delegation then withdrew.

4. Thereafter, the officials of Ministry of Power gave a powerpoint
presentation on ‘Ultra Mega Power Projects’. It was followed by
discussion with them. The following points inter alia came up for
detailed discussion:—

(i) Share of the concerned States in the power generated by
Ultra Mega Power Projects.

(ii) Environmental impact of these power projects.

(iii) Criteria for adopting a particular model by the Government
regarding developing these power projects.

(iv) Issues involved in the availability of imported coal.
(v) Cost at each stage of the development of these Projects.

5. The members raised some other queries also which were
answered by the representatives of the Ministry of Power.

6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

The Witnesses then withdrew.

The Committee then adjourned.

89


APPENDIX II

MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2006-07) HELD ON
2nd NOVEMBER, 2006 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO.‘139’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1615 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
‘MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

. Shri Kiren Rijiju

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

७ enaneon

Pe
BO

Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
13. Shri Bimal Jalan
14, Dr. K. Kasturirangan
15. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
16. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri PK. Bhandari - Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan _ Deputy Secretary


Witnesses

Ministry of Power

5 “मे Shri R.V. Shahi — _ Secretary (Power)
2. Shri Ajay Shankar — Addl. Secretary
3. Shri U.N. Panjiar — Addl. Secretary
4. Shri Harish Chandra — Joint Secretary

5. Shri A.K. Kutty — Joint Secretary

6. Shri Mrutunjay Sahoo — Joint Secretary

7: Shri Rakesh Nath — Chairperson, CEA
8. Dr. V.K. Garg — CMD, PFC

2, In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, a Member of the Committee, under Rule 258 of the
Rule of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha to act as
Chairman for the sitting. The Chairman, welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Power to the sitting of the Committee and apprised
them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. The officials of Ministry of Power gave a powerpoint
presentation on the subject “Ultra Mega Power Project” which was
followed by discussion. The following points were covered in the
discussion:-

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)
(xi)

(xii)

(xiii)

Issues involved in choosing the sites for development of
Ultra Mega Power projects.

Arrangements made by the Government regarding
availability of water for use at various sites.

Rehabilitation and resettlement policy of the Government
relating to Ultra Mega Power Projects.

Issues involved in the import of coal for coastal power
Projects..

Power Tariff from these Projects.

Use of super-critical technology in the development of these
Projects.

Environmental impact of these Projects in terms of emission
of carbon-dioxide.

Provision of buyback in the terms and conditions relating
to the projects in case they are found to be non-performing/
under performing.

91


(xiv) Issue of allowing competition throughout instead of allowing
only at the initial stage.

(xv) Role of hydel projects under ‘Ultra Mega Power Projects’

4. The members raised some other queries also which were
answered by the representatives of the Ministry of Power.

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Witnesses withdrew and the Committee then adjourned.)


APPENDIX पा

MINUTES OF THE 11TH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2006-07) HELD ON
14th MAY, 2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailash Baitha

. Prof. Chander Kumar

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

CP RPNATAR YD

Pe
pS

Rajya Sabha

12. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A.Heptulla
13. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
14. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri PK. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri J.S. Chauhan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — _ Deputy Secretary

93


WITNESSES

Ministry of Power

CP ONaneroOn pe

me
=)

2.

. Shri Anil Razdan — Secretary (Power)
. Shri Harish Chandra — Senior Advisor

. Shri Anil Kumar — Addl. Secretary

. Shri Ashok Kumar Khurana — Addl. Secretary

. Shri G.B. Pradhan — Joint Secretary

. Shri Mrutunjay Sahoo — Joint Secretary

. Shri A.K. Kutty — Joint Secretary

. Shri J.S. Kawale — Joint Secretary

. Shri Rakesh Nath — Chairperson, CEA
. Dr. V.K. Garg — CMD, PFC

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Power to the sitting of the Committee and apprised
them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. The officials of Ministry of Power gave a powerpoint
presentation on the subject “Ultra Mega Power Project” which was
followed by a discussion thereon. The following points were inter alia
covered in the discussion:

@

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(vy)
(vi)

Provision of penalty clause in case of delays in the
development of UMPPs.

The time-schedule for the development/completion of
UMPPs.

Fuel linkages for these projects.

Concessions sought by the host States, where these projects
are to be located.

Delay in the award of Sasan UMPP.

Role of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and the
State Electricity Regulatory Commission in fixation of tariff
for UMPPs.

4.4 copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Witnesses withdrew and the Committee then adjourned.)


APPENDIX IV

MINUTES OF THE 2nd SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON
1st OCTOBER, 2007 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1200 hours to 1300 hours,

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

1. Shri Kailash Baitha

2. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

3. Shri Mohan Jena

4, Prof. Chander Kumar

6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

8. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

9. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

10. Shri Kiren Rijiju

11. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

12, Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

13. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Rajya Sabha

14. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

15. Shri Bimal Jalan

16, Dr. K. Kasturirangan

17, Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha

18. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

19. Shri Motilal Vora

20. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri J.S. Chauhan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
4, Smt. Juby Amar — Under Secretary

95


At the outset, the Chairman Standing Committee on Energy
welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee.

2. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 22nd
Report on the subject “Ultra Mega Power Projects” pertaining to the
Ministry of Power.

३. The Committee adopted the draft Report with minor additions/
amendments as suggested by the Members of the Committee.

4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Report after incorporating the changes suggested by the Members of
the Committee and also by making conesquential changes arising out
of factual verification, if any, by the Ministry of Power and also to
present the same to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha.

5. The issue of power trading by States in the context of power to
be generated by UMPPs and the role of CERC in this regard also
came in for focused discussion. It was, however, decided that this
issue might be taken up separately by the Committee for which CERC
may also be called for oral evidence.

The Committee then adjourned.

96