STANDING COMMITTEE

? g ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-fifth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-2009]

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


TWENTY-NINTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-fifth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-2009]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.2.2009

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


Price : Rs. 95.00

© 2009 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


Carter I

Cuarrer II

Cuarter IIT

Cuarter IV

Cuarrer V

CONTENTS

Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration ....

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ....

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 27.1.2009....

Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 25th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) ८

PAGE

(iii)
(v)

41

72

74

85

86

88

()


SEG 2 छत ५६, 6 Be BR हा
छे छ॑ छ थे #छ छ कफ Bp S

21.

“Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 18.12.2008.
“* Re-Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 9.1.2009.

0 ie 91 9 9 थे

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTES

ON ENERGY (2008-09)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Smt. Susmita Bauri**

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

. Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar*

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

Vacant

(iii


Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
23. Dr. Bimal Jalan
24. Shri Prakash Javadekar
25. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
26. Shri Anil H. Lad***
27. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin तन Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Juneja — Committee Officer

“Nominated wef. 15th January, 2009.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standirg Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 29th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 25th
Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Power.

2. The 25th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd April 2008. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
20th August, 2008.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 27th January, 2009.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the 25th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-Il.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Detxi; GURUDAS KAMAT,
January 27, 2009 Chairman,

Magha 7, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


CHAPTER I

REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the ‘Twenty-fifth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-09.

2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
22.04.2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.
It contained 29 Recommendations/Observations.

3. Action taken notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SL Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Total=21
(Chapter-Il)

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. 9.
Total=01
(Chapter-II)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
teplies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 8, 16, 23, 25.
Total=06
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

91. No. 5.
Total=01
(Chapter-V)


4. The Committee desire that the utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported back to the Committee in
time along with reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations:

Utilization of Plan Allocation
(Recommendation 51. No. 1, Para No. 2.1.11)

6. The Committee observed that during the year 2007-08, the
utilisation of Plan outlays had not kept pace with the allocations.
Though, the budgetary allocations were being hiked year after year,
yet, due to slippages in various programmes, the same were not being
fully utilised. The Budget Estimates for the year 2007-08, including
TEBR were Rs. 33153,26 crore while the Revised Estimates were kept
at Rs. 30690 crore which was 92.57% of Budget Estimates. The
utilisation of funds earmarked for various schemes till 25th February,
2008, was only Rs. 18054.36 crore, showing a utilisation of only 58.83%
of the Revised Estimates. The Committee noted that the major under-
utilisation of Plan outlays reflected in Revised Estimates was in the
annual plan of NTPC, SJVNL, NEEPCO and other Schemes of the
Ministry of Power including non-formulation of the new Scheme of
Equity Gap Funding (Rs. 289.49 crore), merging of the features of the
scheme of consultancy charges for APDRP project (Rs. 271 crore) and
dropping of scheme of preparation of DPRs of new Hydro Electric
Schemes (Rs. 60.75 crore). The Committee had feared that under-
utilisation of Plan outlays by power generating companies during
2007-08 would further delay the execution of projects as the quarterly
utilisation of funds upto the third quarter during 2007-08 has only
been 46%. Moreover, non-utilisation of funds earmarked for the
preparation of DPRs of new Hydro-Electric Projects only indicates the
lackadaisical approach of the Government in exploiting the hydro
power potential in the country. In the background of the fact that
projects/schemes of the Ministry of Power were normally completed
in a span of five to ten years, the Committee wondered as to why
funds were not being utilised substantially in the first three quarters
of the financial year itself. The quarterly utilisation of funds indicates
lack of proper planning and execution of Projects/Schemes in the
Ministry of Power.

2


7. The Ministry in their reply have stated:-

“The Ministry of Power was allocated an amount of Rs. 33153,26
crore(BE) during 2007-08 comprising of GBS of Rs. 5483.00 crore
and IEBR of Rs. 27670.26 crore. The allocation at RE stage was
reduced to Rs. 30690,38 crore comprising of Rs. 4350 crore as GBS
and Rs. 26340.38 crore as IEBR. The quarterly utilization of funds
by Ministry against the BE & RE of financial year 2007-08 are as
under:-

(Rs. in crore)

GBS IEBR Total —_% Utilization % Utilization
Expenditure in financial in financial
year 2007-08 year 2007-08

(wart. BE) (w.rt. RE)
Expenditure during 401.37 3778.87 4180.24 12.60% 13.62%
Ist quarter
Expenditure during 194.37 4309.55 4503.92 13.58% 14.68%
2nd quarter

Expenditure during 1565.26 5039.46 6604.72 19.92% 21.52%
3rd quarter

Expenditure during 2147.93 8211.06 1035899 31.25% 33.75%
4th quarter

Total Expenditure 4308.93 21338.94 25647.87 77.36% 83.57%

In regard to utilization of funds by Ministry of Power upto 25.02.08
which was 58.83% of BE, it is mentioned that against the BE of
Rs. 33153.26 crore, the actual utilization upto the end of financial
year was Rs. 25647.87 crore representing 77.36% of BE.

With regard to the greater utilization in the last quarter vis-a-vis
the previous three quarters it is mentioned that in the case of GBS
the major provision of Rs. 3983 crore at BE stage and Rs. 3944.56
crore at RE stage was for the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY). Approval for continuation of RGGVY during XI
Plan was accorded on 03.01.2008. The delay in approval for the
continuation of RGGVY in the 11th Plan resulted in a greater
utilization in the last quarter of the financial year and less
utilization of funds in the first three quarters. It is also mentioned
that Ministry of Finance had also accorded special relaxation for
RGGVY scheme from the limit of expenditure of 33% of BE in the
last quarter.


The schemes like Equity Gap Funding and Preparation of DPRs
of New Hydro Electric Projects could not get approval of the
competent authorities and hence the provision kept for these
schemes could not be utilized. Under utilization for the scheme of
Consultancy charges for APDRP projects was due to merger of the
scheme with Restructured APDRP scheme, which could not get
approval of the competent authority.

With regard to the less utilization of IEBR it was mentioned that
four organizations 1.९ NEEPCO, NTPC, SJVNL and DVC had not
been able to utilize their Budgeted IEBR and the detailed reasons
for less utilization of IEBR by these organizations have been
provided at Annexure I, Il, III & IV respectively.”

8. The Committee find that the actual utilization of funds by
the Ministry of Power upto the end of financial year was Rs. 25647.87
crore i.e. 77.36% of Budget Estimates of Rs. 33153.26 crore. The
reasons adduced by the Ministry for low utilization of Plan outlay
during 2007-08 inter-alia include delayed approval of RGGVY for
continuation in the 11th Plan, non-approval of restructured APDRP
Scheme and less utilization of their budgetary allocations by
NEEPCO, NTPC, SJVNL and DVC. As regards utilization of Plan
outlay by NEEPCO, the Committee are constrained to note that the
Budget Estimates of Rs. 552.23 crore for 2007-08 were drastically
reduced at RE stage to only Rs. 96.76 crore. Further, the actual
utilization of these outlays by NEEPCO during the year is reported
to be only Rs. 34.16 crore. The Committee also find that the BE for
Kameng Hydro Electric Project (600 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh was
also revised to Rs. 81.92 crore from the BE of Rs. 540.69 crore. As
regards Turial Hydro Electric Project (60 MW), Mizoram, Rs. 10.09
crore could be spent, that too, on normal upkeep of the assets already
created by NEEPCO - as work on the project was held up since
June, 2004. The Committee also find that although NTPC, SJ)VNL
and DVC had ambitious targets during 2007-08 for various projects
but the actual expenditure was substantially reduced to Rs. 8621
crore, Rs. 219.23 crore and Rs. 2523.87 crore against the approved
Plan Outlay (BE) of Rs. 12792 crore, Rs. 642.80 crore and Rs. 4271.38
crore respectively. While observing that these PSUs could not utilize
an amount of Rs. 6342.80 crore out of their Budget Estimates due to
non supply of equipment, administrative, geological and various other
reasons, the Committee feel that the fluctuations in the annual plan
and projections should be restricted to such an extent that the
financial utilization of the approved outlay and physical achievement
of the targets depict a realistic assessment. The Committee therefore,

4


reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that since power
projects are normally completed in a time span of 5 to 10 years, the
Ministry should ensure their planning and execution in such a way
that there are no substantial variations in the approved Plan outlay
and the projections made at RE stage or the actual expenditure
incurred during a financial year. At the same time, the Committee
expect that the Plan outlay for the year 2008-09 of all the PSUs and
various programmes of the Ministry of Power would be fully utilized.

Capacity addition target for the 11th Plan
(Recommendation SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.2.21)

9. The Committee noted that the capacity addition target of power
generation for the 11th Plan was 78578 MW - 16627 MW in the hydro
sector, 58571 MW in the thermal sector and 3380 MW in the nuclear
sector. The Committee noted with great concern the miserable failure
of the capacity addition targets in the previous plan periods because
the capacity addition target achieved in the 8th, 9th and 10th Plans
were only to the tune of 54%, 47% and 51.6% respectively of the
planned capacity targets. What further raised alarm was the fact that
as against the total target of capacity addition of 12039.20 MW in the
year 2007-08, actual capacity addition of 8679 MW could only be
achieved as on 26.03.2008. The Committee also noted that against the
target of 78,578 MW for the 11th Plan, 60899 MW capacity was under
construction, but Letters of Award for the projects totaling 9170 MW
were yet to be placed. The Committee also wanted to know the reasons
for not issuing Letters of Award for projects amounting to 9170 MW
so far and recommended that action in this regard be completed at
the earliest in a time bound manner as the gestation period of power
projects was generally quite long and as it was equally important that
all clearances were expedited and put in place well in time so that the
11th Plan capacity addition targets could be achieved. The Committee
also wanted to be informed of the status of the remaining projects of
about 8500 MW capacity targeted to be commissioned in the
Ith Plan. Further, to speed up work and ensure proper coordination
among different Ministries/agencies involved in the process, the
Committee desired that the idea of creating a unified chain of command
may be taken up for consideration at the highest level of the
Government as was agreed to by the Secretary, Ministry of Power
during evidence. The Committee awaited the considered views of the
Government for their deliberation and consideration.


10. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:-

“According to the latest assessment, a capacity addition of 78,700
MW comprising 15,627 MW Hydro, 59,693 MW Thermal and 3,380
MW nuclear is feasible during 11th Plan. The capacity addition
achieved during 2007-08 was 9,263 MW against a revised target of
12039.2 MW. Capacity addition target for the year 2008-09 is 11,061
MW. During the year 2008-09, a capacity of 434.8 MW had been
commissioned so far. Thus the total capacity commissioned as on
03.08.2008 during 11th Plan is 10883 MW.

Projects totaling to 63157 MW were under construction at present
for likely benefits during 11th Plan. Due to delay in tying up of
essential inputs, orders for a capacity of 6,410 MW are yet to be
placed. For expediting the ordering process, Ministry of Power is
actively interacting and monitoring, through meeting/discussions
with the State Governments, BHEL as well as State Power Utilities
for giving an impetus to various measures inter-alia the capacity
addition. The capacity addition programme was discussed in the
Chief Secretaries’ Conference held on 23rd-24th April, 2007 and
Chief Ministers’ Conference held on 28th May, 2007 wherein inter-
alia early placement of orders for power projects proposed to be
commissioned during the 11th Plan was emphasized. In the Chief
Ministers’ Conference, it was resolved that the Centre and States
would ensure timely placement of orders for all the projects
intended to give benefit during the llth Plan and had regular
monthly monitoring of the projects to ensure their timely
commissioning along predetermined milestones. A meeting of
Group of Ministers chaired by Minister of Power was held on
24th September, 2007 wherein detailed State-wise discussions were
held with regard to accelerated power generation capacity addition
for the 11th Plan. Subsequently, a follow-up meeting of Chief
Secretaries of States was held on 19th February, 2008 wherein
expeditious completion of ordering of all the 11th Plan power
generation projects was emphasized. This matter was again
discussed in the Chief Secretaries’ Conference convened on
22nd April, 2008.

Regarding the issue relating to ensuring proper coordination among
different Ministries/agencies involved in the process, it was
mentioned that for Inter-Ministerial coordination, Ministry of Power
was having regular structured meetings with Ministries of Coal
and Environment and Forests. Furthermore, Energy Coordination


Committee had been constituted under the chairmanship of Hon’ble
Prime Minister to enable a systematic approach to policy
formulation, promote coordination in inter departmental actions
and function as a key mechanism for providing institutional support
to decision making in the area of energy planning. To supplement
these efforts if need arises, further inter-ministerial consultations
shall be organized.”

11. The Committee were informed that against the target of 78,578
MW of power generation during the 11th Plan, projects having 60899
MW capacity were under construction, and Letters of Award for the
projects totaling 9170 MW were yet to be placed. The Committee
are, however, constrained to note that due to delay in the tying up
of essential inputs, orde:s for a capacity of 6,410 MW are yet to be
placed. The Ministry of Power in their reply, have cited various
interaction and monitoring meetings held during April, May, 2007
ani also the follow up meetings taken up with State Governments
in February and April 2008 for expediting the ordering process. The
Committee cannot but deplore lackadaisical approach of the Ministry
to expedite the ordering process for remaining projects which are
targeted to be completed during 11th Plan period as nothing concrete
is reported to have been attempted after the Committee recommended
for the same.

12. As regards the issue relating to ensuring proper co-ordination
among different Ministries/agencies involved in the commissioning
of power projects, the Committee had recommended that a unified
chain of command may be considered at the highest level of the
Government. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that
for inter-Ministerial co-ordination, Ministry of Power have regular
structured meetings with Ministries of Coal and Environment and.
Forests. Furthermore, Energy Co-ordination Committee has been
constituted under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime Minister to
enable a systemic approach to policy formulation, promote
Co-ordination in inter departmental actions and function as a key
mechanism for providing institutional support to decision making
in area of energy planning. According to the Ministry of Power,
inter-Ministerial consultations shall be organized to supplement these
efforts. The Committee would however, like to be apprised of how
the steps taken to ensure proper co-ordination among different
Ministries/agencies have been proved effective in achieving the
targets set for capacity addition during the 11th Plan.


Balance of Plant works for Power Projects
(Recommendation SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.2.22)

13. The Committee in particular noted that there was shortage of
vendors to execute Balance of Plant Works like (i) Ash handling plant,
(ii) Coal handling plant, (iii) Water Treatment Plant including DM plant
etc., and this had become the main hindrance in completion of power
projects resulting in delayed capacity addition. The Committee observed
that the Government was taking certain steps to meet the constraints
in the setting up of power plants such as tie-ups for obtaining critical
equipment and for execution of the balance of plant works. Efforts
were reportedly being made to involve international conclave of
suppliers/vendors of coal handling plants/ash handling plants/water
treatment plants equipment to enhance the manufacturing capacity of
the existing vendors and to widen the vendor-base and create new
entrepreneurs. The Ministry had also been taking steps to revise the
qualifying requirements to encourage more vendors and new
entrepreneurs to come forward for manufacturing main plant
equipment. The Committee would, however, like to know the outcome
of the steps taken by the Government to develop vendor base for
Balance of Plant works of power plants.

14. Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:

“The Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh,
Planning Commission on standardization of specifications of
Thermal Power Plants and development of vendors for Balance of
Plants (BoPs) has submitted its Report regarding development of
vendors for BoPs on 24th January 2008. The main recommendations
of the above report are summarized below:

(a) Order for BoPs (or EPC of BoPs) should be placed within
six months of placement of order for main plant and
equipment.

(b) Liquidated damages for delay in execution of project in time
should be enhanced to discourage cornering of large number
of contracts by a few suppliers.

(c) CEA to finalise the pre-qualification requirement for BoP
vendors by Feb., 2008 end.

(d) CEA and NTPC to complete the exercise for finalizing the
guidelines for standardization/broad design criterion for
various packages of BoP progressively by the end of
Aug., 08.


(०) Capacity building for availability of skilled manpower to
be taken up by the project developers.

(f) Whether a level playing field is being provided to domestic
supplier needs to be examined.

The Ministry of Power & CEA have already taken an initiative in
coordination with CII to sensitize the industry about the
requirement of BoPs by organizing the international conclave in
July, 2007 followed by regional level Conferences at Chennai &
Chandigarh. The actual benefits of above efforts will take time to
materialize. However, it is felt that it will definitely result in
development of new vendors for the 11th Plan projects & for future
plans. The Committee set up in CEA to review the qualifying
requirements of BoPs is likely to submit its report shortly.

NTPC Ltd. has entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with BHEL
to take up work relating to Engineering, Procurement and
Construction (EPC) for power plants and other infrastructure
projects. NTPC Ltd. has also entered into an MOU with Bharat
Forge Limited to promote a joint venture company initially to take
up the manufacturing of casting, forgings, fittings and high-pressure
Ppipings. However, keeping in view the scarcity of vendors for
manufacture of Balance of Plants, this JV would also examine the
feasibility of manufacturing and supply of BoPs.”

(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Paragraph No. 2.2.23)

15. The Committee noted that a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh, Member, Planning Commission, on
the standardization of specifications of Thermal Power Plants and
development of vendors for balance of plants had been set up. Since
the second year of the 11th Plan period had already commenced, the
Committee desired that the aforesaid Committee should be asked to
come up with its findings and recommendations in a specified time so
that the same could be turned into a concrete action plan.

16. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“The Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh,
Member, Planning Commission has submitted its reports on the
issue of Standardization of Specification of Thermal Power Plants
and Development of Additional Vendors for Balance of Plants to
Hon’ble Finance Minister on 8th January, 2008 and 24th January,
2008 respectively. While consolidated view on the recommendations

9


is yet to be taken by the Government, Central Electricity Authority
has already sensitized all the stakeholders regarding placement of
orders for various packages of BoPs which according to the
recommendations of the Committee should be placed progressively
within six months of placement of order for the main plant.”

17. The Committee are dismayed to note that although a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh, Member,
Planning Commission has submitted its Reports on the issue of
standardization of specification of thermal power Plants and
Development of additional vendors for balance of plants to Hon’ble
Finance Minister on 8th January, 2008 and 24th January, 2008
respectively, a consolidated view on the recommendations of the
Committee is yet to be taken by the Government. Since the balance
of plant works constitute an important and integral part for the
setting up of any power plant, the Committee recommend that the
Government should take immediate steps to chalk out a concrete
action plan to ensure the capacity addition during the 11th Plan as
envisaged taking into consideration the findings and
recommendations of the Committee constituted for the purpose.

18. The Committee further observe that one of the important
recommendations of the above referred Committee inter-alia include
finalization of the pre-qualification requirement for Balance of Plant
works (BoP) vendors by CEA by February 2008 and completing the
exercise for finalizing the guidelines for standardization/broad design
criterion for various packages of BoP progressively by CEA and
NTPC by the end of August 2008, The Committee are concerned to
note that CEA could not finalize the pre-qualification requirement
of BoP by February 2008 as targeted. The Committee also note that
the Ministry of Power and CEA have already taken some initiative
in coordination with Confederation of Indian Industries to sensitize
the industry about the requirement of BoPs by organizing the
international conclave in July, 2007 followed by regional level
Conferences at Chennai & Chandigarh. The Ministry have stated
that the actual benefit of above efforts should definitely result in
development of new vendors for the 11th Plan projects & for future
plans. The Ministry have also informed that the Committee set up
in CEA to review the qualifying requirements of BoPs was likely to
submit its report shortly. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the main findings of the report of this Committee and action
taken by the Government thereon.

10


19. The Committee also find that NTPC Ltd. has entered into a
Joint Venture Agreement with BHEL and also with Bharat Forge
Limited — to take up the manufacturing of casting, forgings, fittings
and high-pressure pipings. However, it has also been stated that
keeping in view the scarcity of vendors for manufacture of Balance
of Plants, this JV would also examine the feasibility of manufacturing
and supply of BoPs. The Committee are of the view that a feasibility
study about the manufacturing and supply of BoPs by the proposed
Joint Venture Company of NTPC with Bharat Forge Ltd. be compieted
at the earliest and the Committee be apprised of the same.

Development of Hydro Power
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.3.18)

20. The Committee noted that hydro power was a benign source
of energy and the sector needs to be accorded high priority from the
point of view of energy security as fuels like coal and gas were likely
to be exhausted in the near future. The Committee noted that the bulk
of the hydro potential which was in the Himalayan region in the
States of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and
the North-Eastern Region was yet to be tapped. Although India was
endowed with an estimated hydro power potential of more than
1,50,000 MW, the installed capacity was only 35,379 MW, ie. 25% of
the total power generating capacity in the country. The Committee
had regretted to note that 45 hydro projects with an aggregate capacity
of 15,000 MW only were under construction at present and preparation
of the feasibility reports of 162 schemes so far with an aggregate
capacity of 49,930 MW only had been completed by CEA. The
Committee were further constrained to observe that even during the
11th Plan, while the major capacity addition from the thermal power
stations was pegged at 58,571 MW, from Hydro power plants, it was
to be only 16,227 MW. The Committee noted that a task force had
been constituted under the Chairmanship of Minister of Power to look
into various aspects of hydro power. The Committee liked to be
informed of the steps so far taken by the Task Force to overcome the
bottlenecks in implementation of hydro electric projects.

21. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“In the first meeting of the Task Force on hydro project
development held under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of
Power on 12.12.2007 at New Delhi, the following issues were
deliberated by the Task Force:

(i) Report of TERI on compensation to resource bearing States.

The recommendations made in the Report of TERI on
compensation to resource bearing States and comments of

11


the Ministry of Power thereon were submitted before the
Task Force for discussions. The Task Force endorsed the
comments of Ministry of Power and noted that the
suggestions of TERI had been appropriately addressed in
the revised hydro policy. The Task Force also endorsed the
provisions of the new Hydro Policy which was subsequently
approved by the Cabinet and notified on 31.3.2008.

(ii) The Task Force also approved a proposal to refer the inter-
State issues impeding the implementation of various hydro-
electric schemes in the country to the Commission on
Centre-State relations for an early resolution of these issues.

(iii) Basin-wise development of hydro potential.

The Task Force advised that the CEA in consultation with
the respective State Governments and CWC should carry
out river basin optimization studies for all major river basins.
If necessary, a scheme for financing these efforts may be
formulated. Accordingly, the CEA is requested by this
Ministry to conduct a study to explore the feasibility of
basin-wise development of hydro potential. The CEA was
taking necessary action in this regard.

(iv) The Task Force recommended that the respective State
Governments be asked to identify the potential sites for
setting up of Mega Hydel Projects and propose
implementation through an SPV on the lines of Thermal
Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs). Accordingly, this
Ministry wrote to various hydro potential State Governments
to identify potential sites in their respective States for setting
up of Ultra Mega Hydel Projects of installed capacity of
500 MW or more and consider its implementation through
an SPV on the lines of Thermal Ultra Mega Power Project.”

22. As regards the development of Hydro Sector in the Country,
the Committee note that the capacity from the Hydro Power Plants
targeted to be added is 16227 MW against the thermal power capacity
addition of 58,571 MW during the 11th Plan. The Committee are
constrained to observe that although they had desired to know the
steps taken by the Task Force on Hydro Project Development to
overcome the bottlenecks in implementation of the projects, the
Ministry of Power in their action taken reply furnished to the
Committee have only mentioned the issues which were deliberated
by the Task Force at their first meeting held on 120 December,
2007. The Committee would therefore, like to be categorically

12


apprised of the present status of implementation of basin-wise
development of hydro potential - where the CEA in consultation
with the respective State Governments has been assigned to carry
cut river basin optimization studies for all major river basins. At
the same time, the Committee would also like to be informed of the
response of the State Governments on the recommendation of the
Task Force to identify the potential sites for the setting up of
Mega Hydel Projects and their proposed implementation through
Special Purpose Vehicles on the lines of thermal Ultra Mega Power
Projects (UMPPS) for which the Ministry of Power have already
written to the respective States; for Ultra Mega Hydel Projects of
installed capacity of 500 MW or more.

Gas Allocation Policy of the Government
(Recommendation SI. No. 16, Para No 2.5.10)

23. The Committee had observed that due to shortage of gas in
the country, the actual supplies to NIPC’s gas based power station by
GAIL had fallen short of the contracted/quantity. Taking note of the
fact that the Government was in the process of finalization of Gas
Utilization Policy, the Committee observed that it was time that a
debate was initiated at the highest level in the country over according
relative precedence to various competing sectors, the main being
fertilizer and power sectors, in the proposed Gas Utilisation Policy. At
the same time, the Committee saw a merit in the argument put forward
to the Committee by the Secretary, Ministry of Power that while
fertilizers could be imported, power could not. The Committee
therefore, recommended that the power sector be accorded priority
over all other competing sectors including the fertilizer sector in the
matter of allocation of gas and coal because it was the power sector
which drove the economy.

24, The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“The matter of allocation of gas to the Gas Based Power Plants
was taken up by the Ministry of Power with Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas a number of times. Consequently the Empowered
Group of Ministers (EGoM) in its meeting held on 28.05.2008 on
commercial utilization of gas under the New Exploration Licensing
Policy (NELP) decided to prioritize allocation of gas to Gas Based
Power Plants lying idle/under-utilized and likely to be
commissioned during 2008-09, and liquid fuel plants, which are
now running on liquid fuel and could switch over to natural gas,
to meet the partial requirement of these plants.”

13


25. In regard to the gas policy of the Government, the Committee
have been informed that the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM)
in its meeting held on 28.05.2008 on commercial utilization of gas
under the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) has decided to
prioritize allocation of gas to the gas based power plants lying idle/
under-utilized and likely to be commissioned during 2008-09 and
liquid fuel plants, which are now running on liquid fuel and could
switch over to natural gas to meet the partial requirement of these
plants. The Committee, however, find that the reply of the
Government is silent about according priority to power sector over
other competing sectors including the fertilizer sector. The Committee
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that power sector
needs to be given priority as in the considered opinion of the
Committee it is availability of power which primarily drives the
economy of the country.

Captive Power Generation
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.7.6)

26. The Committee observed that the present installed captive
power generation capacity in the country was 22335 MW. The
Committee also noted that the captive power generation was a means
of decentralized generation with low T&D losses; and to also reduce
the cost, as there was no need to set up a transmission system. Further,
the Government was taking substantive measures to facilitate captive
power generation plants to provide the spare generating capacity to
the grid and the Government had also been striving to do away with
restrictive levies, duties and regulations in a time bound manner. The
Committee further noted that the Government was considering a
proposal for amending the existing mega power policy, which,
inter-alia provided for extending the Mega Power Project status benefits
to captive and merchant power plants, subject to qualifying conditions.
The Committee strongly recommended that the Government should
finalise the mega power policy at the earliest and benefits from the
same should not be confined only to the captive power generators but
the projects in the State sector should also be extended mega policy
benefits in order to increase and encourage participation of the States
in the power generation. The Committee also desired that the
Government should also help captive power generator in getting the
water supply, coal linkages, etc. and thereby encourage more and more
private entrepreneurs to set up such power projects.

14


27. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“A proposal to amend the existing mega power policy is under
consideration of the Ministry of Power in the wake of—(i) need to
provide impetus to accelerated power generation in the context of
the goals set out in the National Electricity Policy, 2005; (ii) Reforms
in the power sector including finalisation of Tariff Policy, 2006 and
new Hydro Policy, 2008. The 11th Plan target for power generation
is 78,577 MW, which is 60% of the country’s total generation
capacity at the end of the 10th Plan. Sustaining achievement ofa
power growth rate of this magnitude on a sustainable basis during
the next decade calls for modification of the current mega power
policy.

Accordingly, the proposal seeks to liberalise the mega power policy
further by, inter-alia, providing:—

(i) Deleting the requirement of privatization of distribution in
the power purchasing States.

(ii) Covering Merchant Power Plants and Captive Power Plants
under Mega Power Policy subject to meeting the threshold
capacity requirements.

(iii) Deleting the requirement of inter-state sale of power.

Further, Government has taken various legislative, policy and
administrative measures to facilitate captive generation and
utilization of surplus capacity.

Under the Electricity Act, 2003, captive power plants, including
group captive, have been freely permitted. The Act provides that
any person may construct, maintain or operate a captive generating
plant and dedicated transmission lines. Under the provisions of
the Act, every person, who has constructed a captive generating
plant and maintains and operates such plant, shall have the right
to open access for the purposes of carrying electricity from his
captive generating plant to the destination of his use, subject to
the availability of transmission capacity.

National Electricity Policy, notified in February, 2005, emphasizes
the need for bringing surplus capacity available with a large
number of captive and standby generating stations in India to the
grid continuously or during certain time periods.

Tariff Policy, notified in January, 2006, recognizes that captive
generation is an important means to make competitive power

15


available and urges the Electricity Regulatory Commissions to create
an enabling environment that encourages captive plants to be
connected to the grid.

The Conference of Chief Ministers on Power Sector Issues held in
May, 2007, has resolved to facilitate captive power plants to provide
the spare generating capacity to the grid and strive to do away
with restrictive levies, duties and regulations in a time bound
manner,

Ministry of Power has been actively involved in moderating the
charges/duties on open access, cross-subsidy, etc. Various
conferences and seminars with the stakeholders have been held to
evolve consensus and expedite actions on the concerned issues,
the latest being the Round Table of Forum of Regulators held on
5.11.2007 and the Conference of Chief Secretaries on Power Sector
Issues held on 19th February, 2008.

The Captive Power Plants (CPPs) have been getting coal linkages
from the coal companies under the Ministry of Coal. The water
allocation to the CPPs is provided by the State Governments.”

28. The Committee find that Government was taking substantive
measures to facilitate captive power generation plants to provide the
generating capacity to the grid and it had also been striving to do
away with the restrictive levies, duties and regulations in a time
bound manner. During examination of the Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Power, the Committee had been informed that the
Government was considering a proposal for amending the existing
Mega Power Policy, which, inter-alia Provided for extending the
Mega Power Project status benefits to both the captive and merchant
power plants, subject to qualifying conditions. The Committee are
concerned to note that although they had recommended that the
Government should finalise the Mega Power Policy at the earliest
and benefits from the same should not be confined only to the
captive power generators but to the projects in the State sector should
also be extended mega policy benefits in order to increase and
encourage participation of the States in the power generation, the
Ministry have again merely stated that a proposal to amend the
existing Mega Power Policy is under their consideration. The
Committee deprecate the delay in finalizing/amending the Mega
Power Policy and desired that an early decision in the matter be
taken by the Government.

16


R&M schemes in Hydro Sector
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23, Para No. 2.9.9)

29. The Committee were dismayed to note that during the
10th Plan, out of a total of 72 hydro schemes programmed for
completion, only 32 schemes could be completed and 38 schemes
slipped to the 11th Plan. Further, two of the projects were reported to
have been shifted to the 12th Plan. The Committee felt that in view
of the R&M works slipping in previous plan periods also, the
Government should have taken advance action for carrying out the
Residual Life Assessment studies, finalising Detailed Project Reports
and constituting dedicated teams for carrying out R&M etc., to
overcome the likely delays in execution of R&M works during the
10th Plan period.

30. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:—

“At the beginning of 10th Plan, a total of 72 Hydro schemes were
identified for taking up R&M works during the 10th Plan based
on proposals received from SEBs/ Utilities. While reviewing the
progress of R&M activities in the subsequent years, it was observed
that the SEBs have not started any activity in 14 schemes and
therefore, these schemes were shifted to 11th/ 12th Plan depending
on their progress.

As such, works on only 58 schemes were in progress during the
10th Plan. Out of these 58 Hydro R&M schemes, 29 schemes got
completed and in addition 3 schemes, which were planned for
11th Plan could be completed earlier in the 10th Plan.

It is submitted that the Hydro R&M schemes were earlier identified
considering the 30-35 years of life of the generating units. There
have been many reasons which could be attributed for non start
of works/ shifting of scheme from 10th Plan to 11th/ 12th Plan,
which are listed below:—

(i) The performance/generation from the identified schemes has
been found to be satisfactory though the units have
completed their design life.

(ii) The response from the bidders for R&M works have been
poor and in some cases, single bids were received resulting
delay in award of works.

7


(iii) Delay in carrying out Residual Life Assessment (RLA)
studies.

(iv) Delay in finalizing the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).

(v) Non-availability of shut downs and sequential execution of
R&M works.

(vi) Revised/enhanced scope of works of R&M schemes.

vii) Non-adherence of completion schedules by the concerned
power authorities/utilities,

(viii) No dedicated teams have been constituted by the SEBs/
PSUs to carry out the R&M works and to tackle the
constraints/bottlenecks and to fix up the responsibility for
any delays etc.

(ix) Delays in resolving the inter-state problems in certain cases
e.g. Machkund in A.P./Orissa and Hampi and Tungabhadra
in A.P./Karnataka.

The various works on balance 29 hydro R&M schemes, which
have been shifted to 11th Plan, are presently in progress.”

31. The Committee note that a total of 72 Hydro schemes were
identified for taking up R&M works during the 10th Plan based on
the proposals received from State Electricity Boards/utilities. While
reviewing the progress of R&M activities, the Committee find that
SEBs had not started any activity in 14 schemes and therefore, these
schemes were shifted to 11th/12th Plan periods. The Committee have
also been informed that the response from the bidders for R&M
works had been poor and in some cases single bids were received
resulting in delay in award of works. There were also reported to
be some delays in carrying out Residual Life Assessment (RLA)
studies and delay in finalization of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).
The major hindrance according to the Ministry is that no dedicated
teams have been constituted by the SEBs/PSUs to carry out R&M
works, to tackle the constraints/bottlenecks and to fix up the
responsibility for any delays, etc. The Committee feel that to ensure
timely completion of R&M works, the Government should pursue
with the State Governments/PSUs for constitution of some dedicated
teams so as to tackle constraints/bottlenecks in the process. At the
same time, the Committee would also like to be informed of the
present status of the renovation and modernization works of all the
29 R&M schemes targeted to be implemented in the 11th Plan period.

18


Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25, Para No. 2.10.15)

32. The Committee noted that the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana(RGGVY), a scheme for Rural Electrification
Infrastructure and household electrification was introduced in April,
2005, for achieving the National Common Minimum Programme
objective of providing access to electricity to all rural households over
a period of four years. Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) was the
nodal agency for the programme. Under this scheme 90% capital
subsidy was to be provided for rural electrification infrastructure and
10% as the loan assistance on soft terms by REC. The Committee
noted that against a target of electrification of 40,000 villages during
2006-07, only 28,706 villages were actually electrified. Further, during
2007-08, the target for village electrification was kept very low, 1.6.
9,000 and only 7,077 villages could be electrified as on 15th February,
2008. The reasons stated by the Ministry for the low target was that
continuation of the scheme in the 11th Plan was approved only in
January, 2008, as a result of which the work was not in full momentum
during April, 2007 to December, 2007. The Committee further noted
that the budget requirement for the year 2008-09 for RGGVY was
projected at Rs. 24,000 crore for achieving the target of electrification
of 67,475 villages and providing electric connections to 2.12 crore BPL
households. Against this projected requirement, a budget allocation to
the tune of Rs. 5500 crore has been made. For achieving the target of
electrifying 25,000 unelectrified villages and providing connections to
60 lakh BPL households, which has been projected in the outcome
budget for the year 2008-09, the total requirement of funds is placed
at Rs. 13,000 crore. However, additional amount would be required to
be released for the scheme at RE stage. The Committee were very
unhappy with the pace and progress of the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana, an ambitious programme of the Government
which was taken up with the aim of electrifying villages and hamlets
for supplying power to the rural areas to unleash full economic growth
potential of rural India. Not convinced by the reasons cited by the
Ministry for non-achievement of targets under the programme, i.e.,
insufficient availability of funds and also the fact that continuation of
the programme in the 11th Plan was only approved on 3rd January,
2008, leaving only 3 months in the financial year 2007-08 for sanctioning
new projects, the Committee strongly recommended the Ministry to
take up the programme progressively on top priority basis in the
financial year 2008-09 so that the targets envisaged were achieved.
The Committee further noted that the Ministry was making an attempt

19


to compress the implementation cycle from 18 months to 12 months
in some of the projects and electrify additional villages in the financial
year 2008-09. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the funds
required for the scheme be made available in time for implementation
of the scheme in the year 2008-09. The Committee noted that ‘cost of
electrification of an unelectrified village’ and the cost of ‘intensive
electrification of already electrified village’ varies from Rs. 13 lakh to
Rs. 18 lakh and Rs. 4 lakh to 6 lakh respectively—in normal terrain
and in hilly, tribal and desert areas. From the case made out before
the Committee during its study visit to Rajasthan and also by going
through the figures of cost of village electrification and basis thereof,
the Committee note that the cost of Rs. 18 lakh for a village
electrification in hilly, tribal and particularly in the desert areas was
not sufficient as compared to the cost of electrifying a village in normal
terrain. The Committee was also of the view that the present practice
of presuming the cost of village electrification as the same for similar
areas/terrain throughout the country without factoring in the State
specific conditions, disregards the ground realities. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the present cost norms for village
electrification should be revisited by the Government and suitably
modified taking into account the local conditions in the terrain and
areas in different States where electrification has to be carried out.

33. The Ministry of Power have stated:

“The target for 2008-09 has been revised and it has now been
fixed to electrify 19,000 un-electrified villages and provide
connections to 50 lakh BPL households. So far 316 new projects
have been sanctioned for implementation during phase-I of XI Plan
period covering electrification of 47,658 un-electrified villages and
release of connections to 1.58 crore BPL households, besides 235
ongoing projects of X Plan. For achieving the target, Monitoring
Committee under Chairmanship of Secretary (P) has been regularly
reviewing and monitoring the progress of RGGVY in the entire
country. Moreover, all State Governments have been advised to
constitute a Coordination Committee headed by Chief Secretary of
the state to review the progress of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana in their States. State Governments have been
requested to monitor each project physically and financially on a
regular basis and to remove all implementation bottlenecks so that
the targets of Bharat Nirman can be achieved. The budgetary
provision for 2008-09 for RGGVY is Rs. 5500 crore which needs to
be revised upwards to Rs. 13,000 crore for achieving targets
prescribed in outcome budget.

20


The existing cost norm for electrification of un-electrified villages
in normal terrain (Rs. 13 lakh) and in hilly, tribal and desert areas
(Rs. 18 lakh) and the cost norm for intensive electrification of
already electrified village in normal terrain (Rs. 4 lakh) and in
hilly, tribal and desert areas (Rs. 6 lakh) have been approved by
the Cabinet and as such modification is not feasible at this stage.
Moreover, the existing cost norms seem to be reasonable.”

34, The Committee note that the target for electrification of
unelectrified villages for the year 2008-09 has been revised to 19,000
villages and 50 lakh BPL households from the original figure of
25,000 villages and 60 lakh BPL households projected earlier in the
Outcome Budget 2008-09, The total requirement of funds for the
purpose is estimated at Rs. 13,000 crore whereas the budgetary
provision for 2008-09 was only Rs. 55,00 crore which according to
the Government is needed to be revised upwards. The Committee
recommend that funds for achieving the revised targets of RGGVY
in 2008-09 should be made available by the Government for the
timely completion of the schemes.

Reduction of Excise Duty on Energy Efficient Products
(Recommendation Sl. No. 27, Para No. 2.12.9)

35. The Committee noted that the Bureau of Energy efficiency (BEE)
under the aegis of Ministry of Power had formulated an Action Plan
in consultation with all stakeholders identifying the major thrust areas
of its activities during the early stages of the 10th Plan. The Action
Plan released by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 23rd August, 2002,
served as a road-map for BEE. The Committee further noted that
against the energy conservation and efficiency potential assessed in
the country at about 20,000 MW, the potential harnessed during the
10th Plan was only 877 MW and the target for harnessing energy
conservation during the 11th Plan was stated to be 10,000 MW. To
achieve the 11th Plan targets of energy conservation, BEE had also
launched schemes such as the Bachat Lamp Yojana and Standard and
Labelling programme. The Committee were disappointed to note that
the Ministry of Finance had not accepted the proposal of progressive
reduction in excise duty for energy efficient products, particularly the
labelled products. The Committee were of the considered opinion that
concessions such as differential excise duty on energy efficient labelled
products which had the potential to provide a great deal of
encouragement towards energy conservation efforts should have been
offered to the customers. The Committee, therefore, recommended to
the Ministry of Power to again take up the matter with the Ministry
of Finance and Committee be apprised of the outcome in this regard.

ai


36. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“In the Pre-Budget Memorandum 2008-09 submitted to Ministry
of Finance, Ministry of Power had taken up the following proposals
relating to energy efficient products for exemption in Excise and
Customs Duty:

(i) Reduction of Excise Duty for Energy Efficient equipment/
appliances (airconditioners, refrigerators, motors and pumps):

All energy efficient end use equipment, particularly that are
covered under the Standards and Labelling programme of
Ministry of Power may be provided fiscal incentives in form
of a progressive Excise Duty structure in three different rates
of 8%, 4% and 0%. A graded increased abatement allowance
on retail price was also recommended for energy efficient
equipment.

(ii) Complete waiver of Customs Duty and Excise Duty on CFL,
LED and Electronic Ballast:

CFL, LED and Electronic Ballast which are highly energy
efficient were recommended for full exemption from all
duties.

However, none of these proposals was accepted. This Ministry
would again take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance in
the next Budgetary exercise.”

37. The Committee have been informed that the pre-budget
proposals of Ministry of Power for reduction of excise duty for
Energy Efficient equipment / appliances (airconditioners, refrigerators,
motors and pumps) Complete waiver of Customs Duty and Excise
Duty on CFL, LED and Electronic Ballast were not accepted by the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee are of the considered view that
after their repeated recommendations for progressive reduction in
excise duty for energy efficient products, particularly the labelled
products and the concessions such as differential excise duty on
energy efficient labelled products, the Ministry of Power have not
taken up these proposals with the Ministry of Finance with due
urgency. The Committee feel that instead of leaving the matter to be
taken up with the Ministry of Finance to the next Budgetary exercise,
the Ministry of Power should have immediately obtained the
comments of the Ministry of Finance in the matter by forwarding
them, the recommendation of the Committee. Unhappy with the
lackadaisical approach of the Government, the Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendation and desire that the matter should be
immediately taken up with the Ministry of Finance so that energy

22


conservation target of 10,000 MW during 11th Plan could be achieved.
At the same time, the Committee also recommend that the Ministry
should take necessary steps to ensure labeling programme for all
the electrical appliances.

Allocation to Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
(Recommendation 51. No. 28, Paragraph No. 2.12.10)

38. The Committee noted that as against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 161.65 crore for the BEE during 2008-09, an amount of only
Rs. 90 crore was approved. The Committee were of the considered
opinion that this would definitely affect some of the ongoing important
schemes of BEE like (i) Designated Consumers and SMEs,
(ii) Institutional Strengthening of BEE (iii) Agriculture DSM and
Municipal DSM, and (iv) Contribution to State Energy Conservation
Fund etc. To encourage energy saving, the Committee noted that the
funds proposed for energy efficiency schemes should not be curtailed.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the funds asked for to
undertake the proposed energy conservation schemes during 2008-09
should be made available to the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE).

39. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“Ministry of Power agrees with the recommendation made by the
Committee and an attempt will be made to seek additional
allocation at R.E. stage.”

40. The Committee find that against the proposed funds of
Rs. 161.65 crore to BEE during 2008-09 an amount of Rs. 90 crore
was sanctioned during 2008-09 to implement their ongoing Schemes
like (i) Designated Consumers and SMEs, (ii) Institutional
Strengthening of BEE (iii) Agriculture DSM and Municipal DSM,
and (iv) Contribution to State Energy Conservation Fund, etc. The
Ministry of power have informed that they agree with the
recommendation of the Committee that the funds proposed for energy
efficiency schemes should not be curtailed and an attempt will be
made to seek additional allocation at Revised Estimates stage. The
Committee would like to informed of the details of the additional
allocations sought by the Ministry of Power at RE stage and the
final outcome thereof in due course.

Funds for Central Power Research Institute
(Recommendation Sl. No. 29, Para No. 2.13.4)

41. The Committee noted that the Central Power Research Institute
(CPRI) had sought a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 202 crore during

23


2008-09 to carry out critical R&D activity. Against this, an allocation of
only Rs. 50 crore has been made. The Committee further note that
due to this huge cut in budgetary support, the major schemes of CPRI,
namely, National and International Accredition for CPRI laboratories
and augmentation and modernization of CPRI laboratories would be
left with only token amount and augmentation of some of the
laboratories to the international standards will get delayed. Moreover,
many of the new schemes approved under 11th Plan’ would also be
delayed in terms of implementation. Taking note of the fact that the
CPRI is a world class R&D Institute with expertise and advanced
know-how in the field of technologies in the power sector, the
Committee, recommended that the funds required by CPRI should be
sanctioned to the Institute to enable it to carry out R&D projects and
also to establish itself as a renowned research Institute of excellence
not only in India but also the world over.

42. The Ministry in their reply have stated:—

“Planning Commission has allocated only Rs. 30,451.91 crore (at
current prices) as Ministry of Power’s GBS for the 11th Plan period
as against Rs. 33,207.99 crore as the revised minimum requirement
tequested for by the Ministry. In this exercise, Rs. 320 crore had
been proposed for allocation to CPRI as GBS for the 11th Plan.
For the year 2008-09, Planning Commission has already made an
allocation of Rs. 50 crore for CPRI. An attempt will be made to
seek additional allocation at R.E. stage.”

43. The Committee are concerned to note that in spite of their
repeated recommendations to the Government to increase investments
in Research and Development activities, against the proposed Gross
Budgetary Support of Rs. 202 crore during 2008-09 an allocation of
only Rs. 50 crore has been made to CPRI. Although, the Ministry of
Power have stated that an attempt will be made to seek additional
allocation at RE stage, the Committee have failed to understand the
reasons for substantially reducing the GBS by the Planning
Commission during 2008-09. Further, Rs. 320 crore had been proposed
for allocation to CPRI as Gross Budgetary Support for the entire
11th Plan. While reiterating their recommendation that the funds
required by CPRI should be sanctioned to the Institute so as to
enable it to carry out its R&D projects and also to establish itself as
a renowned research Institute of excellence, the Committee would
also like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to impress upon
the Planning Commission to allocate the funds asked for by CPRI
for the entire the 11th Plan period.

24


ANNEXURE I

NEEPCO

SL Name of the Project/ i Kvahey जाए uc IEBR (Rs. in Crores) Reasons for

No. Scheme BE. RE Amount less utilization

spent

1... Kameng HE, Project 54069 8192 = — Details as per
(600 MW), Annexure-I-A,
Arunachal Pradesh

2. Tuirial H.E. Project 2.35 434 10.09 (1) Works held up
(60 MW), Mizoram since 9th June, 2004

due to agitation
launched by Tuirial
Crop Compensation
Claimants’ association.
(2) Expenditure
incurred only for
normal upkeep of the
assets already created
by NEEPCO.

35. Khangten S.H. Project 919 1.00 1.10. Major work could not
(7.5 MW), be taken up due to:
Arunachal Pradesh (1) Re-tendering of the

EPC contract on 12/
12/07 due (७0
participation of single
bidder.

4... S&I Schemes, 0.00 650 15.24 =
Arunachal Pradesh

5. Tripura Gas Based 0.00 3.00 34% -

Power Project
(104.74 MW), Tripura

6. Kopili H.E. Project, Stage-II 000 00. 0070 —

7. Tipaimukh प.छ, Project 0.00 0.00 372 -
(1500 MW), Manipur
Total 552.23 9.76. 34.16



ANNEXURE IA

REASONS OF LESS UTILISATION OF FUND AGAINST
KAMENG HEP DURING 2007-08

(1) While framing Annual Plan 2007-08, outlay against Kameng
HEP was fixed at Rs. 702.77 Cr. keeping in view the earlier
commissioning schedule of the project in Nov ‘09. Though the outlaid
amount for 2007-08 was practically on the higher side, it was imperative
to insist on the high outlay in order to phase out the total balance
expenditure of Kameng HEP within the earlier commissioning schedule
of Nov.’ 09. However, on revision of the commissioning schedule to
Mar’ 11 an extended time frame is now available to phase out the
balance expenditure of Kameng HEP in a rather more practical way.
Accordingly, the approved RE 2007-08 against Kameng HEP was
Rs. 245.45 Cr. However, the provisional actual expenditure during the
year stood at Rs 175.93 Cr. only due to the change of design parameters
of Bichom & Tenga Dam during Dec’ 06 and consequent delay in
preparation and release of construction drawings of the respective
structures.

(2) Physical Reasons for shortfalls in the implementation of
KaHEP (600 MW), Arunachal Pradesh during 2007-08:

Bichom River Diversion: Although the Ist stage river diversion
was completed, however, due to changes in design parameters resulting
in change of profile & increase in concreting, the diversion works
have substantially need to be further taken up during the coming lean
period.

Bichom Dam: As suggested by CEA, the crest level of the Bichom
Dam spillway has been lowered by 20 m in order to have a better silt
management. This resulted in modification to the Bichom Dam and
Spillway. According to the revised excavation drawings, with increased
no. of blocks in the Dam, profile of excavation has undergone gross
changes and resulted in shifting the location of various installations
viz. cement silo of batching plant, foundation of cable way etc. already
installed prior to the changes in dam parameters. Presently, dismantling
and shifting are under process. Meanwhile, revised construction
drawings for excavation have been issued on 18th Oct’ 07. Relocation
works are in progress along with the residual excavation works and
approach roads.

26


HRT Boring: Due to Poor geology encountered with Presence of
Class-IIT & IV rocks almost along the whole alignment of the HRT, of
KaHEP (600 MW) Progress of tunnel boring has suffered badly.
Face-II & Face-VI of HRT deserve special mention in this context
because of the facts as described in brief hereunder:

HRT Boring Face-II: As boring from Face-II continued, an 8 m
high cavity formed inside the tunnel at HRT Ch 1214 m due to adverse
geological condition. The geology encountered was a mixed flowing
face with combination of kaolin, schist, and carbonaceous shale. This
led to temporary suspension of boring works wef. 12-01-07 for
rectification works which took about 8 (eight) months. The boring
works resumed from end of August’ 07 with conservative pulls,
However, the progress again stopped we.f. 28-12-07 due to formation.
of cavity and heavy seepage of water. The restoration works are in
Progress.

HRT Boring Face-VI : Progress of boring from Face-VI was severely
affected since 17-02-07 due to heavy ingress of water to the tune of
6000 to 6500 Ipm . Due to such ingress of water entire portion of HRT
from the adit junction had been submerged to the level of 2.50 m. On
implementation of remedial measures as suggested by renowned experts
from CWC, GSI seepage could be controlled. Due to the reasons
mentioned, a period of about 3 (three) months, w.e.f. 17th February’ 07
to 110 April’ 07 was lost. Works resumed on 12-04-07 but the progress
has been slow due to heavy ingress of water,

Tenga Dam: As suggested by CEA/CWC, the spillway level of the
dam has been lowered by 2.0 mtrs. and the work of redesign and
drawing is in progress. Further, relocation and realignment of Tenga
Dam Axis has been finalised in Dec.’ 06 based on the model test of
Tenga Dam as the original profile of spillway showed excessive
asymmetric flow of water through the bays of the Spillway. On firming
up of the parameters, excavation works have already been taken up.

Surge Shaft Boring: Although the lining concreting of the Surge
Shaft was originally planned to be carried out after completion of
boring, however, considering the rock condition, lining works for upper
25 mtrs. have been taken up. This has resulted in delay in boring of
the shaft. The works have resumed and are progressing satisfactorily
since.

HPT Boring: Originally the entire HPT portion was underground.
However, due to poor geology, almost throughout the HPT alignment,
it was later decided to make the HPT partly over ground and Partly
underground which rendered slow Progress.

27


Power House Excavation: Geological hurdles are being faced in
maintaining the slope of the Power House excavation, primarily due
to presence of Gondowana formation with alternate layers of
carbonaceous shale and fine grained sand stone. Based on the
suggestion of Experts, boring of cast in situ RCC piles at different
levels is being taken up.

28


ANNEXURE II

NTPC
The details of NTPC’s utilization of IEBR in Financial year
2007-08 are given below and the detailed reasons for less utilization of
TEBR of NTPC in the financial year 2007-08 are enclosed at
Annexure II-A.
Utilisation of IEBR of NTPC in 2007-08

(Rs. in crore)

Description BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 Actual 2007-08
TEBR

Internal Resources 4998.00 5186.90 3781.03
Domestic Borrowings 5279.00 4794.00 3850.00
External Commercial Borrowings 2515.00 1637.10 989.97
Total IEBR 12792.00 11618.00 8621.00

29


ANNEXURE IA

NTPC’S ACTUAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURE FOR 2007-08

(Rs. Crore)

BE

Name of 2007-2008

the Project

1 2

RE Exp. for Variation

2007-2008 2007-2008 (-) shortfall

wat
(+) Excess

5

‘Major Reasons
for

30

ONGOING SCHEMES
Koldam 678.26

Kahalgaon Il 795.18

Sipat-l 1984.27

646.00

Sipat-II

Barh 2014.72

657.28 440.03

831.36 626.20

1750.90 1004.82

830.31

552.32

1815.91 1283.57

217.25

-205.16

-746.08

277.99

Slow progress in Main
dam due to right bank
landslide and geological
occurrence and
subsequent rectification
and grouting works

Slow progress due to
delay in supply of
equipment by Main
plant suppliers and IR
problems at site

Delay in Main Plant
supplies by Russian
supplier, slow progress
due to cancellation of
committed water by
State Government (now
released for one 500
MW) and local agitation

Delay in commissioning
due to cancellation of
committed water by
State Government (now
released for one 500
MW) & local agitation.
Delayed supplies and
erection by BHEL

Delay in Main Plant
supplies by Russian
suppliers and slow
progress at site



1 2 a 4 5 6

6... Korba II 67245 504.77 519.59 14.82

7. Loharinag Pala 280.10 20438 12687 -77.51 Delay in acquisition of
Forest Land and
geological occurrence
leading to consequential
delay in project works

8. Farakka III 117.41 31.2. 358.03 3.20

9... NCTPP II 146.98 665.00 966.40 301.40

10. Tapovan Vishnugad 23241 16946 129.70 39.76 Delay in acquisition of
Forest Land and
geological occurrence
leading to consequential
delay in project works

व, Simhadri II 251.17 252.20 171.03 = 81.17

12, Mauda 27.12 312.65 = 0.0. 312.65 Delay in acquisition of
land. Initial Advance for
Main Plant to be paid
after availability of land.

13. Bongaigaon 2205.15 244.28 23831 5.97

14. Barh 1 370.20 338.80 6676. -272.04 Delay in award of TG
package due to poor
Tesponse.

Sub-Total A 8691.42 8938.53 6483.63 -2454.90

B. NEW PROJECTS

15. North Karanpura 2219 89.50 43.22 -46.28 Delay in land acquisition

16... Rihand Ill 0.00 254.35 0.00. -254.35 Delay in award of Main
Plant due to bidders’
request for extension of
bid opening and non-
receipt of Mega power
status (Received in
May’08)

17... Darlipalli 1175.20 55.00 000. -55.00 Delay in receipt of
clearances

18. Vindhyachal IV 0.00 10.0 0.0. -10.00

19. Other New Projects 267.70 7.28 0.00 728

Sub-Total B 1465.09 416.13 43.22 372.91

31


1 2 3 4 5 6
c R&M 615.07 283.26 332.90 49.64
Completed Schemes 748.53 671.14 505.22 165.92 Delay in final payments
due to parameters not
being achieved in PG
Test
EB EAP 10.44 11.65 5.47 6.18
Capital Addition 272.60 149.78 294.47 144.69
G. Energy Conservation 5.81 6.94 1.69 5.25
H. — Ash Utilisation 8.73 3.12 133 10.24
I Coal Mining 528.50 10345 2881 -74.64 Delay in land acquisition
process
J. JV & Subsidiaries 445.81 1034.00 92.2. -121.77 Delay in award of
Rammam, delay in
payment for
Muzaffarpur TPS
pending vacation of
charge by LIC and less
demand by NTECL
GRAND TOTAL 12792.00 11618.00 8621.00 -2997.00

32


ANNEXURE III

SATLU] JAL VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED
The details of SJVNL‘s utilization of TEBR in Financial year
2007-08 are given below and the detailed reasons for less utilization

of IEBR of SJVNL in the financial year 2007-08 are enclosed at
Annexure III-A.

(Rs. in crores)

Description IEBR Total Plan Actual
Outlay Expenditure
di Estimate (2007-0! 642.80 642.80
Budget Estimate (: 18) 21925
Revised Estimate (2007-08) 399.87 399,87



ANNEXURE III-A
REASONS FOR LESS UTILIZATION OF IEBR OF SJVNL
Himachal Pradesh Projects:
Nathpa Jhakri Hydro Electric Project:

Non-settlement/materialization of claims such as escalation,
acceleration, extension of time, variation, customs duty/sales tax etc.
Non submission of bills by the suppliers against capital spares for
runners & MIV parts.

Rampur Hydro Electric Project:

Geological hurdles such as poor strata of rock encountered in Adits
and HRT are being faced in maintaining the envisaged progress.
However, based on the suggestion of expert remedial measures are
being taken.

Further, Mobilization advance claims not made by the contractors
as per contract provisions.

Luhri Hydro Electric Project:

Due to non-signing of Implementation Agreement between
Government of Himachal Pradesh and SJVNL various scheduled
infrastructure works could not be taken up.

Khab Hydro Electric Project:

Due to local agitation the preliminary works got held up. Further,
due to non-signing of Implementation Agreement between Govt. of
Himachal Pradesh and SJVN various scheduled infrastructure works
could not be taken up.

Uttarakhand Projects :
Devsari HE Project Stage-I (252 MW)

The envisaged works could not be undertaken as original storage
Devsari Dam Scheme (300 MW) has been modified into a three stage
run of river scheme with installed capacity of about 600 MW in order
to reduce the submergence area.

34


The approval for the Stage-I (252 MW) Devsari Scheme was
accorded by Govt. of Uttarakhand on December 17, 2007. Accordingly,
detailed survey & investigation works are underway.

Jakhol Sankri HE Project (45 MW)

Original proposal changed as the project area was falling under
the Wild Life Sanctuary.

The survey & investigation could not be taken up for want of the
approval of revised proposal from Govt. of Uttarakhand.

Naitwar Mori HE Project (56 MW)

The progress towards completion of pre-construction activities and
Preparation of Feasibility Study Report has been affected because of
modification in project proposal to enhance its capacity from 33 MW
to 56 MW. The layout has also been changed from right bank to left
bank.


ANNEXURE IV
छाए

The details of DVC’s utilization of IEBR in Financial year 2007-08
are given below and the detailed reasons for less utilization of IEBR
of DVC in the financial year 2007-08 are enclosed at Annexure IV-A.

(Rs. in crores)

BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 Variance Expenditure in
(2-1) 2007-08
(Provisional)
4271.38 4288.21 16.83 2523.87

The Revised Estimate has been marginally increased (by Rs. 16.83
Crs.) as compared to Budget Estimate. However, the provisional
utilization is approximately 58.86% of the Revised Estimates. The
scheme wise/project wise details are given in table below:—

Name of the Project/Schemes BE. 2007-08 RE. 2007-08 Expenditure
2007-08
(Provisional)
1 2 3 4
Mejia TPS Extn. Uf 5&6 (2x250 MW) 32345.89  42963.22 31949.00
Chandrapura TPS Extn. U# 7&8 (2x250 MW) 59766.22 73423.76 + 43479.00
Kodarma TPS Stage-I:U# 1&2 (2x500 MW) 51492.38  46170.33 26141.00
Durgapur Steel TPS U# 182 (2500 MW) 46859.39  58334.27 37769.00
Raghunathpur TPS U# 1&2 (2x 600 MW) 5304189  35439.40 38689.00
Bokaro ‘A’ TPS (1x 500+20% MW) 68297.53 7958.59 17.00
Mejia Phase-II: Unitl&2 (2x 500 MW) 6723357 —-73058.77 53556.00
Maithon RB TPS (1050 MW) Equity 20000.00 8716.00 6510.00
Contribution to MPL
Bokaro Steel TPS (3x 250 MW) 3200.00 2000.00 0.00
CS) a कम. Stage-I 55.64 0.00 0.00

36


1

3

4

Investigation/Feasibility studies/DPR, etc. 0.00 200.00 0,00
Balpahari Dam/Hydel 226.00 202.00 0.00
Pollution 1651.50 2108.51 734.00
R&M (O.S&U) SCHEMES 768.81 363.00 0.00
T&D SCHEMES 1742231 1617.84 13484.00
COMMUNICATION SCHEMES 1777.02 743.94 59.00
Equity Contribution to BPSCL 3000.00 200.0 0.00
Misc. Spill Over Works: 1] Mejia TPS 0.00 1184.80 0.00
U-1,2&3 (3X210 MW)]

Misc. Spill Over Works: Mejia TPS 000. 69982 0.00
Extn, U# 4 (1x210 MW)

Refurbishment/ Technology Upgradation/ 0.00 3636.96 0.00
Extension/Improvement

All TOTAL (in Rs. Lakhs): 427138.15 42882121 252387
All TOTAL (in Rs. Crs.): 4271.38 4288.21 2523.87



ANNEXURE IV-A

Following are the major project-wise/scheme-wise reasons for under

utilization of the budget provision :—

38

© Mejia TPS Unit-5&6 (2 x 250 MW): The project was

scheduled for commissioning during 10th five year plan,
but it has slipped to 11th five year Plan due to causes
mainly attributable to equipment suppliers and contractors
of M/s BHEL. There was delay in supply and execution by
the EPC contractor.

Multiple packages were involved in EPC contract.
M/s BHEL delayed in selection of sub-vendors for multiple
packages, resulting in slippages of schedule and associated
activities marginally and also inadequate timely supply of
materials and equipment, delay in erection by M/s BHEL;
further delayed (i.e. slow progress in completion) the project
execution.

Chandrapura TPS Unit-7&8 (2 x 250 MW): The project was
scheduled for commissioning during 10th Five Year Plan,
but it has slipped to 11th Five Year Plan.

Initially there is delay in handing over the land to EPC
contractor (M/s BHEL) by about 7 months. Land was
handed over after resettlement of different establishments
in the plant area like hospital, school, dormitory etc. Also
law and order problem and delay in supply and execution
further delayed the project. During the visit of the Hon’ble
Minister of State for Power on 18.4.2008 at DVC Towers, it
was decided that both the units shall be completed by
December 2008.

Bokaro-A TPS Unit-1 (2 x 500 to 500+20% MW): NIT for
execution of the projects was floated through ICB route in
June, 2007 but the same had to be cancelled due to non-
receipt of bids. The fresh NIT issued again in October, 2007
fetched a single offer from M/s Reliance Energy Limited.
The quoted price by M/s REL has been found to be very
high. Decision of DVC Board on acceptance of the bid or
otherwise is awaited.

In this process, the amount kept reserved for making
advance payment to the contractor could not be utilized
during the financial year 2007-08.


Koderma TPS Unit-1&2 (2 x 500 MW): It was expected that
the orders for Coal Handling Plant and Water System
Packages would be placed by 2007-08, which could, however,
be issued during 2008-09 only.

In view of the delays in placement of the orders, the
provisions made in the budget for advance/mobilization
payment could not be utilized in 2007-08.

Durgapur Steel TPS Unit-1&2 (2 x 500 MW): Like in the
case of the Koderma project, placement of orders for Coal
Handling Plant and Water System Package for Durgapur
Project got delayed and were issued in 2008-09.

In view of the delays in placement of the orders, the
provisions made in the budget for advance/mobilization
payment could not be utilized in 2007-08.

Mejia TPS Ph-II Unit-1&2 (2 x 500 MW): Main plant package
has been awarded to M/s BHEL; there is a delay by one
month for achieving Drum lifting milestone of the unit-1.
Due to this some construction activities got delayed and
hence the expenditure as well could not be utilized fully in
2007-08.

Misc. Spill over Works: Some provision was kept (approx.
Rs, 18.85 Crs.) for expenditure on various miscellaneous spill
over works of Mejia TPS Unit-1, 2 and 3 and Mejia TPS
Unit-4, which could not be utilized due to difficulty in
finding a suitable time-slot for shutdown.

Ramgarh TPS Stage-I: It was anticipated that some
preparatory work of the project could be started during
2007-08 and accordingly budget provision for expenditure
to the tune of Rs. 55.64 lakhs was made. The project has
now been decided to be implemented during 12th five year
plan. Hence, the budget provision in 2007-08 could not be
utilized.

Equity Contribution to BPSCL: The project Bokaro Thermal
Power Plant is implemented by Bokaro Power Supply
Company Ltd. (BPSCL) which is a 50:50 joint venture of
DVC and SAIL. The unit size of the project has been
changed to 3x250 MW from initial size of 2x250 MW by
the BPSCL Board. This has resulted in revalidation of the
related statutory clearances, especially MOE&F clearance.
Due to this reason the budget provision could not be
utilized.

39


40

¢ Refurbishment/Technology Up-gradation/Extension/

Improvement: Due to delay in procurement of materials the
provision of Rs. 366.37 crs. could not be utilized.

Communication Schemes: A provision of Rs. 7.44 Crores
was kept for in RE. 2007-08 for different schemes under
the communication programme but only Rs. 0.59 crs. could
be utilized. Shortfall in expenditure was mainly due to the
following:

(i) Non-commissioning of PLCC equipment matching with
Transmissions lines;

(ii) Non-payment of balance amount to V-SAT contractor
due to non-fulfilment of contractual obligations; and

(iii) Expenditure on account of implementation of ULDC
schemes in DVC which, was being recovered through
transmission charges was not reflected in the budget.

R&M Schemes (OS&U): A provision of Rs. 3.63 crores was
kept for in R.E. 2007-08 for different schemes under R&M
programme. The provision was kept mostly for R&M/LE
of Hydel Power plants. As there was delay in placement of
orders, the fund could not utilized in 2007-08.

T&D Schemes: A provision of Rs. 161.18 crs. was kept for
in R.E. 2007-08 for different schemes under T&D programme,
out of which Rs. 134.84 crs. was been utilized. The major
reasons for non-utilization of fund is due to delay in
acquisition and final possession of land for different sub-
stations like Gola, Giridih, Uluberia etc., ROW problems
and local disturbances and delay in obtaining forest
clearance.


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.1.12)

The Committee had noted a similar phenomenon while examining
the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Power and
recommended in their 20th Report that the Government should analyse
the reasons for low utilisation of Plan outlays for the year 2006-07 and
the continuing trend of making expenditure in the last quarter of the
financial year so that the same story should not be repeated the next
year. Taking an exception to low utilisation of Plan outlays by PSUs
and Ministry of Power during 2007-08 as well, the Committee feel
that although various steps for effective utilisation of funds like weekly
review by Secretary, Ministry of Power regarding investment approval,
monthly review by Chairman, CEA, periodic inter-ministerial
coordination meetings, etc. were reported to had been taken by the
Government, not much headway had been made in utilising the Plan
outlays. The Committee, therefore, couldn’t but reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that more effective steps should be taken
by the Government, to plan realistic targets and also ensure regular
and adequate infusion of funds in various projects/schemes in each
quarter of the financial year so that Plan outlays could be fully utilised.
The Committee hoped that the trend of under-utilisation of funds
would be checked in the financial year 2008-09.

Reply of the Government

The Plan outlay of this Ministry for the year 2007-08 was
Rs. 33153.26 crore consisting of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) of
Rs, 5483 crore and IEBR of Rs. 27670.26 crore while the RE has been
kept at Rs. 30690.38 crore consisting of GBS of Rs. 4350 crore and
TEBR of Rs. 26340.38 crore. Against this the utilization of the Plan
funds during the financial year 2007-08 consisted of Gross Budgetary
Support (GBS) of Rs. 4308.93 crore and TEBR of Rs. 21338.94 crore.

The utilization percentage in 2007-08 w.r.t. GBS vis-a-vis RE was
99% and vis-a-vis BE was 78.59%, while the utilization percentage in
2007-08 w.rt. IEBR vis-a-vis RE was 81% and vis-a-vis BE was 77.11%.
Utilisation in the case of GBS for which the funds are released directly

4


by the Ministry was quite satisfactory w.r.t. RE ceiling imposed by the
Ministry of Finance. The utilisation of IEBR by the CPSUs under the
control of Ministry of Power was also substantial. In the financial year
2008-09, out of the total GBS of Rs. 6000 crore for the Ministry,
Rs. 5500 crore is for the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Viduytikaran Yojana
(RGGVY). Since the utilisation in respect of RGGVY in all the past
years has been almost complete (Annexure-V), there is every possibility
of full utilisation in the financial year 2008-09 as far as GBS is
concerned. All out efforts would also be made to utilise the IEBR
fully. Intensified monitoring mechanism as mentioned in the
recommendation will be rigorously implemented so as to ensure that
there is no shortfall in utilisation of Plan outlay by the Ministry of
Power.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 10/4/2008-Budget,
Dated 11.07.2008]

(Recommendation SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.2.22)

The Committee note that there was shortage of vendors to execute
Balance of Plant Works like (i) Ash handling plant, (ii) Coal handling
plant, (iii) Water Treatment Plant including DM plant etc., and this
had become the main hindrance in completion of power projects
resulting in delayed capacity addition. The Committee observe that
the Government is taking certain steps to meet the constraints in the
setting up of power plants such as tie-ups for obtaining critical
equipment and for execution of the balance of plant works. Efforts are
reportedly being made to involve international conclave of suppliers/
vendors of coal handling plants/ash handling plants/water treatment
plants equipment to enhance the manufacturing capacity of the existing
vendors and to widen the vendor base and create new entrepreneurs.
The Ministry is also taking steps to revise the qualifying requirements
to encourage more vendors and new entrepreneurs to come forward
for manufacturing main plant equipment. The Committee would,
however, like to know the outcome of the steps taken by the
Government to develop vendor base for Balance of Plant works of
power plants.

Reply of the Government

The Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh,
Planning Commission on standardization of specifications of Thermal
Power Plants and development of vendors for Balance of Plants (BoPs)
has submitted its Report regarding development of vendors for BoPs

42


on 24th January 2008. The main recommendations of the above report
are summarized below:

(a) Order for BoPs (or EPC of BoPs) should be placed within
six months of placement of order for main plant and
equipment.

(0) Liquidated damages for delay in execution of project in time
should be enhanced to discourage cornering of large number
of contracts by a few suppliers.

(c) CEA to finalise the pre-qualification requirement for BoP
vendors by Feb., 2008 end.

(d) CEA and NTPC to complete the exercise for finalizing the
guidelines for standardization/broad design criterion for
various packages of BoP progressively by the end of Aug.,
2008.

(e) Capacity building for availability of skilled manpower to
be taken up by the project developers.

(f) Whether a level playing field is being provided to domestic
supplier needs to be examined.

The Ministry of Power & CEA have already taken an initiative in
coordination with CII to sensitize the industry about the requirement
of BoPs by organizing the international conclave in July, 2007 followed
by regional level Conferences at Chennai & Chandigarh. The actual
benefits of above efforts will take time to materialize. However, it is
felt that it will definitely result in development of new vendors for
the 11th Plan projects and for future plans. The Committee set up in
CEA to review the qualifying requirements of BoPs is likely to submit
its report shortly.

NTPC Ltd. has entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with BHEL
to take up work relating to Engineering, Procurement and Construction
(EPC) for power plants and other infrastructure projects. NIPC Ltd.
has also entered into an MoU with Bharat Forge Limited to promote
a joint venture company initially to take up the manufacturing of
casting, forgings, fittings and high pressure pipings. However, keeping
in view the scarcity of vendors for manufacture of Balance of Plants,
this JV would also examine the feasibility of manufacturing and supply
of BoPs.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 2/23/2008-P&P,
Dated 23.06.2008]
43


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17-19 of Chapter-I of the report)
(Recommendation 51. No. 6, Para No. 2.2.24)

As regards enhancing the manufacturing capacity in respect of
main power plant equipment, the Committee note that the BHEL has
planned to gradually enhance their main plant equipment
manufacturing capacity from 6000 MW/year to 15,000 MW by the end
of 2009. Further, BHEL is also reported to be taking advance
procurement action for critical power plant materials like forgings and
castings, which had a long lead-time for manufacture. A MoU has
been signed by NTPC and BHEL for carrying out EPC activities and
equipment manufacturing in power sector. Further, NTPC and
Bharat Forge Ltd. have also forged a Joint Venture company to
manufacture castings, forgings, high-pressure piping, power plant
equipment etc. The Committee also note that an agreement has been
signed between Larsen and Toubro and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
(MHD) of Japan to manufacture supercritical boilers and large size steam
turbines. However, taking note of the fact that manufacturing facilities
from these Joint Ventures may also take few years to come up, the
Committee are apprehensive that the constraints in supply of equipment
would be overcome immediately. The Committee would, therefore, like
to know the time frame within which these Joint Venture Schemes
would yield results and also till that time when other alternatives are
available with the Government to meet the Present requirements of
power sector.

Reply of the Government

Status of the Joint ventures regarding enhancing the manufacturing
capacity is as follows:

NTPC-BHEL Joint Venture

A joint Venture Company “NTPC BHEL Power Projects Private
Limited” has been incorporated on 29.4.2008.

Main Objectives of the Company are:

* To explore, secure and execute EPC contract(s) for Power
Plants and other Infrastructure Projects in India and abroad
including plant engineering, project management, quality
assurance, quality control, procurement, logistics, site
management, erection and commissioning services.


© To engage in manufacturing and supply of equipment for
power plants and other infrastructure projects in India and
abroad.

The Board of the Company is presently under constitution, which
shall prepare the Business Plan of the company covering Road Map
for taking up various activities for meeting the objectives. The JV
Company would be operational and ready to take up EPC assignments
within the 11th Plan.

NTPC-Bharat Forge Limited Joint Venture

An MoU has been signed between NTPC and Bharat Forge Limited
with the aim of establishing a facility, subject to establishment of techno-
commercial viability, to initially take up manufacture of castings,
forgings, fittings and High Pressure pipings required for Power and
other industries, Balance of Plant (BoP) equipment for the power sector
ete. including technological tie-ups, tie-up with strategic partners etc.

Activities related to the formation of the Joint Venture Company
have been initiated. After incorporation of the proposed Joint Venture
Company, its Board will prepare Business Plan of the Company
covering Road Map for taking up various activities.

Besides CEA has reported that the following prospective companies
have intended to augment/set up manufacturing facilities in the country
for super critical units.

(a) BHEL (Boiler and TG)
(0) Ansaldo Caldie (Boiler)
(c) L&T—MHI (Boiler and TG)
(७) Toshiba—JSW (TG)
(e) Alstom-Bharat Forge (TG)
Out of 5 Companies, 3 companies at (०) to (e) are JV Companies.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s 0.0. No. 3/4/2008-Th-I.,
Dated 23.07.2008)

(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.2.25)

While examining the constraints expressed by the Ministry in the
capacity addition programme, the Committee note that there is a

45


shortage of skilled manpower, i.e., welders, bar benders, crane operators,
commissioning team etc. in the power sector. The Committee see an
opportunity in the fact that the development of the power sector will
help provide more and more jobs to the youth, trainees in these skills
in various ITIs located in various States across the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should impress
upon the State Governments to arrange to provide training to students
of ITIs in these and other power sector related tasks and, if necessary
also increase the number of seats in these training institutes; and give
more funding to National Power Training Institute (NPTI) in Faridabad
to increase its training facilities.

Reply of the Government

The issue of shortage of manpower has been recognized. It was
raised in the International Conclave organized by Ministry of Power
and Central Electricity Authority on 4th & 5th July, 2007 on “Key
Inputs for Accelerated Development of Power Sector during 11th Plan
& Beyond”. Participants included 85 industries such as BHEL, Dong
Fang, L&T, MHI, Ansaldo, Alstom, VA Tech., Toshiba, various research
institutions, State Governments, Central and State Regulatory
Commissions, Ministries of Labour and Employment and Heavy
Industry, Public Sector Companies and other organisations.

The Conclave noted that the large capacity addition planned in
generation, transmission & distribution sectors offers a great opportunity
for employment generation and building up of a large skilled
manpower base. Shortage of skilled manpower was recognized as an
issue of concern, more so in the context of competing requirements on
account of the infrastructure development boom in the country. It was
agreed that one of the steps required to be taken urgently is to train
the required additional manpower from the existing ITIs to suit the
requirements of the power sector. There was a consensus in the
Conclave that the project developers should contribute to building up
of trained manpower base which could be utilized by them and their
contractors /sub-contractors.

One of the recommendations of the Conclave was adoption of ITIs
located close to the project site by the project developers and major
EPC contractors and who would contribute by means of providing
necessary infrastructure at the ITIs and also assist in organizing practical
training programmes at the project sites under the technical
apprenticeship programme.

46


One of the positive outcomes of the International Conclave
mentioned above was the initiation of a dialogue with the Ministry of
Labour. The Ministry of Labour had informed that 500 ITIs out ofa
total of 1896 ITIs (as on 1.1.2007) owned by the State Governments are
being upgraded through the World Bank assisted scheme and domestic
funding scheme of Government of India. The Ministry of Labour,
Government of India had also informed that it had launched a Scheme
for up-gradation of the remaining 1396 Government ITIs through
Public-Private Partnership from 2007-08.

The issue regarding requirement of manpower was further
discussed in a Seminar organized by Ministry of Power on
“Requirement and Availability of Highly Skilled Manpower for the
Power Sector” in October, 2007 with participation from Power
Secretaries and Secretaries (Technical Education) from the States/UTs,
Director General (Employment and Training), Ministry of Labour,
Chairman, AICTE, CPSUs, Autonomous Bodies and Statutory Bodies
under the administrative control of Ministry of Power.

‘As a result of the deliberations, it was decided that Task Forces be
constituted to look into the following areas:

(i) Curriculum setting (for new trades as well as existing ones)

(ii) Road map for development of human resources for 11th
and 12th Plans.

(iii) Key performance indicators—Employment satisfaction, Status
of teaching methodology, Physical infrastructure and
Teaching training capability.

(iv) Power Sector Job portal to be set up.

(v) Distance learning and practical training to develop highly
skilled workforce.

Central Electricity Authority have submitted the Draft Reports/
Reports of the Task Forces which are currently under examination.

For the year 2008-09, Planning Commission has made an allocation
of Rs. 20 crore for NPTI. Planning Commission has allocated only
Rs. 30,451.91 crore as Ministry of Power’s GBS for the 11th Plan period
as against Rs. 33,207.99 crore as the revised minimum requirement
requested for by the Ministry. In this exercise Rs. 80 crore has been
kept for allocation to NPTI as GBS for the 11th Plan.

[Ministry of Power, U.O. No. 12/3/2008-T&R, dated 9.7.2008]

47


(Recommendation SI. No. 10, Para 2.3.20)

The Committee observed that the 10th Plan capacity addition target
for NHPC which was 4357 MW (1 number of projects), was revised to
3252 MW (8 number of projects) during the mid term appraisal in the
year 2004. The Committee also note that the total 10th Plan allocation
for NHPC was Rs. 32,226 crore including Rs. 14,200 crore as Budgetary
Support. The Plan outlay was revised (during Mid-Term Appraisal) to
Rs. 20,107 crore, with a budgetary support of Rs. 10,645 crore. The
actual utilization out of this, however, during the 10th plan has only
been Rs. 10,888 crore including budgetary support of Rs. 4,982 crore.
The Committee are unhappy to note that only about 33 per cent of
the total outlays could be used by NHPC in 10th Plan period. The
Committee were informed that the main reason for the slippage was
that the projects included in the 10th Plan were at the initial stages of
preparation of DPRs and the approvals could not be obtained in time.
The Committee are constrained to observe that the actual capacity
addition of 1970 MW (4 number of Projects) achieved by NHPC during
10th Plan was quite small as against the target of 4357 MW set for the
Plan period. The Committee, therefore, cannot but deplore the way
the unrealistic targets (both physical and financial) were set for NHPC
during the 10th Plan period. The Committee further observe that NHPC
plans to add 4713 MW from nine hydro electric projects during the
11th Plan period. The Committee hope that the achievement of targets
by NHPC for the 11th Plan would not follow the same path as that
of the 10th Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommend that execution
of hydro projects by NHPC should be taken up not only in a more
realistic manner but also on a fast track mode. The Committee expects
the NHPC to achieve both the physical and financial targets during
the 11th Plan period.

Reply of the Government

The reasons (physical and financial) for not achieving the target
fixed for 10th Plan are given below:—

Physical Targets

Major reason for slippage in achievement of capacity addition is
that slipped projects (except Teesta-V), which were included in X plan,
were at initial stage of preparation of DPR. The Project wise reasons
for non-achievement of the targets of capacity addition are enclosed at
Annex-I.

48


Financial Targets

When the X Plan was prepared, originally most of the projects
were in the initial stage of preparation of Feasibility Report and their
preparedness were not adequate. Further, 2 projects (937 MW)
ie, Purulia PSS (900 MW) and Bav-II (37 MW) were dropped from X
plan and 4 projects (940 MW) were approved later than envisaged for
various reasons. These are Teesta Low Dam-III (132 MW), Teesta Low
Dam-IV (168 MW, later on revised to 160 MW), Sewa-II (120 MW) and
Omkareshwar (520 MW).

XI Plan
Physical Targets

NHPC has proposed a capacity addition of 4713 MW on its own
and 520 MW through JV, during XI Plan. Only those projects which
have been sanctioned by GOI has been included for benefit during the
XI plan. Even out of sanctioned projects, two projects viz. Nimoo Bazgo
(45 MW) and Chutak (44 MW) have been targeted under “Best Effort”
category due to location of these projects in hostile climatic conditions
of Laddakh region. Amongst these Omkareshwar Project (520 MW)
has already been commissioned in November 2007 and Teesta-V
(510 MW) in Mar, 08.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. 1/ 19/2007—DO(NHPC),
Dated 21.07.2008]

(Recommendation 51. No. 11, Para 2.3.21)

Regarding Subansiri HE Project being executed by NHPC, the
Committee observe that although the project got the CCEA approval
on September 3, 2003, for execution within a period of 7 years and
the civil construction work packages for Dam works and Power House
Works were awarded on 19th Dec., 2003, the project was delayed
pending final forest clearance and on account of imposition and
subsequent payment of net present value—which further delayed
physical possession of encumbrance free land. After achieving the
milestones of diversion of the river in December, 2007, and completion
of Power House excavation in August, 2007, the commissioning of the
ist unit of the project was now scheduled for 30th October, 2011.
Expressing confidence that now with the constitution of a “Steering
Committee” to address the problems encountered in the execution of
work, the Committee desire that the project be positively completed in
the llth Plan period as per revised schedule. The Committee would,

49


however, like to be apprised of the developments taking place in
implementation of this important project from time to time.

Reply of the Government

Standing Committee on Energy Demands for grants for year
2008-2009, has already appreciated the initial teething troubles which
Subansiri Lower HE Project has faced after obtaining CCEA approval
on 3rd Sep., 2003. Further to above, it is brought out that the work on
all the fronts for the project started in full swing since Jan., 2005 until
27th Jan., 2008. On 28th Jan., 2008, a major slide took place in back
slope of the Power House. The debris flew in the entire Power House
pit excepting the unit-1 area. After this slide, the work in the Power
House came to standstill. Corporate management of NHPC, constituted
an External Expert Committee to examine the causes of failure and
suggest remedial measures for restoration works of the back hill slope
of Power House. The Committee has submitted its report and same is
under examination by NHPC for incorporating the advice/ suggestions
in the construction drawings of the Power House. It is expected that
the work will be resumed after the monsoon (May to September). The
Progress in the HRT intake area and surge shaft suffered due to the
slide in the Power House which disrupted the access road etc.

The work in the dam is reportedly going on as scheduled. The
upstream and down stream coffer dams are ready and the excavation
in the dam pit is also getting completed. In this regard, it is expected
that the main concreting in the dam body would start after the
monsoon period i.e. from October, 2008 onwards. The stripping of
abutments of the dam is proceeding as per schedule and the stripping
work of the left abutment is almost complete.

The project is now planned for commissioning in January, 2012.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s, U.O No. 1 /19/2007—DO(NHPC),
Dated 21.07.2008]

(Recommendation SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.3.22)

The Committee are further constrained to note that in the case of
NEEPCO also, as against Budget Estimates of 1258.70 crore in 2007-08,
the Revised Estimates during the year were only Rs. 260.90 crore. The
main reason for low Revised Estimates was the slippage of Kameng
hydro electric project which was initially envisaged to be completed
by November 2009. The Committee note that work on Kameng hydro
electric project suffered initially due to various factors like

50


unprecedented geology, poor approach road as well as delay in
mobilization of equipment and manpower by the package contractor.
The Committee further note that the Government has appointed a
panel of experts comprising personnel of national repute to assist and
render advice on design and construction aspects of Kameng hydro
electric project so that the project is expedited as rescheduled. The
Committee hope that the project would now be completed as per
revised commissioning schedule of March, 2011.

Reply of the Government

Progress of various major civil works of Kameng HE project
suffered primarily on account of extremely poor geological strata
encountered in various work fronts. Necessary action has been taken
for augmentation of resources and manpower so as to adhere to the
revised commissioning schedule of March 2011.

In view of the modifications suggested by the Committee
constituted by the Ministry of Power, Govt of India, the crest level of
Bichom and Tenga dam has been lowered on account of high silt load.
The design and drawing under revised parameters had been carried
out. The excavation of Bichom dam under revised parameter has
commenced. In order to augment the rate of HRT boring in this adverse
geology, methodology has been reviewed in the context of encountered
rock strata, However, marginal improvement in rock condition has
been observed in some stretches where the various state of the art
tunneling techniques have been adopted in place of conventional
methods, to yield better progress. In order to achieve maximum
progress, optimization of blasting pattern and pull has been carried
out considering the geology of the heading.

All efforts are being made both at corporate and site level to
comunission the projects as per the revised schedule of March 2011.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry's U.O No. 45/3/2008-H-I,
Dated 12.05.2008]

(Recommendation 51. No. 13, Para No 2.4.8)

The Committee are constrained to note that NTPC, a Central PSU
engaged in power generation for the last three decades, was unable to
target realistic outlays during 2007-08. Against the estimated plan outlay
of Rs. 12792.00 crore for NTPC during 2007-08, revised outlay were
Rs. 11618.00 crore, showing a substantial decrease. The Committee note
that the Budget Estimates of Rs. 1175.20 crore for the proposed thermal

51


power station of NTPC at Darlipalli, were drastically reduced at Revised
Estimates stage of Rs. 55 crore, showing a shortfall of Rs. 1120.20 crore
as there were various problems regarding supply of water to the project.
Also another important project, i. Badarpur Expansion Project could
not be taken up due to soil conditions and non-availability of relaxation
of chimney height from Ministry of Environment and Forests. The
Committee expect realistic plan outlays to be formulated by NTPC in
future and at the same time they desire that the Plan outlay for
2008-09 be fully utilized by NTPC. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action pian formulated by the NTPC for the year
2008-09 in this regard.

Reply of the Government

As regards realistic outlays, it needs to be appreciated that outlays
are prepared considering the status of on-going Projects and the targets
envisaged for new power projects. However, in the case of new Projects,
outlay is particularly linked to investment approval date and main
plant award date which in turn depend on the availability of various
input tie-ups/clearances to be obtained from external agencies. Delay
in input tie-ups or availability of clearances leads to shifting of main
plant award date resulting in reduction of outlays /expenditure.

NTPC’s outlay for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 13588 crore. The outlay
has been broken up into monthly targets based on the physical progress
of projects. Each project is reviewed every month by project review
team especially constituted for this purpose. The exceptions out of this
review are flagged to the top management for corrective measures
and directions. In addition to this, reviews are carried out by the top
management at regular intervals to expedite the projects, both at site
and at corporate centre. Actual budget utilization vis-a-vis the monthly
targets is also reviewed by NTPC’s Board of Directors so as to facilitate
taking corrective actions wherever necessary.

Further, NTPC vigorously follows up with BHEL/Main Plant
supplier for timely completion of supplies and subsequent erection at
site so that the identified project milestones are fully achieved and
corresponding outlays are fully utilised.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. 3/4/2008-Th-1,
Dated 23.07.2008)

(Recommendation 51. No. 14, Para No. 2.4.9)

Thé Committee note that NTPC had taken up R&D works in the
10th Plan period. However, the efforts made were developmental in

52



nature and did not exactly qualify as R&D since research component
in fundamental science was minimum. The Committee further observe
that NTPC envisages to upgrade and strengthen the R&D centre
facilities established by it at a cost of Rs. 28 crore. The Committee are
also happy to note the commitment on the part of NTPC to invest
0.5% of its net profit every year on R&D activities, over and above the
capital expenditure for Energy Technology Research Centre and that
NTPC has also entered into research collaborations with 10 leading
research institutes for 14 research projects in various areas of efficiency
and environment, with reference to power generation, to be completed
over a time period of 18 to 48 months at a cost of around Rs. 9.5
crore. The Committee, however, desire to know the details of the 14
R&D projects proposed to be taken at a cost of Rs. 9.5 crore and
recommend that the proposed outlays be fully and properly utilized
by NTPC and the projects completed as targeted.

Reply of the Government

Details of 14 R&D projects costing approximately Rs. 9 crores being
taken up by NTPC’s Energy Technologies department are given below:—

si. Name of the Project Total Expenditure Expected
No. expected till deliverable
R&D cost date
(Rs. Lacs) (Rs. Lacs)
1 2 3 4 5
1. Development of 903 reactor 95 18... 503 based flue gas
and associated components for conditioning system which
$03—Flue Gas Conditioning can be dovetailed with
(Collaborative R&D project Ammonia based flue gas
with NCL Pune). conditioning system to form
dual conditioning system.
2. Development of Artificial 20... 9.5. 88३ time operator advisory
Intelligence based Modeling system to run the plant at
& Optimization system for maximum efficiency all the
SG-TG Cycle (Collaborative time.

R&D project with NCL Pune).
3. Computational Fluid Dynamics 40 1724 ~—-1, CED model of 210 MW

(CFD) Modeling of Coal Fired coal fired boiler.
Boiler. (Collaborative R&D 2. Reduced order
project with NCL Pune). phenomenological model.

53


2 a

10.

IL.

CO2 separation using membrane 24
contractors based on ionic liquid
(Collaborative R&D project with

NCL Pune).

Anoxic Microbial sequestration
of carbon dioxide in flue gas
to methane. (Collaborative

R&D project with ARI, Pune).

Development of Adsorbent 792
based process for the Tecovery

of the CO2 from power plant

flue gasses (Collaborative R&D

project with IIT, Mumbai).

Development of Adsorbent 79.2
based process for the recovery

of the CO2 from power plant

flue gasses (Collaborative R&D

Project with IIP Dehradun).

Development of Adsorbent 89
based process for the Tecovery

of the CO2 from power plant

flue gasses (Collaborative

R&D project with CSMCRI

Bhavnagar).

Development of Adsorbent 50
based process for the recovery

of the CO2 from power plant

flue gasses (Collaborative

R&D project with NEERI

Nagpur).

Urea based flue gas 65
conditioning system

(Collaborative R&D project

with IIT, Kharagpur).

Improvement of Turbine
Cycle Heat Rate through
Multi-Composition Ammonia
Liquor Absorption Engine
(MALAE) (Collaborative
R&D project with UICT
Mumbai).

54.53

71.13

20

95

31.96

28,38

26.39

13

Membrane separation
Process for CO2 separation.

Bio sequestration of CO2
and conversion to methane.

Pressure swing adsorption
(PSA) process for CO2
separation,

Pressure swing adsorption
(PSA) process for CO2
separation.

Pressure swing adsorption
(PSA) process for CO2
separation, हा

Pressure swing adsorption
(PSA) process for CO2
separation,

Process design package for
Urea based flue gas
conditioning.

100 KW MALAE cycle pilot
plants. Design for
bottoming cycle ७
210 MW / 500 MW unit
based on MALAE cycle.

54


1 2 3 4 5

12. Modeling and Design of 59.31 10.56 — Improved design of cooling
Cooling towers & Their tower and software for
Components for Optimum online performance
Approach Temperature. monitoring of cooling tower

(Collaborative R&D project
with UICT Mumbai)

13. Develop and Deliver 125.00 Automated boiler tube
Automated Boiler Tube inspection system
Inspection System for Coal
Based Thermal Power Plants
(Collaborative R&D project
with BARC, Mumbai)

14, Transfer of Ammonia Based 75.00 Ammonia based flue gas
Flue Gas Conditioning (AFGC) conditioning system
technology to NTPC, set up
of prototype facility and further
research for the improvement
of efficacy of AFGC

Total 926.37 227.28

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 3/4/2008-Th-I,
Dated 2.06.2008]

(Recommendation SI. No. 15, Para No 2.5.9)

The Committee observe that the Government is making all efforts
to obtain long-term coal linkages based on the capacity addition targets
for the 11th Plan. The committee also note that NTPC and CIL have
initiated the model fuel supply agreement which will be signed with
subsidiary companies of CIL for supply of coal to power stations.
Further, NTPC has kept all options open for the import of coal. Taking
note of the fact, that 26 thermal power plants monitored by CEA have
been declared as critical due to short supply/stock of coal, the
Committee recommend that the Government should take necessary
steps to ensure adequate supply of coal to existing thermal power
stations. At the same time, the Committee urge the Government to
identify well in advance the dedicated coal blocks/linkages for thermal
power plants targeted to be completed in the 11th Plan.

Reply of the Government

Out of 56670 MW coal based power projects envisaged for
commissioning during the 11th Plan period, long term linkages/

55


dedicated coal blocks have already been granted by the Ministry of
Coal for 51640 MW capacity. Recommendations for long term coal
linkage to the remaining 5030 MW capacity have already been sent to
Ministry of Coal. On the advice of Ministry of Coal, power utilities,
including NTPC, have been asked by the Ministry of Power to import
20 MT coal during 2008-09 in order to meet the shortfall of coal
production. Through vigorous monitoring of the supply of coal to the
power stations at all levels, efforts are being made to ensure that
utility power stations in the country do not suffer generation loss due
to shortage of coal.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 3/4/2008-Th-1,
Dated 23.07.2008]

(Recommendation Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.6.5)

The Committee note that the Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs)
are ambitious projects of the Ministry as they would immensely help
in the capacity addition programme of the Government. The Committee
further observe that bidding process for UMPPs located in Sasan (MP),
Mundra (Gujarat) and Krishnapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) has been
completed and Special Purpose Vehicle has been transferred to the
executive companies. The Committee note with satisfaction that because
of the efforts made by the Ministry of Power four of the UMPPs are
reported to be at the stage of take off and construction work for three
of them would be started soon. The Committee, however, find that
the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has identified an alternate site
for a UMPP in Orissa and the State Government was communicated
the recommendations of CEA on 20th September, 2007, approval for
identified site and water allocation has yet to be consented to by the
Government of Orissa. The Committee further observe that the selection
of site and initiation of bidding process for setting up UMPPs in the
States of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Karnataka are contingent upon
the necessary inputs/clearances by the respective State Governments.
While observing that involvement of State Governments in the whole
process of identification of sites, allotment of land and water for the
setting up of UMPPs as well as relocation of affected families in the
respective State were very important for the timely development of
these projects, the Committee once again reiterate their recommendation
made in their 22nd report on Ultra Mega Power Projects, that the
success of UMPPs depends on the support of and coordination among
various players involved, ie., the Central Government, the State
Government, project developers, consultants, etc. The Committee are
of the opinion that lack of coordination among these agencies could

56


derail the capacity addition programme during the 11th and 12th Plan
periods. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
should ensure that all agencies work in tandem for the completion of
UMPPs. The Committee also desire that Central/State Government
should take necessary steps in advance to settle the local issues, if
any, before the State Government offers a site to set up an UMPP. The
Committee hope that the UMPPs would be set up in the specified
timeframe to facilitate the capacity addition as targeted.

Reply of the Government

1. It is well recognized that development of UMPP requires
support and coordination between the various players involved
particularly the State Governments. Keeping this in view a coordinated
approach is being adopted for the development of UMPPs. The Project
specific Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed under PFC are
responsible for carrying out various developmental activities on behalf
of the procurers which include appointment of consultants to undertake
preparation of project reports, preparation of environmental Impact
Assessment Reports, Preparation of bidding documents, carrying out
bidding process, acquisition of land, getting clearances regarding water
and environment & forests etc. The Boards of SPVs includes officials
of the PFC, the representatives of the distribution companies of the
major power procuring States. CEA is providing the technical support
to the SPVs in formulation of project reports and other feasibility
studies. Power Grid Corporation of India (PGCIL) is providing support
in formulating the transmission system for evacuation of power. State
Governments are being involved right from the beginning i.e. in site
identification, land acquisition, water allocation, R&R Plan, participation
in various Committees for undertaking the competitive bidding process,
facilitation of signing of the Power Purchase Agreement, Payment
Security Mechanism etc.

2. It is submitted that the scheme of developing UMPPs has
following mechanisms for active involvement of the concerned State
Governments:

(i) Involvement of the State Government agencies has been
ensured from the initial stage itself. Probable sites as
identified by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) in
consultation with Central Mine Planning & Design Institute
(CMPDI), National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) and
Railways/sites as proposed by the States, are visited by a
team of officers from CEA, PFC and concerned State
agencies.

57



(Gi) On the basis of the inputs provided by the above mentioned
State agencies a likely site is identified by CEA.

(iii) Thereafter, CEA holds meetings with senior State
Government officials to obtain their specific confirmation
about the availability of land and water for the identified
likely site.

‘(iv) This is followed by a formal request to the State Government
for making available land and water.

(v) The State agencies also continue to be involved at different
stages of the process. The representative of the Power
Utilities who are getting to procure major share of electricity
from the project are nominated by the concerned State
Governments on the Board of the Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) formed for a particular UMPP. The Board of the SPV
takes final decision at various stages of the bidding process
for the particular UMPP.

(vi) The representative of the State Power Utilities are also
consulted in finalization of the project specific bidding
documents.

(vii) After award of the project, a monitoring committee is
constituted for every UMPP to review and facilitate
resolution of issues arising during implementation of the
Project. These committees are co-chaired by a Member of
the Central Electricity Authority and the Principal Secretary/
Secretary (Energy) of the concerned State Government.

3. Before selecting a particular site for the UMPP a team of
Officers from CEA, PFC and State Utilities invariably visit the various
available alternative sites. It is only on the basis of the inputs provided
by the State agencies that CEA selects a particular site for UMPP. Also
in most of the cases the Central team held series of meetings with
senior State Government officials to obtain their specific confirmation
about the availability of land and water for the UMPPs.

4. However, the observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been
noted and all efforts will be made to improve the level of coordination
with the State agencies.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 2/23/2008-P&P,
Dated 23.06.2008]

58


(Recommendation 51. No. 18, Para No. 2.7.6)

The Committee observe that the present installed captive power
generation capacity in the country is 22335 MW. The Committee note
that the captive power generation is a means of decentralized
generation with low T&D losses; and to also reduce the cost, as there
was no need to set up a transmission system. Further, the Government
is taking substantive measures to facilitate captive power generation
plants to provide the spare generating capacity to the grid and it has
also been striving to do away with restrictive levies, duties and
regulations in a time bound manner. The Committee further note that
the Government is considering a proposal for amending the existing
mega power policy, which, inter-alia provides for extending the Mega
Power Project status benefits to captive and merchant power plants,
subject to qualifying conditions. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Government should finalise the mega power policy at the
earliest and benefits from the same should not be confined only to the
captive power generators but the project in the State sector should
also be extended mega policy benefits in order to increase and
encourage participation of the States in the power generation. The
Committee also desire that the Government should also help captive
power generation in getting coal linkages, water supply etc. and thereby
encourage more and more private entrepreneurs to set up such power
projects.

Reply of the Government

A proposal to amend the existing mega power policy is under
consideration of the Ministry of Power in the wake of—(i) need to
provide impetus to accelerated power generation in the context of the
goals set out in the National Electricity Policy, 2005; (ii) Reforms in
the power sector including finalisation of Tariff Policy, 2006 and new
Hydro Policy, 2008. The 11th Plan target for power generation is 78,577
MW, which is 60% of the country’s total generation capacity at the
end of the 10th Plan. Sustaining achievement of a power growth rate
of this magnitude on a sustainable basis during the next decade calls
for modification of the current mega power policy.

Accordingly, the proposal seeks to liberalise the mega power policy
further by, inter-alia, providing—

(i) Deleting the requirement of privatization of distribution in
the power purchasing States.

59


(ii) Covering Merchant Power Plants and Captive Power Plants
under Mega Power Policy subject to meeting the threshold
capacity requirements.

(iii) Deleting the requirement of inter-state sale of power.

Further, Government has taken various legislative, policy and
administrative measures to facilitate captive generation and utilization
of surplus capacity.

Under the Electricity Act, 2003, captive power plants, including
group captive, have been freely permitted. The Act provides that any
person may construct, maintain or operate a captive generating plant
and dedicated transmission lines. Under the provisions of the Act,
every person, who has constructed a captive generating plant and
maintains and operates such plant, shall have the right to open access
for the purposes of carrying electricity from his captive generating
plant to the destination of his use, subject to the availability of
transmission capacity.

National Electricity Policy, notified in February, 2005, emphasizes
the need for bringing surplus capacity available with a large number
of captive and standby generating stations in India to the grid
continuously or during certain time periods.

Tariff Policy, notified in January, 2006, recognizes that captive
generation is an important means to make competitive power available
and urges the Electricity Regulatory Commissions to create an enabling
environment that encourages captive plants to be connected to the
grid.

The Conference of Chief Ministers on Power Sector Issues held in
May, 2007, has resolved to facilitate captive power plants to provide
the spare generating capacity to the grid and strive to do away with
restrictive levies, duties and regulations in a time bound manner.

Ministry of Power has been actively involved in moderating the
charges/duties on open access, cross-subsidy, etc. Various conferences
and seminars with the stakeholders have been held to evolve consensus
and expedite actions on the concerned issues, the latest being the Round
Table of Forum of Regulators held on 5.11.2007 and the Conference of
Chief Secretaries on Power Sector Issues held on 19th February, 2008.

The Captive Power Plants (CPPs) have been getting coal linkages
from the coal companies under the Ministry of Coal. The water
allocation to the CPPs is provided by the State Governments.

(Ministry of Power, Ministry's U.O. No. PS-1/2008-IPC,
Dated 25.06.2008]
60


Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 28 of Chapter-I of report)
(Recommendation 51. No. 19, Para No 2.8.9)

The Committee note that the use of supercritical technologies helps
in faster and cleaner capacity addition due to large unit size, fuel
efficiencies and reduced emission. The supercritical technologies also
give better load cycling. The Committee, however, express concern at
the high levels of carbon dioxide emission by power projects in the
environment. The Committee also note that supercritical technology in
the power plants has a higher thermal efficiency of about 40% as
compared to 38.6% for sub-critical units of 500 MW. Apart from this,
Circulating Fluidized Bed Combustion (CFBC) Technology is also being
adopted as a cleaner technology in the power plants. Moreover, the
Ministry has stated that the Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle
(IGCC) has been adopted in the world for low ash coal, which was
not suitable for Indian high ash coal. In this connection, the Committee
recommend that multipoint efforts for development of indigenous
technology should be made and a special R&D project be prioritized
for developing suitable technology for use of high ash coal with
reduced emissions. Besides adopting other cleaner technologies available
in the world for reducing the carbon emissions by power plants, the
Committee also recommend that the government should examine the
feasibility of using carbon dioxide for useful purposes like enhanced
oil recovery or for making ethanol, etc.

Reply of the Government

The reply regarding adoption of supercritical technology is given
in the reply of Para No 2.8.10.

NTPC has been interacting with international partner/organizations
for enhancing efficiency in fossil fuel based power plants. NTPC is
also pursuing with BHEL to set up an Integrated Gasification Combined
Cycle Project (IGCC) at Auraiya. A Joint team of NIPC and BHEL has
been set up to work on the IGCC.

As to the feasibility of using carbon dioxide for useful purposes
like enhanced oil recovery or for making ethanol, etc, Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas, has been addressed for taking appropriate
action in this regard(copy enclosed).

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 3/4/2008-Th-L,
Dated 23.07.2008}

61


(Recommendation 51. No. 20, Para No 2.8.10)

The Committee note with satisfaction that the supercritical
technologies are under installation at Sipat and Barh Thermal Power
Stations (TPS) of NTPC Ltd. A number of other 600/800 MW power
Stations based on supercritical technology were going to be set up by
NTPC and the State utilities. The Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs)
are also envisaged to be set up with supercritical parameters. Taking
note of the fact that the supercritical technology has been adopted by
various developed countries like USA, Japan, Germany, Korea, Russia
etc. and that its use will result in the saving of about four per cent
of fuel and correspondingly less emission, the Committee desire that
the Government should accord high priority to the development and
use of supercritical technology in the power plants to every possible
extent.

Reply of the Government

In order to promote Supercritical Technology in the Thermal Power
Projects in the country, Government has decided the methodology for
the award of 7 units of 660 MW & 6 units of 800 MW Supercritical
Units, which would pave the way for progressive indigenization of
Supercritical Technology in India. States are also setting up new power
plants based on supercritical technology. The list of Supercritical projects
that may come up in the 12th Plan in Central/State sector other than
those being set up through tariff based competitive bidding including
UMPPs are as below:—

Sl.No. — Project Name Capacity Executing Agency
1, Darlipalli, Orissa 4x800 MW NTPC
2. Tanda Expn., UP 2x660 MW NTPC
3. Pench, MP 2x660 MW NTPC
4. Mejja, UP 2x660 MW NTPC-UP JV
5. New Nabinagar, Bihar 2x660 MW NTPC-Bihar JV
6. Koradi, Maharashtra 3x660 MW Mahagenco
7. Dopawe, Maharashtra 2x800 MW Mahagenco
8. Obra, U.P. 2x800 MW BHEL-UP JV
9. Udangudi, T.N. 2x800 MW BHEL-TNEB JV

QD
Ds}


() The following prospective companies have intended to
augment/set up manufacturing facilities in the country for Supercritical
units:—

(a) BHEL (Boiler and TG)

(b) Ansaldo Caldie (Boiler)

(c) L&T - MHI (Boiler and TG)
(d) Toshiba - JSW (TG)

(e) Alstom-Bharat Forge (TG)

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 3/4/2008-Th-I,
Dated 23.07.2008]

(Recommandation SI. No. 21, Para No. 2.8.11)

Taking note of the fact that preservation of the top soil and proper
management of fly ash from power stations was an area which requires
urgent attention, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should
accord top priority to issues relating to fly ash management and also
explore the possibility of having suitable tie-ups for the use of fly ash
with other sectors such as cement industry etc, to make maximum
use of this significant by product of the thermal power plants.

Reply of the Government

Ash utilisation is guided by the notification No.763 (B) dated
14.09.1999 read with amended notification No. 979 (E) dated 27.8.2003
issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOE &F). Central
Electricity Authority(CEA), under the Ministry of Power, is monitoring
ash utilisation in thermal power stations. As a result of constant
monitoring, ash utilisation has increased from 20.79 million tones in
2002-03 to 55.01 million tones in 2006-07. In some of the power stations,
ash utilisation has been of the order of 100%. Besides use of ash in
cement sector, ash is also being utilised in various other segments like
bricks manufacturing, road embankment, reclamation, mine filling,
agriculture etc.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 5/10/2008-State Thermal,
y y
Dated 16.07.2008]

(Recommendation SI. No. 22, Para No. 2.9.8)

The Committee note that demand for electric power continues to
grow at a rapid rate out-stripping the availability of the same. In the

63


prevailing scenario of shortage of resources to build up new capacity
on the one hand, and stringent environmental conditions on the other,
Renovation and Modernisation (R&M) and Life Extension (LE) of power
plants have been recognised as a well-proven, cost effective technique
the world over for improving the performance of older power plants
and thereby obtaining additional generation of power at a much lesser
cost. The Committee are of the opinion that by infusion of small
amount of funds, in these processes, the performance of power plants
can be greatly increased. The Committee are constrained to note that
against a total estimated cost of Rs. 570.68 crore for R&M of thermal
power plants during the 10th Plan to undertake 282 activities, only
198 activities with a total expenditure of Rs. 257.80 crore could be
completed till January, 2008. Taking note of the fact that the 10th Plan
targets of R&M activities of thermal power station slipped to the
11th Plan on account of some delay in finalization of schemes, delay
in supplies by equipment suppliers, non-availability of unit shut down
for carrying out the works, poor response of bidders for execution of
R&M works and non-constitution of dedicated teams by SEBs/PSUs
for R&M work ete., the Committee expect the Government to take
necessary steps to complete the R&M activities during 2008-09 as
targeted. The Committee would also like to know, the action plan of
the Government to achieve the targets during the year.

Reply of the Government

In order to complete the pending activities of the R&M works of
all ongoing thermal power plants close monitoring with the power
utilities and implementing agencies are being done regularly by CEA.
NTPC have intimated that in case of their projects R&M activities are
ongoing process. In case of State sector projects, the R&M activities in
23 units out of 32 units taken up during the 10th plan have already
been completed and the balance units are expected to be completed
during 2008-09.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 5/10/2008—State Thermal,
Dated 16.07.2008]

(Recommendation 51. No. 24, Para No. 2.9.10)

The Committee also note that the Government had been making
some efforts for increasing the Plant Load Factor in the State Sector
power plants by R&M and life extension work. The Committee further
note that a total number of 60 hydro R&M schemes have been planned
for implementation during the 11th Plan, having an installed capacity
of 11069 MW for renovation & modernization, uprating, life extension

64


and restoration at an estimated cost of Rs. 3987 crore. After
implementation of these schemes, there would be a benefit of about
4392 MW - towards uprating (257MW), life extension (4105MW) and
restoration (30MW). The Committee are dismayed that out of
60 schemes identified for the 11th Plan, till date only one scheme of
the State Sector with an installed capacity of 40 MW at a cost of about
Rs. 24 crore had been completed and had brought a benefit of
50 MW-through life extension (40MW) & uprating (10४०५) and
41 schemes were on-going. On balance 18 schemes, the works had yet
to take off. The Committee cannot but deplore the lackadaisical
approach of the Central and State Government/Utilities responsible
for implementing the R&M activities in the power sector. To carry out
the R&M work in a time bound manner, the Committee urge the
Government to take all necessary steps so that the R&M work of all
pending projects be completed as per the revised schedule. The
Comunittee also recommend that the involvement of the private sector
in the R&M works may also be encouraged for speedy achievement of
the targets.

Reply of the Government
R&M in Hydro Power Sector

At the beginning of 11th Plan ie. May/June, 2007, a total of
62 Hydro R&M schemes were programmed. During Dec., 2007,
M/s. RRVPNL (Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited)
declared two Hydro R&M schemes of Rajasthan as closed as no R&M
works were going on the schemes due to non-receipt of approval
from Madhya Pradesh (Inter State Projects). Hence, as on Dec., 2007 a
total of 60 Hydro R&M schemes were projected to be completed during
11th Plan. Out of these 60 schemes, till 30th April, 2008 only 2 schemes
(one in Central Sector and one in State Sector) with an installed capacity
of 134 MW at a cost of about Rs. 35 crores have been completed and
have accrued a benefit of 50 MW through life extension and uprating.
During the last week of April, 2008/first week of May, 2008, status of
ongoing hydro R&M schemes programmed for completion during
11th Plan, has recently been reviewed with the different SEBs/ Utilities.

R&M in Thermal Power Sector

(i) In order to complete the pending activities of the R&M
works of all ongoing thermal power plants, close monitoring
with the power utilities and implementing agencies are being
done regularly by CEA. NTPC have intimated that in case

65


of their projects R&M activities are ongoing process. In case
of State sector projects, the R&M activities in 23 units out
of 32 units taken up during the 10th plan have already
been completed and the balance units are expected to be
completed during 2008-09.

(ii) During the 10th Plan, most of R&M works were awarded
by State utilities to the Original Equipment Manufacturer
(OEM) through negotiation route. However, at present
utilities are free to follow competitive bidding thus
facilitating private sector participation.

R&M by Private Sector

Regarding encouragement to the private sector it is stated that
RM&U works are awarded by the State Governments through a process
of open tendering in which private sector entities also participate. A
few of the R, Mé U Projects in the country are already being executed
by private companies.

(Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. 6/3/2005-BBMB,
Dated 27.05.2008)

&

(No.5/10/2008—State Thermal, Dated 18.06.2008)

(Recommendation Sl. No. 26, Paragraph No. 2.11.8)

The Committee note the main objective of the APDRP programme
was reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses
to around 15% in five years to begin with in the urban areas and high
density/consumption areas. Further, the scheme was also targeted to
reduce commercial and cash loss of the utilities. The Committee note
that nine States had achieved cash loss reduction of Rs. 5753.22 crore
and had become eligible for incentive of Rs. 2876.61 crore. But the
Committee are constrained to note that out of this amount incentive
of Rs. 1959.70 crore only could be released. The balance could not be
released due to low availability of budget. The Committee further
note that it was proposed to continue APDRP during the 11 Plan with
revised terms and conditions as a Centrally sponsored scheme. The
focus of the programme is stated to be on the actual, demonsratable
performance in terms of loss reduction. Establishment of reliable and
automated systems for sustained collection of accurate baseline data
and the adoption of Information Technology in the areas of energy

66


1 accounting would be necessary pre-conditions before sanctioning any
projects for strengthening and upgradation of subtransmission and
distribution networks. The scheme will involve two parts—Part-A shall
include the projects for establishment of baseline data and IT
applications for energy accounting/auditing and IT based consumer
service centres and Part-B should include regular distribution
strengthening projects. The Committee find that the automatic systems
for collection of accurate baseline data are not available in all the
States. The Committee also note that in the restructured APDRP,
emphasis is laid on first establishing reliable and automated systems
for sustained collection of accurate baseline data, and adoption of
Information Technology (IT) in the areas of energy accounting and
auditing. According to the Ministry, the establishment of baseline data
will result in fixing accountability at the lowest level in the electricity
distribution utility, which is expected to bring down AT&C losses of
the utilities. Moreover, IT will also allow real time monitoring of quality
of power and service level to consumers. Further, the Committee note
that the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum for
restructuring of APDRP has been circulated to all concerned and the
meeting was expected to be held very soon. The proposal is to be
placed before the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for
approval and finalisation of the allocations for restructured APDRP.
The Committee have been informed that the scheme should be
operationalised as and when CCEA’s approval was obtained. The
Committee strongly recommend that the proposal for restructuring
APDRP should be submitted to CCEA for their approval at the earliest
so that the revised APDRP scheme can be implemented at the earliest
in the 11th Plan as one precious year of the plan period had already
been lost. The Committee recommend that the APDRP scheme needs
to be continued in its new form in the rural areas as well and the
programmes such as Feeder Renovation Programme (FRP) as
undertaken in the States like Gujarat and Rajasthan specifically needs
to be included under the scheme. The Committee further recommend
that the fund constraints should not be a hurdle for implementation
of the scheme and funds for the same should also be made available
without any reservations.

Reply of the Government

Nine States have achieved cash loss reduction of Rs. 5759.46 crores
and became eligible for incentive of Rs. 2879.73 crore under the
Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP).

67


The Government has released the full incentive i.e. Rs. 2879.73 crore.
The details are given below:—

(Figures in Rs. Crore)

S.No. State Cash Loss Eligibility Incentive

Reduction Released
1. Andhra Pradesh 530.22 265.11 265.11
2. Gujarat 2078.62 1039.31 1039.31
3. Haryana 210.98 105.49 105.49
4. Kerala 295.86 147.93 147.93
5. Maharashtra 275.78 137.89 137.89
6... Punjab 503.88 251.94 251.94
7. Madhya Pradesh 595.22 297.61 297.61
8... Rajasthan 275.42 137.71 137.71
9. West Bengal 993.48 496.74 496.74
Total 5759.46 2879.73 2879.73

It is proposed to continue Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (APDRP) during the XI Plan with revised terms
and conditions as a Central Sector Scheme. The focus of the programme
shall be on actual, demonstrable performance in terms of loss reduction.
Establishment of reliable and automated systems for sustained collection
of accurate baseline data, and the adoption of Information Technology
in the areas of energy accounting will be necessary pre-conditions
before sanctioning any project. This will enable objective evaluation of
the performance of utilities before and after implementation of the
programme, and will enforce internal accountability leading to pressure
to perform on officers and staff. It is proposed to cover urban areas
towns and cities with population of more than 30,000 (10,000 in case
of special category States). In addition, in certain high-load density
tural areas with significant loads, works of separation of agricultural
feeders from domestic and industrial ones, and of High Voltage
Distribution System (1110) are also proposed to be taken up.

Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved the
restructured APDRP for implementation in XI Plan.

[Ministry of Power, RNo. 5/2/2008-APDRP,
Dated August, 10, 2008]
68


(Recommendation SI. No. 27, Para No. 2.12.9)

The Committee note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
under the aegis of Ministry of Power had formulated an Action Plan
in consultation with all stakeholders identifying the major thrust areas
of its activities during the early stages of the 10th Plan. The Action
Plan released by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 23rd August, 2002,
serves as a road-map for BEE. The Committee note that against the
energy conservation and efficiency potential assessed in the country at
about 20,000 MW, the potential harnessed during the 10th Plan was
only 877 MW. The target for harnessing energy conservation during
the 11th Plan is stated to be 10,000 MW. To achieve the 11th Plan
targets of energy conservation, BEE has also launched schemes such
as the Bachat Lamp Yojana and Standard and Labeling programme.
The Committee are disappointed to note that the Ministry of Finance
had not accepted the proposal of progressive reduction in excise duty
for energy efficient products, particularly the labeled products. The
committee are of the considered opinion that concessions such as
differential excise duty on energy efficient labelled products which
have the potential to provide a great deal of encouragement towards
energy conservation efforts should have been offered to the customers.
The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry of Power
to again take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and
Committee be apprised of the outcome in this regard.

Reply of the Government

In the pre Budget Memorandum 2008-09 submitted to Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Power had taken up the following proposals
relating to energy efficient products for exemption in Excise & Customs
Duty:

(i) Reduction of Excise Duty for Energy Efficient equipment/
appliances (airconditionors, refrigerators, motors and pumps):

All energy efficient end use equipment, particularly that are
covered under the Standards and Labeling programme of
Ministry of Power may be provided fiscal incentives in form
of a progressive Excise Duty structure in three different rates
of 8%, 4% and 0%. A graded increased abatement allowance
on retail price was also recommended for energy efficient
equipment.

(ii) Complete waiver of Customs Duty and Excise Duty on CFL,
LED & Electronic Ballast:

CFL, LED and Electronic Ballast which are highly energy
efficient were recommended for full exemption from all
duties.

69


However, none of these proposals was accepted. This Ministry
would again take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance in the
next Budgetary exercise.

(Ministry of Power, ENo. 8/7/2008-Fin, Dated July 17, 2008)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 37 of Chapter-I of report)
{Recommendation 51. No. No. 28, Paragraph No. 2.12.10)

The Committee also note that as against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 161.65 crore for the BEE during 2008-09, an amount of only
Rs. 90 crore was approved. The Committee are of the considered.
opinion that this would definitely affect some of the ongoing important
schemes of BEE like (i) Designated Consumers and SMEs,
(ii) Institutional Strengthening of BEE (iii) Agriculture DSM and
Municipal DSM, and (iv) Contribution to State Energy Conservation
Fund etc. To encourage energy saving, the Committee note that the
funds proposed for energy efficiency schemes should not be curtailed.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the funds asked for to
undertake the proposed energy conservation schemes during 2008-09
should be made available to the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE).

Reply of the Government

Ministry of Power agrees with the recommendation made by the
Committee and an attempt will be made to seek additional allocation
at R.E. stage.

[Ministry of Power, ENo. 14/9/2008-EC, Dated May 12, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 40 of Chapter-I of report)
(Recommendation SI. No. 29, Para No. 2.13.4)

The Committee note that the Central Power Research Institute
(CPRI) had sought a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 202 crore during
2008-09 to carry out critical R&D activity. Against this, an allocation of
only Rs. 50 crore has been made. The Committee further note that
due to this huge cut in budgetary support, the major schemes of CPRI,
namely, National and International Accredition for CPRI laboratories
and augmentation and modernization of CPRI laboratories would be

70


left with only token amount and augmentation of some of the
laboratories to the international standards will get delayed. Moreover,
many of the new schemes approved under 11th Plan would also be
delayed in terms of implementation. The Committee note that CPRI is
a world class R&D Institute with expertise and advanced know-how
in the field of technologies in the power sector. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the funds required by CPRI should be
sanctioned to the Institute to enable it to carry out R&D projects and
also to establish itself as a renowned research Institute of excellence
not only in India but also the world over.

Reply of the Government

Planning Commission has allocated only Rs. 30,451.91 crore (at
current prices) as Ministry of Power’s GBS for the 11th Plan period as
against Rs. 33,207.99 crore as the revised minimum requirement
requested for by the Ministry. In this exercise, Rs. 320 crore had been
proposed for allocation to CPRI as GBS for the 11th Plan. For the year
2008-09, Planning Commission has already made an allocation of
Rs. 50 crore for CPRI. An attempt will be made to seek additional
allocation at R.E. stage.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry's U.O. No. 12/3/2008-T&R,
dated 6.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 43 of Chapter-I of report)

71


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

(Recommendation SI. No. 9, Para No. 2.3.19)

The Committee are surprised to note that a scheme of preparation
of DPRs for new hydro electric projects amounting to Rs. 60.75 crore
was dropped due to lack of response of hydro rich States for taking
up the schemes for survey and investigation under 50,000 MW hydro
initiative. The Committee feel that this would not had been the case
if the necessary and proactive action had been taken by the CEA in
persuading the hydro rich States to agree for survey and investigation.
While noting that preparation of DPRs is only a first step for
development of hydro power, the Committee recommend that the
matter regarding preparation of DPRs for hydro projects should be
taken up with the State Governments on top priority and an action
plan clearly indicating the physical and financial targets should be
drawn up for execution in the 11th Plan period and the Committee be
apprised of the same.

Reply of the Government

Under the 50,000 MW Initiative, out of 162 hydro-electric Projects
for which PFRs have been prepared during 2003-04, 77 schemes (whose
first year tariff is below Rs. 2.50/kWh) have been considered as low
tariff schemes and taken up for S&I and preparation of DPRs. Action
has already been initiated in this regard by CPSUs/SPSUs/SEBs/IPPs.

A proposal for Rs. 350 crores for preparation of DPRs for
50 schemes was submitted to the Planning Commission in December,
2003 for obtaining ‘in principle’ approval. However, this Proposal was
not agreed to by the Planning Commission. Subsequently, a revised
proposal was sent to the Planning Commission for Rs. 120 crores for
Preparation of DPRs of 17 schemes. An amount of Rs. 60 crores were
kept in the year 2007-08 for the above work. However, the concurrence
of the Planning Commission was received only in 2007. In the
meanwhile, most of the schemes had been either allotted to IPPs by
the respective State Governments for implementation/survey and
investigation and preparation of DPRs.

72


CEA wrote to the hydro rich States of J&K, Uttarakhand, Himachal
Pradesh, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and Karnataka in April, 2007
seeking proposals to take up preparation of Bankable DPRs for balance
attractive schemes selected from PFR schemes prepared under 50,000
MW ELE. initiative, thereby, providing a shelf of projects for execution
in the near future. However, no proposal were received from Himachal
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and Karnataka.

In response, only J&K and Sikkim submitted their proposals. J&K
state wanted to take up the work of 5७ and preparation of DPRs of
all the 13 schemes for which PFRs were prepared. In this connection,
it is mentioned that only five of the 13 schemes of J&K were identified
as low tariff schemes and out of these the DPRs of three schemes
namely Kiru, Kawar and Ratle had already been prepared by NHPC.
DPR of Shamnot was not prepared by NHPC of it was found unviable
due to large submergence of the National Highway. The remaining
one scheme namely Bichlari was allotted to WAPCOS for DPR
preparation. The balance 8 schemes were having high first year tariffs
and therefore, could not be taken up for DPR preparation.

Sikkim Govt. submitted the proposal for 4 Nos. of small HLE.
schemes namely (i) Rorathang (30 MW), (ii) Rellichu-II (27 MW), (iii)
Kali Khola (30 MW) and (iv) Taramchu (45 MW) for Survey &
Investigation and preparation of DPRs under 50,000 MW ELE. initiative.
These schemes were, very small and beyond the 50,000 MW initiative
under which PFRs had already been prepared. These schemes, therefore,
were not taken up the CEA. All the schemes in Sikkim, for which
PFRs were prepared under 50,000 MW HE. initiative, have already
been allotted by Govt. of Sikkim to developers for implementation/
Survey & Investigation and preparation of DPR’s.

In view of the allotment of most of the 77 low tariff schemes
already to CPSUs/SEBs/SPSUs/IPPs for implementation/DPR
preparation and lack of response of the hydro rich State Governments
for taking up the schemes for the Survey & Investigation and
preparation of DPRs of balance schemes under the 50,000 MW H.W.
initiative, it was decided that in the revised scenario, the subject scheme
may be dropped. The same view was endorsed in the meeting of the
Hydro Task Force chaired by Minister of Power on 12.12.2007.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry's U.O No. No. 37/9/2008-H-IL,
Dated. 24.07.2008)

73


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

(Recommendation 51, No. 1, Para No. 2.1.11)

The Committee observe that during the year 2007-08, the utilisation
of Plan outlays has not kept pace with the allocations. Though, the
budgetary allocations are being hiked year after year, yet, due to
slippages in various programmes, the same are not being fully utilised.
The Budget Estimates for the year 2007-08, including IEBR were
Rs. 33153.26 crore while the Revised Estimates were kept at Rs. 30690 crore
which is 92.57% of Budget Estimates. The utilisation of funds earmarked
for various schemes till 25th February, 2008, is Rs. 18054, 36 crore,
showing a utilisation of only 58.83% of the Revised Estimates. The
Committee note that the major under-utilisation of Plan outlays reflected
in Revised Estimates is in the annual plan of NTPC, SJ)VNL, NEEPCO
and other Schemes of the Ministry of Power including non-formulation
of the new Scheme of Equity Gap Funding (Rs. 289.49 crore), merging
of the features of the scheme of consultancy charges for APDRP project
(Rs. 271 crore) and dropping of scheme of preparation of DPRs of
new hydro electric scheme (Rs. 60.75 crore). The Committee fear that
under-utilisation of Plan outlays by power generating companies during
2007-08 would further delay the execution of projects as the quarterly
utilisation of funds upto the third quarter during 2007-08 had only
been 46%. Moreover, non-utilisation of funds earmarked for preparation
of DPRs of new hydro electric projects only indicates the lackadaisical
approach of the Government in exploiting the hydro power potential
in the country. In the background of the fact that projects/schemes of
the Ministry of Power are normally completed in a span of five to ten
years, the Committee wondered as to why funds are not being utilised
substantially in the first three quarters of the financial year itself. The
quarterly utilisation of funds indicates a lack of proper planning and
execution of Projects/Schemes in the Ministry of Power.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry of Power was allocated an amount of Rs. 33153.26 crore
(BE) during 2007-08 comprising of GBS of Rs. 5483.00 crore and

74


IEBR of Rs. 27670.26 crores. The allocation at RE stage was reduced to
Rs. 30690.38 crore comprising of Rs. 4350 crore as GBS and Rs. 26340.38
crore as IEBR. The quarterly utilization of funds by Ministry against
the BE & RE of financial year 2007-08 are as under:-—

(Rs. in crore)

GBs IEBR Total % Utilization % Utilization
Expenditure in financial in financial

year 2007-08 year 2007-08

(wrt, BE) (wat. RE)

Expenditure during 401.37 3778.87 4180.24 12.60% . 13.62%
Ast quarter
Expenditure during 194.37 4309.55 4503.92 13.58% 14.68%
2nd quarter
Expenditure during 1565.26 = 5039.46 = 6604.72 19.92% 21.52%
3rd quarter
Expenditure during 2147.93 8211.06 10358.99 31.25% 33.75%
4th quarter
Total Expenditure 4308.93 21338.94 25647.87 77.36% «83.57%

In regard to utilization of funds by Ministry of Power upto 25.02.08
which was 58.83% of BE, it is mentioned that against the BE of
Rs. 33153.26 crore, the actual utilization upto the end of financial year
was Rs. 25647.87 crore representing 77.36% of BE.

With regard to the greater utilization in the last quarter vis-a-vis
the previous three quarters it is mentioned that in the case of GBS the
major provision of Rs. 3983 crore at BE stage and Rs. 3944.56 crore at
RE stage was for the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY). Approval for continuation of RGGVY during XI Plan was
accorded on 03.01.2008. The delay in approval for the continuation of
RGGVY in the 11th Plan resulted in a greater utilization in the last
quarter of the financial year and less utilization of funds in the first
three quarters. It is also mentioned that Ministry of Finance had also
accorded special relaxation for RGGVY scheme from the limit of
expenditure of 33% of BE in the last quarter.

The schemes like Equity Gap Funding and Preparation of DPRs of
New Hydro Electric Projects could not get approval of the competent
authorities and hence the provision kept for these schemes could not
be utilized. Under utilization for the scheme of Consultancy charges

75


for APDRP projects was due to merger of the scheme with Restructured
APDRP scheme, which could not get approval of the competent
authority.

With regard to the less utilization of IEBR it is mentioned that
four organizations 1.० NEEPCO, NTPC, SJVNL and DVC have not
been able to utilize their Budgeted IEBR and the detailed reasons for
less utilization of IEBR by these organizations are given at Annexure
1, व, पा & IV respectively.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. 10/4/2008-Budget,
Dated 11.07.2008)

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 8 of Chapter-I of report)
(Recommendation SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.2.21)

The Committee note that the capacity addition target of power
generation for the 11th Plan is 78578 MW - 16627 MW in the hydro
sector, 58571 MW in the thermal sector and 3380 MW in the nuclear
sector. The Committee note with great concern that capacity addition
targets in the previous plan periods had failed miserably as the target
achieved in the 8th, 9th and 10th Plans were only 54%, 47% and
51.6% respectively of the planned capacity targets. What further raises
alarm was the fact that as against the total target of capacity addition
of 12039.20 MW in the year 2007-08, actual capacity addition of 8679
MW could be achieved as on 26.03.2008. The Committee also note that
against the target of 78,578 MW for the 11th Plan, 60899 MW capacity
is under construction, but Letters of Award for the projects totaling
9170 MW are yet to be placed. The Committee would like to know
the reasons for not issuing Letters of Award for projects amounting to
9170 MW so far and recommend that action in this regard may now
be completed in a time bound manner and at the earliest as the
gestation period of power projects is generally quite long and as it is
equally important that all clearances are expedited and put in place
well in time so that the 11th Plan capacity addition targets can be
achieved. The Committee would also like to be informed of the status
of the remaining projects of about 8500 MW capacity targeted to be
commissioned in the 11th Plan. Further, to speed up work and ensure
proper coordination among different Ministriés/agencies involved in
the process, the Committee desire that the idea of creating a unified
chain of command may be taken up for consideration at the highest
level of the Government as was agreed to by the Secretary, Ministry

76


of Power during evidence. The Committee would await the considered
views of the Government for their deliberation and consideration.

Reply of the Government

According to the latest assessment, a capacity addition of 78,700
MW comprising 15,627 MW Hydro, 59,693 MW Thermal and 3,380
MW nuclear is feasible during 11th Plan. The capacity addition achieved
during 2007-08 was 9,263 MW against a revised target of 12039.2 MW.
Capacity addition target for the year 2008-09 is 11,061 MW. During the
year 2008-09, a capacity of 434.8 MW has been commissioned so far.
Thus the total capacity commissioned as on 03.08.2008 during 11th
Plan is 10883 MW.

Projects totaling to 63157 MW are under construction at present
for likely benefits during 11th Plan. Due to delay in tying up of
essential inputs, orders for a capacity of 6410 MW are yet to be placed.
For expediting. the ordering process, Ministry of Power has been
actively interacting and monitoring, through meeting/ discussions with
the State Governments, BHEL as well as State Power Utilities for giving
an impetus to various measures inter-alia the capacity addition. The
capacity addition programme was discussed in the Chief Secretaries’
Conference held on 23rd - 24th April, 2007 and Chief Ministers’
Conference held on 28th May, 2007 wherein inter-alia early placement
of orders for power projects proposed to be commissioned during the
1th Plan was emphasized. In the Chief Ministers’ Conference, it was
resolved that the Centre and States would ensure timely placement of
orders for all the projects intended to give benefit during the 1th
Plan and have regular monthly monitoring of the projects to ensure
their timely commissioning along predetermined milestones. A meeting
of Group of Ministers chaired by Minister of Power was held on 24th
September, 2007 wherein detailed State-wise discussions were held with
regard to accelerated power generation capacity addition for the 11th
Plan. Subsequently, a follow-up meeting of Chief Secretaries of States
was held on 19th February, 2008 wherein expeditious completion of
ordering of all the 11th Plan power generation projects was emphasized.
This matter was again discussed in the Chief Secretaries’ Conference
convened on 22nd April, 2008.

Regarding the issue relating to ensuring proper coordination among
different Ministries/agencies involved in the process, it is mentioned
that for Inter-Ministerial coordination, Ministry of Power is having
regular structured meetings with Ministries of Coal and Environment

77


and Forests. Furthermore, Energy Coordination Committee has been
constituted under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Prime Minister to enable
a systematic approach to policy formulation, promote coordination in
inter departmental actions and function as a key mechanism for
providing institutional support to decision making in the area of energy
planning. To supplement these efforts if need arises, further inter-
ministerial consultations shall be organized.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O. No. 2/23/2008-P&P,
Dated 23.06.08]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 11 & 12 of Chapter-I of report)
(Recommendation SI, No. 8, Para No. 2.3.18)

The Committee note that hydro Power is a benign source of energy
and the sector needs to be accorded high priority from the point of
view of energy security as fuels like coal and gas are likely to be
exhausted in the near future. The Committee find that the bulk of the
hydro potential which is in the Himalayan region in the States of
Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and the North-
Eastern Region is yet to be tapped. Although India is endowed with
an estimated hydro power potential of more than 150,000 MW, the
installed capacity is only 35,379 MW, ie. 25% of the total power
generating capacity in the country. The Committee regret to note that
45 hydro projects with an aggregate capacity of 15,000 MW only are
under construction at present and Preparation of feasibility reports of
162 schemes so far with an aggregate capacity of 49,930 MW only has
been completed by CEA. The Committee are further constrained to
observe that even during the 11th Plan, while the major capacity
addition from the thermal power stations is pegged at 58,571 MW,
from Hydro power plants, it was to be only 16,227 MW. The Committee
note that a task force has been constituted under the Chairmanship of
Minister of Power to look into various aspects of hydro power. The
Committee would like to be informed of the steps so far taken by the
Task Force to overcome the bottlenecks in implementation of hydro
electric projects.

Reply of the Government

In the first meeting of the Task Force on hydro project development
held under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of Power on

78


12.12.2007 at New Delhi, the following issues were deliberated by the
Task Force:

(i) Report of TERI on compensation to resource bearing States

The recommendations made in the Report of TERI on compensation
to resource bearing States and comments of the Ministry of Power
thereon were submitted before the Task Force for discussions. The
Task Force endorsed the comments of Ministry of Power and noted
that the suggestions of TERI have been appropriately addressed in the
revised hydro policy. The Task Force also endorsed the provisions of
the new Hydro Policy, which was subsequently approved by the
Cabinet and notified on 31.3.2008.

(ii) The Task Force also approved a proposal to refer the inter-
State issues impeding the implementation of various hydro-electric
schemes in the country to the Commission on Centre State relations
for an early resolution of these issues.

(iii) Basin-wise development of hydro potential

The Task Force advised that the CEA in consultation with the
respective State Governments and CWC should carry out river basin
optimization studies for all major river basins. If necessary, a scheme
for financing these efforts may be formulated. Accordingly, the CEA
was requested by this Ministry to conduct a study to explore the
feasibility of basin-wise development of hydro potential. The CEA is
taking necessary action in this regard.

(iv) The Task Force recommended that the respective State
Governments be asked to identify the potential sites for setting up of
Mega Hydel Projects and propose implementation through an SPV on
the lines of Thermal Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs). Accordingly,
this Ministry wrote to various hydro potential State Governments to
identify potential sites in their respective States for setting up of Ultra
Mega Hydel Projects of installed capacity of 500 MW or more and
consider its implementation through an SPV on the lines of Thermal
Ultra Mega Power Project.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. No. 37/9/2008-H-IL,
Dated 24.07.2008]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 37 of Chapter-I of report)

79


(Recommendation 51. No. 16, Para No. 2.5.10)

The Committee further observe that due to shortage of gas in the
country, the actual supplies to NTPC’s gas based power station by
GAIL has fallen short of the contracted/quantity. Taking note of the
fact that the Government is in process of finalization of Gas Utilization
Policy, the Committee observe that it was high time that a debate is
initiated at the highest level in the country over according relative
precedence to various competing sectors, the main being fertilizer and
power sectors, in the proposed Gas Utilisation Policy. At the same
time, the Committee see a merit in the argument put forward to the
Committee by the Secretary, Ministry of Power that while fertilizers
can be imported, power can not be. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the power sector be accorded Priority over all other
competing sectors including the fertilizer sector in the matter of
allocation of gas and coal because it is the power sector, which drives
the economy.

Reply of the Government

The matter of allocation of gas to the Gas Based Power Plants was
taken up by the Ministry of Power with Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas a number of times. Consequently the Empowered Group
of Ministers (EGoM) in its meeting held on 28.05.2008 on commercial
utilization of gas under the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP)
decided to prioritize allocation of gas to Gas Based Power Plants lying
idle/under-utilized and likely to be commissioned during 2008-09, and
liquid fuel plants, which are now running on liquid fuel and could
switch over to natural gas, to meet the partial requirement of these
plants.

[Ministry of Power UO No. 3/4/2008 TH-I, dated 23.07.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 25 of Chapter-I of Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23, Para No. 2.9.9)

The Committee are dismayed to note that during the 10th Plan,
out of a total of 72 Hydro schemes programmed for completion, only
32 schemes could be completed and 38 schemes slipped to the
11th Plan. Further, two of the projects are reported to have been shifted
to the 12th Plan. The Commitiee feel that in view of the R&M works
slipping in previous plan periods also, the Government should have

80


taken advance action for carrying out Residual Life Assessment studies,
finalising Detailed Project Reports and constituting dedicated teams

for carrying out R&M etc., to overcome the likely delays in execution
of R&M works during the 10th Plan period.

Reply of the Government

At the beginning of 10th Plan, a total of 72 Hydro schemes were
identified for taking up R&M works during the 10th Plan based on
proposals received from SEBs/Utilities. While reviewing the progress
of R&M activities in the subsequent years, it was observed that the
SEBs have not started any activity in 14 schemes and therefore, these
schemes were shifted to 11th/12th Plan depending on their progress.

As such, works on only 58 schemes were in progress during the
10th Plan. Out of these 58 Hydro R&M schemes, 29 schemes got
completed and in addition 3 schemes which were planned for
वक्ष Plan could be completed earlier in the 10th Plan.

It is submitted that the Hydro R&M schemes were earlier identified
considering the 30-35 years of life of the generating units. There have
been many reasons which could be attributed for non start of works/
shifting of scheme from 10th Plan to 11th/12th Plan, which are listed
below:—

(x) The performance/generation from the identified schemes has
been found to be satisfactory though the units have
completed their design life.

(xi) The response from the bidders for R&M works have been
poor and in some cases, single bids were received resulting
delay in award of works.

(xii) Delay in carrying out Residual Life Assessment (RLA)
studies.

(xiii) Delay in finalizing the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).

(xiv) Non-availability of shut downs and sequential execution of
R&M works.

(xv) Revised/enhanced scope of works of R&M schemes.

(xvi) Non-adherence of completion schedules by the concerned
power authorities / utilities.

(xvii) No dedicated teams have been constituted by the SEBs/
PSUs to carry out the R&M works and to tackle the
constraints/bottlenecks and to fix up the responsibility for
any delays etc.

81


(xviii) Delays in resolving the inter-State problems in certain cases
e.g. Machkund in A.P./Orissa and Hampi and Tungabhadra
in A.P./Karnataka.

The various works on balance 29 Hydro R&M schemes, which
have been shifted to 11th Plan, are presently in progress.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s U.O No. 6/3/2005-BBMB,
dated 27.05.2008]

(Recommendation 51. No. 25, Para No. 2.10.15)

The Committee note that the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY), a scheme for Rural Electrification Infrastructure and
household electrification was introduced in April, 2005, for achieving
the National Common Minimum Programme objective of providing
access to electricity to all rural households over a period of four years.
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) is the nodal agency for the
programme. Under this scheme 90% capital subsidy is to be provided
for rural electrification infrastructure and 10% as the loan assistance
on soft terms by REC. The Committee note that against a target of
electrification of 40,000 villages during 2006-07, only 28,706 villages
were actually electrified. Further, during 2007-08, the target for village
electrification was kept very low, ie. 9,000 and only 7,077 villages
could be electrified as on 15th February, 2008. The reasons stated by
the Ministry for the low target was that continuation of the scheme in
the 11th Plan was approved only in January, 2008, as a result of which
the work was not in full momentum during April, 2007 to December,
2007. The Committee further note that the budget requirement for the
year 2008-09 for RGGVY was projected at Rs. 24,000 crore for achieving
the target of electrification of 67,475 villages and providing electric
connections to 2.12 crore BPL households. Against this projected
requirement, a budget allocation to the tune of Rs. 5500 crore had
been made. For achieving the target of electrifying 25,000 unelectrified
villages and providing connections to 60 lakh BPL households, which
had been projected in the outcome budget for the year 2008-09, the
total requirement of funds was placed at Rs. 13,000 crore. However,
additional amount would be required to be released for the scheme at
RE stage. The Committee are very unhappy with the pace and progress
of the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana, an ambitious
programme of the Government which was taken up with the aim of
electrifying villages and hamlets for supplying power to the rural areas
to unleash full economic growth potential of rural India. Not convinced
by the reasons cited by the Ministry for non-achievement of targets
under the programme, i.e., insufficient availability of funds and also

82


the fact that continuation of the programme in the 11th Plan was only
approved on 3rd January, 2008, leaving only 3 months in the financial
year 2007-08 for sanctioning new projects, the Committee strongly
recommend the Ministry to take up the programme progressively on
top priority basis in the financial year 2008-09 so that the targets
envisaged are achieved. The Committee further note that the Ministry
is making an attempt to compress the implementation cycle from 18
months to 12 months in some of the projects and electrify additional
villages in the financial year 2008-09. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the funds required for the scheme be made available
in time for implementation of the scheme in the year 2008-09. The
Committee note that ‘cost of electrification of an unelectrified village’
and the cost of ‘intensive electrification of already electrified village’
varies from Rs. 13 lakh to Rs. 18 lakh and Rs. 4 lakh to 6 lakh
respectively—in normal terrain and in hilly, tribal and desert areas.
From the case made out before the Committee during its study visit
to Rajasthan and also by going through the figures of cost of village
electrification and basis thereof, the Committee note that the cost of
Rs. 18 lakh for a village electrification in hilly, tribal and particularly
in the desert areas is not sufficient as compared to the cost of
electrifying a village in normal terrain. The Committee is also of the
view that the present practice of presuming the cost of village
electrification as the same for similar areas/terrain throughout the
country without factoring in the State specific conditions, disregards
the ground realities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
present cost norms for village electrification should be revisited by the
Government and suitably modified taking into account the local
conditions in the terrain and areas in different States where
electrification had to be carried out.

Reply of the Government

The target for 2008-09 has been revised and it has now been fixed
to electrify 19,000 un-electrified villages and provide connections to
50 lakh BPL households. So far 316 new projects have been sanctioned
for implementation during phase-I of XI Plan period covering
electrification of 47,658 un-electrified villages and release of connections
to 1.58 crore BPL households, besides 235 ongoing projects of X Plan.
For achieving the target, Monitoring Committee under Chairmanship
of Secretary (P) has been regularly reviewing and monitoring the
progress of RGGVY in the entire country. Moreover, all State
Governments have been advised to constitute a Coordination
Committee headed by Chief Secretary of the State to review the
progress of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana in their States.

83


State Governments have been requested to monitor each project
physically and financially on a regular basis and to remove all
implementation bottlenecks so that the targets of Bharat Nirman can
be achieved. The budgetary provision for 2008-09 for RGGVY is Rs.
5500 crore which needs to be revised upwards to Rs. 13,000 crore for
achieving targets prescribed in outcome budget.

The existing cost norm for electrification of un-electrified villages
in normal terrain (Rs. 13 lakh) and in hilly, tribal & desert areas
(Rs. 18 lakh) and the cost norm for intensive electrification of already
electrified village in normal terrain (Rs. 4 lakh) and in hilly, tribal &
desert areas (Rs. 6 lakh) have been approved by the Cabinet and as
such modification is not feasible at this stage. Moreover, the existing
cost norms seem to be reasonable. :

[Ministry of Power, F. No. 44/7/2008-RE, Dated June 17, 2008]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 34 of Chapter-I of the report)

84


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED

(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.2.23)

The Committee further note that a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh, Member, Planning Commission, on
standardization of specifications of Thermal Power Plants and
development of vendors for balance of plants has been set up. Since
the second year of the 11th Plan period had already commenced, the
Committee desire that the aforesaid Committee should be asked to
come up with its findings and recommendations in a specified time so
that the same could be turned into a concrete action plan.

Reply of the Government

The Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh,
Member, Planning Commission has submitted its reports on the issue
of Standardization of Specification of Thermal Power Plants and
Development of Additional Vendors for Balance of Plants to Hon’ble
Finance Minister on 8th January, 2008 and 24th January, 2008
respectively. While consolidated view on the recommendations is yet
to be taken by the Government, Central Electricity Authority has
already sensitized all the stakeholders regarding vlacement of orders
for various packages of BoPs which according to the recommendations
of the Committee should be placed progressively within six months of
placement of order for the main plant.

[Ministry of Power, Ministry’s UO No. 2/23/2008-P&P,
Dated 23.06.08)

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 17, 18, 19 of Chapter-I of the report)

New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
January 27, 2009 Chairman,
Magha 7, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

85


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON
27TH JANUARY, 2009 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘C’, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1150 hrs.

PRESENT

Shri Jesudasu Seelam — In the Chair
Memsers
Lok Sabha

Smt. Susmita Bauri

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Bs Or छू ए pe

Rajya Sabha

7. Dr. Bimal Jalan
. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha
10. Shri Shivpratap Singh
ll. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary-II

2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Jesudasu Seelam, a Member of the Committee, under Rule 258(3)
of the Rule of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, to
act as Chairman for the sitting. The acting Chairman welcomed the
Members of the Committee to the sitting. The Committee then took

86


up for consideration/adoption the following draft Reports and adopted
the same without any amendment/modifications:

6)

@)

(ii)

(iv)

Draft Report on the subject “Role of CERC and SERCs in
the Protection of Interests of Consumers”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on recommendations contained
in the 22nd Report of the Committee on the subject “Ultra
Mega Power Projects”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 25th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-09.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2008-09.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

87


APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)

(0) Total number of Recommendations 29

(ii) | Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29

Total 21
Percentage 72.42%

(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. 09
Total 01
Percentage 3.45%

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 8, 16, 23 and 25

Total 6
Percentage 20.68%

(v) | Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the final replies of the
Government are still awaited:

SL No. 5
Total 01
Percentage 3.45%


oo—————— तन चखत'“त(/तर य
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www. parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”

—_———— 2 iii.