STANDING COMMITTEE

3 1 ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

IMPLEMENTATION OF RAJIV GANDHI
GRAMEEN VIDYUTIKARAN YOJANA

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


THIRTY-FIRST REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER

IMPLEMENTATION OF RAJIV GANDHI GRAMEEN
VIDYUTIKARAN YOJANA

Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.2.2009

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 184

Price : Rs. 104.00

© 2009 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Composition OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)

MISTRESS THOR a sexeecccossorsesreussnecserai SoG NLS Riss hemi chcceasiioceemente,
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
Introductory...

CHAPTER II

A. Facets of Village Electrification under RGGVY

B. Rural Electrification Plan.......

C. Implementation of RGGVY

D. Implementation of RGGVY Projects through Decentralized
Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply Projects .........

E. Targets and Achievements under RGGVY....

F Cost Norms for Village Electrification...
G. Monitoring Mechanism under RGGVY
H. Development of Franchisee System under RGGVY ..........
1 Performance Appraisal of RGGVY...
PART IL

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee...........

APPENDICES

I. Annexures I to VIII...

Il Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on
16.06.2008, 19.09.2008 and 12.02.2009...

13
14
20

30
32

37

47

89

(i)


|
a |
i a
= —== छा
- *
T
lg
oe
|
= +
a =
= a
—_ का
al
a | -
1 |
“= +
| OO
+
a2 at .
+
=
+"
1 |
a



aoe 9 ०

2

10.
i.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

* Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 18.12.2008.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY (2008-09)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Smt. Susmita Bauri**

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Smt. Anuradha Choudhary
Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Rabindar Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G, Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar*

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

Vacant

** Re-nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 91.2009.

(ii)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
23. Dr. Bimal Jalan

24. Shri Prakash Javadekar
25. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

26. Shri Anil H. Lad***

27. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

30. Shri Shivpratap Singh

31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Ashok Sarin

2. Shri Shiv Kumar

3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar
4. Shri N. Amarathiagan

** Nominated wef. 15th January, 2009.

(iv)

Joint Secretary

Deputy Secretary
Deputy Secretary-II

Sr. Committee Assistant


INTRODUCTION

L the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 31st Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY)’ relating to the Ministry of Power.

2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Power on 16th June, 2008. The issue of implementation of
RGGVY was also discussed again at a sitting of the Committee held
on 19th September, 2008 to have a briefing from the Ministry of Power
on the Status of Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Reports of the Standing Committee on Energy presented during
the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. The latest information as obtained in the
matter, at that point of time has also been incorporated in the Report.

3. The Committee wish to thank the representatives of the
Ministry of Power and concerned Central Public Sector Undertakings
associated with the implementation of RGGVY and representatives from
the States of Maharashtra and Jharkhand who appeared before the
Committee and expressed their considered views on the subject. They
also wish to thank the Ministry of Power for furnishing the replies to
the points raised by the Committee.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 12th February, 2009.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Dew; GURUDAS KAMAT,
ताक Oe (काछ 12, 2009 Chairman,
Magha 23, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

1.1 Electricity, which is a concurrent subject at Entry number 38 in
the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, is one
of the essential infrastructures required for economic growth,
employment generation and poverty alleviation. The Ministry of Power
is primarily responsible for the development of electrical energy in the
country. The Ministry is concerned with perspective planning, policy
formulation, processing of projects for investment decisions, monitoring
of the implementation of power projects, training and manpower
development and the administration and enactment of legislation in

regard to thermal, hydro power generation, transmission and
distribution.

1.2 Rural electrification has been regarded as a vital programme
for the development of rural areas. It has been stated that the basic
aim of the Rural Electrification policy of Government of India is to
ensure rapid economic development by providing access of electricity
to all the villages and households in order to improve the quality of
life in the rural areas by supplying electricity for lighting up of rural
homes and hearths, shops, community centers, public places etc., in
all villages and also to facilitate the development of productive loads.

1.3 In 1947, only 1500 villages were electrified in India and the
per capita consumption was only 14 units. For the electrification of
rural areas of the country, the Government of India from time-to-time
launched many rural electrification programmes such as Rural
Electrification under Minimum Needs Programme (MNP),
Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya Yojana (PMGY), Kutir Jyoti Scheme,
Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme (AREP) and Accelerated
Electrification of one lakh villages and one crore households. As per
2001 census, a total of 7,80,90,874 rural households in the country
constituting about 56.48% were un-electrified. The total number of
un-electrified villages in the country was estimated to be around
1,25,000 as per the new definition of village electrification
(effective from 2004-05).


1.4 Recognizing the need, the problems associated with rural
electrification in India to accelerate the pace of village electrification
programme and its critical role in poverty alleviation, the Government
of India, Ministry of Power, in April, 2005, launched the new scheme
of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) for attainment
of the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) goal of
providing access of electricity to all households in five years. The
Ministry of Power subsequently, merged with the RGGVY scheme all
other Rural Electrification Programmes of the Ministry i.e. Rural
Electrification under Minimum Needs Programme (MNP), Kutir Jyoti
Scheme, and Accelerated Electrification of one lakh villages and one
crore households.

15 The Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), which was
incorporated as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 in the year
1969 with the main objective of financing rural electrification schemes
in the country, and which was subsequently made a Non-Banking
Financial Company (NBFC) under Section 45 IA of the RBI Act, 1934,
has been made the nodal agency for the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana.

1.6 Development of franchisee system for rural distribution is stated
to be one of the salient features of the RGGVY. Under the RGGVY, the
management of rural distribution would be through the franchisees
who could be Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Users
Associations, Panchayat Institutions, Cooperatives or individual
entrepreneurs. Deployment of franchisees by the time villages are
electrified under the scheme, is stated to be the desired objective. The
utility has to ensure this to make it viable proposition by ensuring
supply of powers for reasonable number of hours. Franchisees are
required to be given proper support by the local administration in
detection and prevention of theft of electricity.

1.7 There exists a three tier Quality Monitoring Mechanism to
ensure effective implementation of the projects sanctioned under
RGGVY. In the first tier, a third party will be appointed by the
implementing agency, which will ensure that the utilized material and
workmanship is in accordance with the specifications and guidelines
on a concurrent and ongoing basis. At second tier, Rural Electrification
Corporation will get the inspection of the works done through
outsourcing to reputed inspection agencies or retired personnel
designated as REC Quality Monitors. At third tier, Ministry of Power
will engage independent agencies to conduct random inspection for
effective implementation of the scheme. They shall inspect the work
with particular reference to quality specifications. In case reports reveal

Z


unsatisfactory work, the implementing agency shall ensure that the
material/work is replaced or rectified (as the case may be) within the
time period stipulated.

1.8 Considering the importance of Rural Electrification Programme
in the country, the Committee undertook a detailed examination of
the subject ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana’ pertaining to the Ministry of Power. Various aspects of the
examination the subject undertaken by the Committee have been
outlined in the next Chapter of the Report.



2.1.8 Subsequently, the Committee in their Ist Report (14th Lok Sabha)
recommended that the Ministry should impress upon the States to
carry out fresh survey for identifying non-electrified villages as per
the new definition on village electrification effective from 2004-05. The
Committee again in their 3rd Report (14th Lok Sabha) recommended
that the Ministry should obtain updated statistics on rural electrification
from the States and modify their rural electrification programme in
the light of the updated statistics.

2.1.9 The number of un-electrified villages in the country as per
the new definition on village electrification effective from 2004-05, was
estimated to be 1,25,000. The State-wise details of status of village
electrification as on 31 March, 2004, as supplied by the Ministry of
Power, are at Annexure-I. Further, in a meeting convened on
19th September 2008, to discuss the implementation status of
recommendations made by the Committee in their various Reports
(14th Lok Sabha), the Committee were informed that the updated data
on rural electrification was yet to be received by the Ministry from all
the States.

2.1.10 As for the status of rural household electrification in the
country, the Committee were informed that as per 2001 census the
total number of rural households in the country was 13,82,71,559. The
number of households having electricity was stated to be 6,01,80,685
(43.52%) and the number of un-electrified rural households was
estimated to be 7,80,90,874. The State-wise details are given at
Annexure-II.

2.1.11 With reference to a query regarding the present criteria for
a BPL household being followed for providing free electricity connection
in the country, the Committee have been informed that the
Implementing Agencies get the list of BPL households from the District
Authorities of the States and that the criteria for BPL households are
decided by the States.

2.1.12 In response to a query about the approximate number of
BPL households in the country and how many of them had been
electrified under RGGVY, the Committee were informed by the Ministry
that the estimated number of un-electrified BPL households in the
country was 2.34 crore, of which connections to 25.97 lakh BPL
households had been provided under RGGVY up to 31.05.2008.

2.1.13 When asked about the action plan for electrifying the
remaining BPL households in the country, the Ministry have stated
that the remaining connections to BPL households covered in
6


235 projects are likely to be released by March 2010 and that efforts
would be made to complete 316 projects sanctioned in XI Plan in
18 months from the date of award,

2.1.14 During oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Power
pointed out, among other things, the difficulties arising out of non-
availakility of BPL lists for Providing free electricity connection to BPL
families in the villages covered under RGGVY. Further, responding to
a query regarding omission of BPL households under RGGVY, the
Secretary stated:

“It is not part of a project if those project have not been taken up
where this cap is remaining we may not be able to visit them in
this programme unless a Separate project come. This is a project
approach. The project is defined; the beneficiaries are more or less
defined. But within a project area, we could select some of the un-
electrified villages to accelerate the Project faster so that there is
greater consolidation of the work instead of totally green filed
coverage because total Greenfield coverage would entail higher
expenditure.”

B. Rural Electrification Plan

2.2.1 As per the RGGVY launched in April 2005, the States are
required to finalize their Rural Electrification Plans in consultation with
Ministry of Power and notify the same within six months. The
Rural Electrification Plan is a roadmap for generation, transmission,
sub-transmission and distribution of electricity in a State, which will
ensure achievement of the objectives of the scheme.

2.2.2 The Secretary, Ministry of Power, emphasizing on the
importance of drawing up of Rural Electrification Plan by States, during
evidence on 16th June, 2008 stated as under:

“what is most important is that the States must draw up their
Rural Electrification Plans. You will appreciate that electricity can
only be taken to the last mile provided the linkages are available
and the State has arranged the necessary power to supply to the
villages.”

2.2.3 The Ministry of Power, in a written note, have given following
information on Rural Electrification Plan:

“The objective of Rural Electrification Plan is to map and detail
the electrification delivery mechanism by each State considering

7


the availability of resources, electricity, transmission, sub-transmission
network, funds for subsidy, and management of rural distribution
to enable proper supply of power to the rural areas and proper
services to the consumers and to maintain revenue sustainability.

Till now, States were implementing their Rural Electrification
projects without proper planning in isolated manner. However, for
projects to be eligible for capital subsidy under RGGVY, prior
commitment of the States that they shall ensure a minimum daily
supply of 6-8 hours of electricity in the RGGVY network with the
assurance of meeting any deficit in this context for supplying
electricity at subsidized tariff as required under the Electricity Act,
2003, is obtained.”

2.2.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Power, in a sitting of the Committee
held on 19th September 2008, convened to discuss the implementation
status of recommendations of the Committee pertaining to RGGVY in
particular, deposed as under:

“We feel that for really a meaningful Rural Electrification
Programme, the Rural Electrification Plans of the States giving how
power is to be reaching those people, how the tariff issues will be
resolved, whatever the roadmap is, sub-stations etc., down the line,
we took an assessment and found that some States had submitted
very perfunctory kind of Rural Electrification Plan which was not
giving any level of confidence that actually it will happen. So, we
circulated some model draft that you please give it on this line.”

2.2.5 On a specific query by the Committee to give details as to
whether any time limit was prescribed for the States to get the
Rural Electrification Plan approved and notified, the Ministry of Power
in a written reply stated that all the States interested in availing
assistance under RGGVY had to notify their Rural Electrification Plans
by August, 2008.

2.2.6 Regarding status of finalization of Rural Electrification Plans,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power, in the sitting of the Committee held
on 19th September, 2008 informed:

“five States have notified their RE plans, namely Gujarat,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. Five States have
finalised their plans but have yet to notify them. They are
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Punjab.
In respect of four States, drafts have been submitted to which
we have commented on some shortcomings. These States are


Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. This is
the broad status that we have. Other States are yet to respond to
us.”

2.2.7 The Secretary further elaborated:

“One option is not to sanction anything in their States for the
time being at all till they draw up those plans. But we have decided
to sanction, and hopefully in parallel that they can put these things
in operation. Otherwise, you will realise that if we were to stall
their sanctions, then a large number of States would be left out.
But we have written to the Chief Secretaries that if the
Rural Electrification Plans are not submitted by October—I have
addressed letter to them—that funds will not be provided to them.
It is because we believe that till they have this basic framework in
place and the overall planning in place and the other inputs that
are going to come in, the rural electrification will not fructify”.

C. Implementation of RGGVY

2.3.1 The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) is
implemented through the designated nodal agency, the Rural
Electrification Corporation (REC). The REC is stated to be responsible
for complete oversight on the Programme from concept to completion.

2.3.2 The Committee have been informed that under te
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) ninety per cent
capital subsidy is provided towards the overall cost of the rural
electrification projects excluding the amount of State or local taxes,
which will be borne by the concerned State/State Utility. Ten per cent
of the project cost would be contributed by States through own
Tesources/loan from financial institution,

2.3.3 The States have to comply with the under-mentioned
conditionality to ensure Proper implementation of the programme:

(i) States must make adequate arrangements for supply of
electricity and there should be no discrimination in the hours
of supply between rural and urban households;

(ii) Deployment of franchisees for the management of rural
distribution in projects financed under the scheme;

(iii) Making provision of requisite revenue subsidies to the State
Utilities as required under Section 65 of the Electricity
Act, 2003; and


(iv) Determination of bulk supply tariff for franchisees in a
manner that ensures their commercial viability.

2.3.4 For the rural electrification projects to be eligible for capital
subsidy under the scheme, prior commitment of the States would be
obtained before sanction of projects under the scheme for:

(i) Guarantee by State Government for a minimum daily supply
of 6-8 hours of electricity in the RGGVY network with the
assurance of meeting any deficit in this context by supplying
electricity at subsidized tariff as required under Electricity
Act, 2003.

(ii) Deployment of franchisees for the management of rural
distribution in projects financed under the scheme and to
undertake steps necessary to operationalize the scheme.

2.3.5 In the event the projects are not implemented satisfactorily in
accordance with the conditionality indicated above, the capital subsidy
could be converted into interest bearing loans.

2.3.6 The Ministry on being asked to furnish details regarding
measure of success achieved by them in obtaining prior commitment
in the form of a guarantee by State Government for a minimum daily
supply of electricity in the RGGVY network, informed as under:

“This is one of conditionality in sanction letter. Commitment from
the States is being obtained in the form of acceptance letter of the
sanction of concerned project under RGGVY. The funds are released
only after acceptance by the States of conditionality of sanction
letter.”

2.3.7 On being asked to elaborate on the methodology followed
and the normal time taken for the clearance of rural electrification
projects submitted by the States, the Ministry of Power informed:—

“The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) formulated by the concerned
project implementing agencies (State power utilities/CPSUs) and
recommended by respective State Government, in accordance with
the guidelines for project formulation under the RGGVY issued by
REC, are submitted at the concerned project office of REC for the
State. The DPRs are then scrutinized by the project office in
accordance with the guidelines for project formulation and the
office memorandum of Ministry of Power. After field appraisal of
the projects by the project office, the DPRs are forwarded to the

10


RGGVY Division, REC, Corporate office with their
recommendations for consideration of sanction of projects for the
financial assistance by the Corporation. The DPRs are further
scrutinized at RGGVY Division of REC, Corporate Office in
accordance with guidelines for Project formulation and after
reviewing the recommendations of the project office, if acceptable;
the projects are Processed and submitted to the Competent
Authority of REC for consideration of approval. The projects
approved by the Competent Authority are forwarded to Ministry
of Power for sanction by the Monitoring Committee on RGGVY.”

2.3.8 When asked about the functions of the Monitoring Committee
constituted by the Ministry of Power under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (Power), the Committee have been informed by the Ministry
of Power in a written note that the Monitoring Committee sanction
RGGVY projects, including revised cost estimates, monitor and review
the implementation of the scheme. In addition, the Monitoring
Committee also issues necessary guidelines from time to time for
effective implementation of the scheme. The Monitoring Committee of
RGGVY, while sanctioning Decentralised Distributed Generation (DDG)
projects also coordinate with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
to avoid any overlapping of the identified Projects.

2.3.9 To a query regarding how often the RGGVY Monitoring
Committee meet to consider/review the Project proposals, the
Committee were informed:

“Monitoring Committee meetings are held as per requirement. It
may be seen that for approval of XI Plan projects, Monitoring
Committee had held six sittings in Feb. & March 2008.”

2.3.10 On being asked about the manner in which the funds are
released under the scheme, the Committee have been informed that
Ministry of Power releases subsidy in instalments to the Rural
Electrification Corporation as against claims raised by REC. Rural
Electrification Corporation, in turn, releases the subsidy to the
implementing agency in four instalments of 30 per cent, 30 per cent,
30 per cent and 10 per cent. The first instalment is released when the
implementing agency is ready to award the contract. Subsequent
instalments are released after the implementing agency has inter-alia
certified incurring expenditure of 80% of the previous release. The
State-wise details of capital subsidy released for RGGVY projects as
on 10th June, 2008, as furnished by the Ministry of Power are given
at Annexure-III.

1


2.3.11 The Ministry on being asked to state the reasons for non-

release of any funds under RGGVY as on 10.06.2008 to Sikkim despite
the fact that two projects each were sanctioned for the State in the
10th and the 11th Plans, submitted:

“The implementing agencies are eligible to receive Ist instalment
when they are ready for award of contracts i.e. tender evaluation
has been completed. In case of Sikkim, the implementing agency
ie. Govt. of Sikkim is yet to reach this stage. During 10th Plan
also, no fund could be released to Sikkim for the same reason.”

2.3.12 During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Power, responding

to a point raised by the Committee relating to progress in the RGGVY
projects in Bihar and non-release of funds to the Bihar State Electricity
Board to take up the work of RGGVY projects, stated:

“The list we have in respect of Bihar shows that 26 projects in
10th Plan were sanctioned and 26 projects were handed over to
the implementing agencies on request of and in concurrence with
the State Government. These projects were distributed between
Power Grid and NHPC, of the Central Government. He is right
that works in Bhagalpur were carried out by Power Grid 30459
BPL households were given electricity there. The price thereof was
calculated to be Rs. 6066 lakhs. The sanctioned amount was revised
to Rs 73.23 crore. Even during the presentation you would have
seen that there is difficulty in providing BPL list in Bihar. Electric
Connection cannot be provided to those houses where BPL list is
not available... In this regard, we have requested the States to
ensure the availability of BPL lists so that BPL families may be
identified. The State Government will provide the lists to us.
17 projects have been sanctioned in the 11th Plan period. Out of
them 8 lie with the Bihar Electricity Board. Nothing of them has
so far been awarded.”

2.3.13 Asked if the Government ever considered giving more

responsibility to the States in implementation of rural electrification
programme, the Secretary Ministry of Power, responded during
evidence:

“We shall certainly look into it, but we have tried to do something
like this in our implementation programme. What we have done
is that there will be no parking of funds. Once the implementing
agency is identified, the funds will be directly given to the
implementing agency. But, as per the criteria that you are
suggesting, somebody will have to audit and check if the sums
are properly spent or not.”


D. Implementation of RGGVY Projects through Decentralized
Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply Projects

2.4.1 Under the RGGVY, the villages where grid connectivity was
either not feasible or not cost effectiv , were indicated to be electrified
through Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply
projects using conventional or renewable or non-conventional sources
such as biomass, bio-fuel, bio-gas, mini hydro, geo-thermal and solar
etc. It was also stated that the funding would be on the Pattern of
90% subsidy from Government of India and 10% loan from REC or
from own funds of the State/loan from financial institutions. The
Monitoring Committee of RGGVY, while sanctioning DDG projects
under RGGVY, should coordinate with MNRE to avoid any overlap.

24.2 The Ministry of Power, informed on 28th April 2008, in a
written note on the subject, that RGGVY was approved for the last
two years of 10th Plan with a capital subsidy Rs. 5,000. Approval has
also been accorded for capital subsidy of Rs. 28,000 crore during the
110 Plan period. The capital subsidy of Rs, 28,000 crore in the first
two years of the 11th Plan would inter-alia cover the subsidy
requirement for DDG projects. The provision for subsidy requirement
of DDG is Rs. 540 crore.

2.4.3 The Committee taking note of the fact that the Ministry of
Power in 2005 indicated non-feasibility of electrification in respect of
certain villages of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and in some UTs, wanted
to know as to how the Government proposed to electrify them. The
Ministry in their reply, informed that those villages were very remote
and grid-connectivity to those villages was very costly. It was further
intimated that DDG projects under RGGVY would take care of such
villages.

2.4.4 On being asked to furnish State-wise details of DDG projects
that have so far been sanctioned and completed so far, including the
expenditure incurred thereon, the Committee have been informed by
the Ministry in a written teply as follows:

“Framing of detailed guidelines for formulation of DDG projects
for electrification of remote rural areas is under Progress. So far,
no DDG project has been sanctioned.”

24.5 The Ministry of Power vide their Order No. 44/1/2007—Re
dated 12th January, 2009 issued guidelines for village electrification
through Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply
Projects under RGGVY (Annexure-IV). As per the guidelines, the list
of villages/hamlets to be electrified through DDG is to be finalized by
the State Renewable Energy Development Agency /Departments

13


promoting renewable energy in consultation with State utilities and
MNRE. The RGGVY Monitoring Committee of Ministry of Power
would sanction the projects on merit. The DDG projects would be
owned by State Governments which will decide the implementing
agency for their respective States. The Implementing agencies will
finalize the prioritized list of villages/hamlets to be electrified through
DDG and get the DPRs made through the panel of consultants to be
identified by the Ministry of Power. Creation of an Implementation
Support Group (ISG) by the Ministry of Power to coordinate/supervise
the scheme has also been outlined.

E. Targets and Achievements under RGGVY

2.5.1 The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
was launched by the Ministry of Power in April 2005 to achieve the
National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) goal of attainment
of access to electricity to all rural households in five years. The
overall cost estimates initially worked out in respect of different
components of the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY) for all villages and households as per Ministry of Power
OM No. 44/19/2004-D(RE) dated 18th March, 2005, are as follows:

(Rs. in crore)

a. Electrification of 125,000 un-electrified villages which 8,125
includes inter-alia development of backbone network
comprising Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone
(REDB) and Village Electrification Infrastructure (VEI)
and last mile service connectivity to 10% Households
in the village @ Rs. 6.50 lakh/village

b. Rural Households Electrification (RHE) of population 3,510
under BPL ie. 30% of 7.8 cr., Un-electrified Households/
ie. 2.34 crore households @ Rs. 1500/H/H as per Kutir
Jyoti dispensation.

c. Augmentation of backbone network in already electrified 4,620
villages having un-electrified inhabitations @ Rs. 1 lakh/
village for 4.62 lakh villages.

Total (1+2+3) 16,255
Outlay for the scheme 16,000
Subsidy component @ 90% for items 1&3 and 100% 14,750
for item 2
Component of subsidy to be set aside for enabling 160
activities including technology development @ 1% of
outlay


2.5.2 The Committee were further informed that the Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) scheme was approved initially
for the last two years of the 10th Plan with the capital subsidy of
Rs. 5000 crore and it was to be continued in the 110 Plan after
evaluation and necessary modifications, if required. 235 projects which
were sanctioned during the 10th Plan period were stated to be covering
68,763 un-electrified villages, 1.1 lakh electrified villages and 83 lakh
of BPL households at the sanctioned cost of Rs. 9,696 crore.

2.5.3 Planning Commission undertook evaluation of the scheme
for extension of the scheme in the 11th Plan. Sanction for release of
fund during 11th Plan for ongoing projects of 10th Plan was
accorded on 9th October, 2007, after evaluation of the scheme by
Planning Commission. Approval for continuation of the scheme in the
11th Plan with a capital subsidy provision of Rs. 28,000 crore was
accorded on 3rd January 2008. The capital subsidy of Rs. 28,000 crore
in the first two years of the 11th Plan would inter-alia cover the subsidy
requirement for DDG projects.

2.5.4 The Ministry of Power further informed that in the
llth Plan, a total of 551 RGGVY projects including 235 projects
sanctioned during the 10th Plan period, were taken up at the sanctioned
cost of Rs. 25,276 crore. Those 551 projects would cover 1.15 un-
electrified villages, 3.46 lakh already electrified villages and 2.42 crore
BPL households. The State-wise details of 551 projects (235 + 316)
furnished to the Committee are at Annexure-V. It was also stated that
the approved subsidy of Rs. 28,000 crore in the first two years of the
llth Plan would inter-alia cover the subsidy requirement for DDG
projects and charges for implementation and supporting activities.

2.5.5 On being asked to furnish details regarding the amount of
Central subsidy that would be required for the implementation of the
on going projects sanctioned by the Ministry, the Committee were
informed that 551 projects had been sanctioned for total estimated
cost of Rs. 25,275 crore. The award cost of these projects was estimated
to be Rs. 32,850 crore involving subsidy of Rs. 29,565 crore (@90%).

2.5.6 When asked about the year-wise fund allocation for RGGVY
and the capital subsidy released for the RGGVY projects, the following
details were furnished by the Ministry:

Year Allocation Capital Subsidy
Released
2005-06 1,500 crore 1,500 crore
2006-07 3,000 crore 3,000 crore
2007-08 3,944 crore 3,913.45 crore
2008-09 5,500 crore 364.26 crore*

*As on 31.08.2008.
15


2.5.7 Earlier during the course of examination of the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for 2008-09, the Ministry had
informed the Committee that they had Projected budget requirement
of Rs. 24,000 crore for RGGVY for 2008-09 with a view to achieve the
target of electrification of 67,475 villages and connection to 2.12 crore
BPL households. The Committee were further informed that in order
to cover the shortfall in targets and achievements in 2007-08, efforts
would be made to electrify additional 7000 villages since the financial
year 2008-09 over and above the remaining 18,000 villages of
235 projects sanctioned in the 10th Plan. For achieving the target of
25,000 un-electrified villages and providing connections to 60 Lakh
BPL households which were Projected in the outcome budget for
2008-09, the total requirement was placed at Rs. 13,000 crore. However,
budget allocation to the tune of Rs. 5,500 crore only has been made
for 2008-09 for RGGVY.

2.5.8 On being asked to furnish status report on the target of
electrifying 25,000 un-electrified villages and providing connections to
the 60 Lakh BPL households, the Committee have been informed that
the target for 2008-09 has been fixed at electrification of 19,000 un-
electrified villages and release of connections to 50 Lakh BPL
households.

2.5.9 When asked to state about steps that had been taken by the
Ministry to get additional allocation of funds over and above the
already allotted amount, the Ministry of Power informed the Committee
that the matter of enhancement of budget would be taken up at RE
stage by the Ministry of Power on the basis of expenditure incurred
and expected requirement of funds during FY 2008-09.

2.5.10 In response to a query as to how much money including
the central subsidy would be required to achieve 100% rural
electrification in the country taking into account State-wise un-electrified
villages and BPL households, the Committee have been informed that
for comprehensive rural electrification of the country, it is estimated
that about Rs. 52,000 crore will be required. This will involve capital
subsidy of Rs. 47,000 crore out of which Rs. 33,000 crore has been
sanctioned by Government of India in X and XI Plans.

2.5.11 Regarding targets and achievements made in the
implementation of RGGVY, the Committee were informed that in the
year 2005-06 & 2006-07, the achievement in RGGVY was electrification
of 37,895 (9189+28,706) un-electrified villages respectively against the
target of electrification of 50,000 (10,000+40,000) un-electrified villages.
The main reasons for the shortfall in achievements, are stated to be
delay in finalization of award of contract, non-availability of sufficient
equipinents, contractors & manpower, delay in issue of road permit,

16


delay in issue of authenticated BPL lists by State authorities and delay
in allocation and subsequent acquisition of land for new sub-stations.

2.5.12 In the year 2007-08, 9301 villages were reported to be
electrified against a target of 9000 villages. The Committee were
informed that the reason for lower targets & achievement was that the
sanction for continuation of the RGGVY scheme in the 11th Plan was
approved on 3rd January, 2008 leaving only three months for
implementation. During the course of examination of the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Power for 2008-09, the Committee were

since the financial year 2008-09 over and above the remaining
18,000 villages of 235 Projects sanctioned in the 10th Plan,

2.5.13 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry about
the progress on their efforts to reduce implementation cycle from
18 months to 12 months for additional electrification of 7000 villages
during 2008-09. In this connection the Ministry have responded:

“The matter was discussed in the Monitoring Committee meeting
and CPSUs have indicated that it may not be feasible to further
reduce implementation cycle from 18 months especially where
electrification of large number of un-electrified villages is involved.
However, where intensive electrification work is to be done in
already electrified villages, efforts shall be made to complete the
projects in less than 18 months.”

25.14 As regards cumulative achievements made in the
implementation of RGGVY as on 31st May, 2008, the Committee have
been informed about electrification of 48,401 un-electrified villages,
intensive electrification of 44,648 electrified villages and household
electrification of 31,61,446 households including 25,97,847 BPL
households. The State-wise details are given in Annexure-VI. The
following year-wise targets and achievements have been stated to be
made since launching of the scheme in 2005-06:

५ न iecaaimidh Oh sputhdicneatiacdcae ee Achievement (Households)
(Village Electrification) § ——
BPL Households Total Households

2005-06 10,000/9819 : E
2006-07 40,000/28706 6,72,588 729,774
2007-08 9,000/9301 16,21,182 20,41,836
2008-09 19,000/575* 3,04,077* ae I a at te 27 ese टिकी

“as on 31.05.2008,
17


2.5.15 Asked about the progress made in electrification of villages
in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya,
the Ministry furnished the following information:

“In Bihar, electrification works in 13533 villages have been
completed as on 31.05.2008. Once these villages are energized, the
percentage of electrified villages shall be about 85 per cent. In the
State of Jharkhand, works in 1292 villages have been completed as
on 31.05.2008. Once these villages are energized the percentage of
electrified villages shall be about 30%. In Arunachal Pradesh the
contracts have been recently awarded. In Meghalaya, although
contracts were awarded in 2007, physical progress has not been
reported so far.”

2.5.16 To a specific query that by when 100% village electrification
(both villages/habitations and households) was targeted to be realized
under RGGVY, what steps had been taken by the Govt. to ensure the
same and with what results, it has been stated that the villages covered
in 235 projects sanctioned in X Plan are likely to be completed by
March 2009. Connections to BPL households covered in these projects
are likely to be released by March 2010. Efforts will be made to
complete 316 projects sanctioned in XI Plan in 18 months from the
date of award. The achievement of above targets is subject to
availability of required funds.

2.5.17 The Ministry on being asked to justify the progress since
launch of the scheme in April 2005, submitted as under:

“The RGGVY scheme is material intensive scheme. The physical
outcome starts only after 9-10 months and the progress is
commensurate with the projects sanctioned, coverage of villages
and flow of funds.”

2.5.18 During evidence, the Committee wanted to know as to how
the Committee hoped to attain targets in 2008-09 with the lesser
budgetary allocation. Responding to the query, the Secretary, Ministry
of Power stated:

“We would probably as we said, strategise it by covering electrified
villages where more intensive electrification can be done. The cost
per connection may be lower in that situation. So, we would be
covering perhaps BPL households by concentrating on some of the
electrified villages where more intensive electrification can be done...
But our efforts certainly would be to do the maximum amount
that we can, given the funds that we have. We are of course able

18


to focus essentially on the consolidation of the investment that is
made on the 10th Plan Projects. We would subject to availability
of funds be concentrating more on intensification of the 10th Plan
expenditure so that that is out of the way and those projects are
completed. The 11th Plan Projects would of course be finally
awarded subject to availability of adequate funds.”

2.5.19 When asked to state reasons for modest progress and slow
pace of implementation of RGGVY as compared to the targets, the
Secretary, Ministry of Power inter alia stated:

“...The implementation of this programme depends very heavily
on the initiatives that the States take, the facilities that they can
offer, the availability of contractors locally and some construction
materials. In respect of giving BPL connections, there is the
requirement of having BPL lists which are not readily available
always.......The Programme began on a modest note in the
Tenth Plan and has got a substantial allocation in the Eleventh Plan,
although the allocations that we have received of Rs. 28,000 crore
through the Cabinet sanction will fructify through the years in
terms of financial allocation. This will not meet the entire needs of
the programme. Keeping in view the availability of funds and a
certain prioritization that we could do for the implementation of
the programme in terms of cost norms, keeping in view the Priority
for border areas, sensitive areas and special category States, we
have drawn up a phased programme for the Eleventh Plan for
which we have received sanction in January this year. We hope to
implement this programme keeping in view the availability of funds
and activation of the State agencies to arrange the necessary
contractors, if possible. ‘We have been in meeting and dialogue
with the industry to show that the demand for certain products,
certain equipment is going to increase manifold and the
manufacturing capacity should be enlarged to meet this increasing
demand...”

2.5.20 In response to a specific post-evidence query as to how many
of the RGGVY project Proposals sanctioned by the Ministry remain
totally unimplemented, the Committee have been informed by the
Ministry of Power:

“Out of 235 projects sanctioned in * Plan, turnkey contracts for
execution of projects in respect of 229 projects have been awarded
and works are under progress. Balance 6 Projects of the States of
Sikkim (2), J & K (1), Mizoram (2) and Tripura (1) the work is yet
to be awarded. The delay has been reported to be on part of the
respective implementing agencies.”

19


The Committee have been further informed that out of 323 projects
sanctioned in XI Plan, turnkey contracts in respect of 133 projects
have been awarded and for balance projects, the process of tendering
is reported to be under progress.

2.5.21 Some of the aspects of the subject of “Implementation of
RGGVY” were again discussed by the Committee on 19th September
2008 in a meeting with the representatives of Ministry, convened to
discuss the implementation status of recommendations made by the
Committee in their reports (14th Lok Sabha). The Committee were
informed that seven more RGGVY projects over and above the already
sanctioned 316 RGGVY projects (316+7=323), had been sanctioned in
the 11th Plan thus far. The figure of additional 7 projects led the tally
to overall 558 projects sanctioned to electrify 1.16 lakh villages, cover
3.5 lakh electrified villages and free connections to 2.43 crore BPL
households with a total sanctioned cost of Rs. 25651.44 crore.
State-wise list of projects sanctioned and achievement made is shown
at Annexure-VII. As per the data made available, 50,717 villages, have
been electrified against the target of 1.16 lakh villages; 59,337 villages
have been covered against 3.5 lakh electrified villages and 32,79,487
BPL households have been covered against 2,43,74,672 BPL households.

F. Cost Norms for Village Electrification

2.6.1 A cost norm was stated to be evolved in order to maintain
cost effectiveness of the RGGVY scheme. The Ministry of Power in
their brief note submitted to the Committee on 28th April 2008,
furnished the following details pertaining to cost norms of RGGVY:

Particulars Cost Norms
Plain Areas Hills/Desert/
Tribal Areas
Un-electrified Village Rs. 13 lakh Rs. 18 lakh
Electrified Village Rs. 4 lakh Rs. 6 lakh

Cost of BPL connection revised from Rs. 1500 to Rs. 2200.

2.6.2 The cost norms for the projects under RGGVY had also been
studied in detail by the Committee during examination of Demands
for Grants of the Ministry for 2008-09 and the Committee in their
25th Report expressed the view that the practice of presuming the cost
of village electrification as the same for similar areas/terrain throughout
the country without factoring in the State specific conditions,
disregarded the ground realities. The Committee, therefore, had

20


Tecommended that the cost norms for village electrification should be
tevisited by the Government and suitably modified taking into account
the local conditions in the terrain and areas in different States where
electrification has to be carried out.

2.6.3 On being asked to comment on the action initiated by the
Ministry with regard to the above recommendation of the Committee,
the Ministey of Power have in a written reply furnished on 16 June,
2008 informed that the Monitoring Committee, while considering
sanction of projects, also considers the local conditions in the Projects
areas based on the justification provided by the concerned
implementing agency/State to arrive at appropriate project cost to be
sanctioned.

2.6.4 Again on 17th June, 2008, the Ministry of Power, in their
action taken reply stated that:

“The existing cost norm for electrification of un-electrified villages
in normal terrain (Rs. 13 lakh) and in hilly, tribal & desert areas
(Rs. 18 lakh) and the cost norm for intensive electrification of
already electrified village in normal terrain (Rs. 4 lakh) and in
hilly, tribal & desert areas (Rs. 6 lakh) have been approved by the
Cabinet and as such modification is not feasible at this stage.
Moreover, the existing cost norms seem to be reasonable.”

2.6.5 In response to another Post evidence query on the revision of
cost norms under RGGVY in respect of villages and especially for the
BPL households, the Committee have been informed on 08th July, 2008
that the cost norms under RGGVY in respect of villages and
BPL households were last revised at the time of approval of
continuation of the scheme in the 119 Plan ie. in January, 2008. The
statement showing revised and Ppre-revised cost norms under RGGVY
is as given below:

बा ७ ieee बह नकल नर सत्र No. Particulars Cost Norms
Pre-revised —$—__________Prerevised Revised |

1, BPL Household Electrification Rs. 1500 per Rs. 2200 per
‘connection connection
2. Electrification of un-electrified
(a) In normal terrain Rs. 65 Lakh Rs, 13 Lakh
(b) In hilly, tribal, desert areas Rs. 65 Lakh Rs. 18 Lakh
3. Intensive electrification of already electrified villages
(a) In normal terrain Rs. 1 Lakh Rs. 4 Lakh
(b) In hilly, tribal, desert areas Rs. 1 Lakh RAT Lakh छहाओआ | 6 Lakh

21



2.6.6 Toa query from the Committee as to what action was being
taken in respect of project proposals, cost “of which exceed the cost
norms, the Ministry of Power informed:

“In case, the estimated project cost exceed the cost norms, the
concerned implementing agency is advised to either provide
appropriate justifications or to modify the project.”

2.6.7 During oral evidence, points relating to award cost of
RGGVY projects and cost norms were also discussed. Regarding award
cost of projects, the Secretary, Ministry of Power stated:

“We did have a problem of the awarded cost being higher than
the DPR cost quite substantially in quite a few cases and we had
to spend some months trying to rationalize and also trying to
compare that with the SRs, that is the schedule of rates which the
States have in their PWD Departments and others so that we can
find a justification as to why in some cases the awarded costs are
almost 50-60 per cent higher than what the DPR costs were......”

2.6.8 Further, the cost norm followed in respect of free electricity
connections to BPL households under RGGVY projects came in for a
focussed discussion during oral evidence. The Committee pointed out
that as per old cost norm, an amount of Rs. 1,500 per connection was
given whereas the cost was estimated to be Rs. 1,700. The cost per
connection has been revised to be Rs. 2,200 w.e.f, January 2008. The
Committee highlighting that free electricity connections to BPL families
was not being fully achieved due to the money gap a5 per old norm,
wanted to know from the representatives of Ministry of Power whether
more money would be sanctioned for BPL connections in those RGGVY
projects which were sanctioned as per the old norm of Rs. 1,500 per
connection. Responding to the query the Secretary, Ministry of Power
stated:—

“About the costs in the Tenth Plan and the Eleventh Plan
programmes, you have mentioned about the old norms and new
norms. This is a fact that there is a complaint that some people
have not been able to do the connectivity in the BPL household
for a sum of Rs. 1500/-. But, unfortunately, this was an award or
‘a contract. This norm existed at that time when the project was
awarded and we have sincerely advised the States that do pick up
your moral responsibility of providing electricity and this difference
in cost of Rs. 700/- should be given by the relevant State
Government... But contractually there is a problem with the old
contracts and the old norms. We will not be able to revisit them.
22


I think the most prudent thing for the States to give this extra
Rs. 700/- where the contractor is not doing because after all he
did pick up the contract with that norm in view. He may have
provided for it elsewhere and perhaps we do not know. But it
will be extremely difficult for us to get into revision of these earlier
norms.”

2.6.9 Responding to suggestions to sanction Rs. 2,200 per
connection at least in respect of revised BPL lists when it comes up,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power stated:—

“Sir, it will not be Possible. The audit will not allow this kind of
activity. We have gone into great detail and depth in the discussions
and I do not think that we should hold them a hope for doing it
by that methodology. I think the State Government should come
forth and discharge some responsibility there and complete the
programme.”

G. Monitoring Mechanism under RGGVY

2.7.1 A Monitoring Committee of the Ministry of Power under
the Chairmanship of the Minister of Power, besides sanctioning RGGVY
projects, monitor and review the implementation of the scheme and
issue necessary guidelines from time to time for effective
implementation of the scheme. A three tier (First tier monitoring by
implementing agency, Second Tier by REC and Third Tier by the
Ministry of Power) quality monitoring mechanism was stated to be
under operation to ensure effective implementation.

2.7.2 The Ministry of Power in their brief note on the subject
“Implementation of RGGVY” furnished to the Committee informed
that lack acquaintance/ preparedness of State power utilities, inadequate
response from industry, timely supply of materials such as electric
poles/cables/conductors/ distribution transformers/sub-station
equipment etc, delay in acquisition of land for sub-station, non-
availability of authentic list of BPL households and cooperation of
States as important factors which affect implementation of RGGVY.
The Committee have been informed that cooperation of States is desired
in the following areas:

(a) Identification & availability of contractors for turnkey
implementation of projects;

(6) Timely award of projects;

(c) Furnishing list of BPL households;
23



(व) Arranging timely forest clearance;
(e) Identification & timely handover of the land for sub-stations;

(f) Release of way bills/C forms/PAN/TAN number to
implementing agencies/contractors;

(g) Energization of villages once electricity infrastructure has
been created;

(h) Taking over of the assets from contractors/CPSUs; and

(i) Notification of Rural electrification Plan in consultation with
the Ministry of Power.

2.7.3 The Committee were also informed that once a village was
electrified, certification in this regard by Panchayat was required at
the earliest to declare it electrified. REC had reported that out of
47,826 villages electrified, only 27,426 Panchayat Certificates were
received by REC.

2.7.4 To a query as to what action was being taken to secure
certification from the remaining village panchayats in regard to
electrification, the Committee were informed that Grama Panchayat
Certificates were obtained by the implementing agencies and that the
matter was being pursued with the States and implementing agencies
vigorously through regular review meetings.

2.7.5 On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to
overcome issues connected with effective implementation of RGGVY,
the following has been stated in a written reply by the Ministry:

“The States have been requested by MoP to constitute a
Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary
and to hold monthly meetings to review progress of RGGVY. The
Committee may include representatives from Departments of Home,
Revenue/Excise, Forest, Police, the concerned power utility or
implementing agency. The Committee has also been asked to review
forest & environment clearances, supply of BPL list, land for
sub-stations etc.”

2.7.6 The Ministry of Power have further informed:—

“States were advised to set up District level Committees under
section 166(5) of Electricity Act, 2003 to inter alia monitor the village
electrification process. The role of the District Committee shall be
to coordinate and review the extension of electrification in each

24


district, to review the quality of power supply and consumer
satisfaction and to Promote energy efficiency and its conservation.

that notifications have been issued for setting up District level
Committees, the meetings need to be more regular.”

2.7.7 When asked to state about the powers of the District level
Committees, the Ministry informed the Committee that the role of the
District Committee would be to coordinate and review the extension
of electrification in each district, to review the quality of power supply
and consumer satisfaction and to promote energy efficiency and its
conservation.

“Ministry of Power has requested States to activate the District
Electricity Committees and to ensure that the meetings of these
Committees are held regularly every month. It is expected that
regular meetings of the Committee shall accelerate the
implementation of RGGVY. The States ...Coordination Committee
under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary (are) to resolve the
bottlenecks in the implementation of RGGVY.”

2.7.9 The Committee also held detailed discussions with the
representatives of the Central Public Sector Undertakings responsible
for implementing the RGGVY, during evidence. Elaborating on the
constraints faced at field level in the effective implementation of
RGGVY, the representative of NESCL (NTPC Electric Supply Company
Limited), inter alia stated:

“We are doing the work in 12 districts in Orissa, in eight districts
in Jharkhand, in three districts in West Bengal, in two districts in
Chhattisgarh and in two districts in Madhya Pradesh.... Basically,
the problems are non-availability of BPL lists, issues relating to
forest clearances and Placement of franchisees who take over when
we complete the work. These are the kinds of problems that we
are facing”

2.7.10 The representative of NHPC in this context added:—

“We have been working in Orissa, one of the problems that we
have is the non-availability of suitable number of poles. Presently,

25


submit

26

the company concerned produces around 14,000 poles per month
and they produce around two lakh poles in a year. Once we award
the contract for all the 30 districts, our total requirement will come
to around 20 lakh poles. If production of poles is not increased in
the State, the non-availability of poles itself will be bottleneck. The
second problem is about the non-availability of BPL list....There is
a gap in terms of production. There is no industry. Secondly, we
are not getting approved BPL list. We have awarded the contract
for 35,000 BPL connections in Puri district now, this figure has
gone up to 1,65,000...We have a problem of way-bill also. The
State Government is taking a very long time for issuing the way-
bill and as a result, the contractor has a problem in getting the
incoming material. This is what we have discussed with the
Minister recently, during our visit last week, in Orissa. We are also
not getting the Inspector to inspect the site and give clearance
for charging of DT and the line. These are small problems that
we are facing. We requested them to authorise NHPC or the PSUs
to inspect and get the charged line so that at the time of taking
over by the Discoms, they can further inspect and take over the
lines.”

2.7.11 The representative of PGCIL also made the following
ion in this regard:—

“We have taken up work in about nine Districts in Tenth Plan in
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and two Districts of Gujarat
and Rajasthan and others. By and large, we have tried to improve
the method and quality of the work being done by the State
Governments. For example, in Bihar or Uttar Pradesh steam-curing
for the poles was not being done which we have introduced.
Among the PSUs we were the first to take up this type of work.
We have done major work in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, Around
20,000 villages have been electrified by us. So, this quality
improvement work is done. In the case of Bihar, we have electrified
around 12,000 villages. But we have awarded the contract in 2005
and now this is 2008. We have got the BPL lists only after long
persuasion from the Central Government. Our Power Secretary
had written a number of letters. We have coordinated, we are
having regular meetings with the District Collector. But, ultimately
this could be finalised only in the month of January or February.
Even among them, for three-four Districts we have still not got
the lists. We could have completed this work long back...”


2.7.12 During evidence, the Committee made many suggestions as
to how to resolve the problems of shortage material like electric poles
etc. for RGGVY projects. Replying to the points explaining steps taken
to overcome the issue, the representative of NESCL, submitted:—

“Orissa, right in the beginning, when we assigned these works,
had taken the initiative. I have received a letter from the Secretary
(Power) saying that they had talked to their counterpart in the
industry department. Wherever the State has developed industrial
estates, they had identified sheds and they are saying that these
sheds are available for putting up units for pole manufacturing.
When we are awarding new jobs to new contractors we are giving
them, telling them and encouraging them to start their own pole
manufacturing facility. Two districts where we are working, that
is, Angul and Nayagarh, the contractor has already opened his
factory for manufacture of poles.”

2.7.13 The Secretary, Ministry of Power, further explaining about
the action taken to resolve the problems faced in the implementation
of rural electrification projects under RGGVY, inter-alia stated:

“That is why we have been holding this meeting with State Chief
Secretaries, Power Secretaries and making them aware of it. You
talked of material requirements. We held a special workshop in
march this year with all the States and representatives of the Indian
Electrical and Electronic Manufacturers Association (IEEMA) and
gave them the total requirement of materials and asked them to
plan production accordingly. From our side we are doing whatever
we can. But there is a need to pick up the opportunity. It is not
only a challenge, it is a huge opportunity for the industry and for
the youth to come forth and take this up. In fact, they can get
employment and entrepreneurship in the rural areas. It is not a
high-tech industry as 1 mentioned.”

2.7.14 The aspect of contracting of RGGVY work came in for sharp
discussion. The Committee pointed out the problems in assigning
RGGVY works to contractor, that contractor to sub-contractor and that
sub-contractor to another sub-contractor. Responding to the same, the
Secretary, Ministry of Power stated:—

“...the issue of contractor to sub-contractor is a very genuine
problem. We foresee it. That is why we had highlighted that the
availability of suitable competent agencies to do this job and the
required number is obviously a distinct handicap in the programme.

27



We certainly do not like this concept of handing down further
and further below because there is every likelihood that the next
sub-contractor will be of a lower quality and qualification than the
higher one. We will ask the agencies to address it, but I think the
way we want do address it is through a very tight monitoring
programme now which will involve the implementing agency, the
REC as well as the Central Government. We hope that we should
be able to put things in place with that and that faults that do
come up are pointed out in the execution phase itself rather than
wait for the completion by which time the damages would have
been done.”

2.7.15 Measures to be taken for speeding up the pace of the

RGGVY, were also taken up for detailed discussion during oral
evidence. The Secretary, Ministry of Power, responding to the queries
relating to those points, stated inter-alia as under:—

28

“We do hold periodic meetings with the States. You have mentioned
that the best practices that are being followed or practices that are
worthy of being followed are shared by them. We encourage the
States to speak themselves and speak of their achievements. When
everybody is present there, they do pick on the best practices.....As
regards the need to accelerate the programme and how we can
accelerate it, we need resources certainly to implement this
programme. One is financial resources and the other is technical
resources and the third will be equipment, the material that is
required to implement the programme. In all these three, the first
requirement of course will be of funds. But then it will come
down to the contracting agencies and also to materials being
available. From our side we have been trying to address; myself
and the Chairman, Central Electricity Authority have been going
around the Country and speaking to industry groups across the
Country letting them know that this is the magnitude of the
programme that is being implemented, sharing the material
requirements with them with the hope of promoting local industry.
As I mentioned some time back, we need some basic things like
poles, conductors, transformers etc. These are very basic things.
These are things that are required in very large numbers. We have
shared this with various groups across the country with the help
of CII, FICCI, Indian Merchants Chamber, and Regional Chambers.
We have tried to put this across to them.”


2.7.16 The aspect of Tequirement of financial resources for
“Implementation of RGGVY” was again discussed by the Committee

to the Cabinet a requirement of funds to the tune of Rs. 42,000 crore
for comprehensive rural electrification under RGGVY during the
Uth Plan. During the course of interaction, the Secretary, was asked to
clarify inter-alia as to how the target of 100% electrification would be
achieved with the Government sanctioned amount of Rs. 28,000 crore
against the requested 11th Plan allocation of Rs. 42,000 crore, the
Secretary submitted:—

“...you had asked about the issue of Rs. 28,000 crore. We had
drawn up a plan for Rs. 42,000 crore. Keeping in view the resource
availability, we were informed by the Planning Commission and
the Finance Ministry that they can make available Rs. 28,000 crore
in this phase. That is why, we had divided the programme into
phase I and II within the Eleventh Plan. Keeping in view the fund
availability, we had set aside certain norms for expenditure on
tural electrification, We have made some exceptions. We have taken
4p some more projects from phase II also in phase I within the
overall commitment that the total expenditure will not be beyond
what is the present level of sanction. That level of flexibility we
are looking at case to case basis. That will entail that the cost is
brought down from the existing projects or some States may be
willing to take up some component from their own State plans,
for their own expenditure so as to be able to get more coverage
or more areas through Central assistance. We are very positive on
those suggestions. We have examined and recommended such cases
in some monitoring committee meetings. Ultimately the issue has
to be cleared by the Cabinet because we had placed phase 1 and
2 before the Cabinet; in some situations where we have made the
exception, we have moved a case to the Planning Commission
and the Finance Ministry to approve the flexibility within the
overall ceiling of commitment of expenditure. But given the Present
level of spending in the States, this amount seems adequate for
the next 2-3 years. Unfortunately there was a gap for about a year
between two sanctions. So, the activity came down. Now this again
is picking up. But it is a very massive task and simultaneously if
you take up so much activity across the length and breadth of the
country, those contractors may not even be available to provide
the wherewithal and fix those lines. From our side, we tried to
reduce the project execution time from 2 years to about 18 months.”

29



H. Development of Franchisee System under RGGVY

2.8.1 The Ministry of Power has adopted franchisee system for
the management of rural distribution. The franchisees could be
Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Users Associations, Panchayat
Institutions, Cooperatives or individual entrepreneurs. A National
Programme for Franchisees was launched in May 2006 to facilitate
installation of franchisees in States and the franchisee guidelines
prepared by the REC were circulated to all States.

28.2 The franchisee arrangement could be for system beyond and
including feeders from substation or from and including Distribution
Transformer(s). The franchisees should be preferably input based to
reduce Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses so as to make the
system revenue-sustainable. The Ministry have stated that the Bulk
Supply Tariff (BST) for the franchisee would be determined based on
the consumer mix and the prevailing consumer tariff and likely load,
after ensuring commercial viability of the franchisee.

2.8.3 The Committee have been informed that the Panchayati Raj
Institutions have an important role of overseeing, in advisory capacity,
the delivery of service by the franchisees according to their identified
responsibilities. The State Government could also encouraye the
Panchayati Raj Institutions to take on responsibility of franchisee if
they are capable of entering into commercial agreements.

2.8.4 The key factors for the success of franchisee system are stated
to be reliability, availability and maintainability of power in the rural
areas and upfront payment of subsidies to the utilities. The utility has
to ensure this to make it viable proposition by ensuring supply of
powers for reasonable number of hours. Theft of electricity is stated to
be one of the major issues, which constitutes to losses of the utilities.
Franchisees are required to be given proper support by the local
administration in detection and prevention of theft of electricity.

2.8.5 The franchisee initiative involving public private partnership
across the States is stated to have shown encouraging results such as
increased revenue collection and consumer satisfaction as franchisee is
involved in repairs, proper billing and employment generation. In States
such as Uttaranchal and West Bengal women Self Help Groups are
involved as franchisees and this has yielded considerable interest among
the rural women. Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI) & IRADE were
entrusted the work of evaluation of franchisee installed in Assam,
Nagaland, Uttaranchal, West Bengal, Karnataka and UP. In their
evaluation reports, they have stated that the Franchisee System has
resulted in increase in revenue collection and other secondary benefits.

30


2.8.6 Elaborating on the aspect of development of franchisee
system, the Secretary, Ministry of Power stated during evidence:

“We also need in this programme franchisees to be arranged at
the village level to manage the Programme. The objective is to
have such franchisees who will give technical support as well as
collect revenues, As a beginning, we would be happy to get
revenue based franchisees who can do the collection of revenues
and ultimately with our support and also with the support of
State Governments acquire the necessary training. It is hoped that
this would provide employment opportunities to the local youth
to manage this programme. From our side, we have shown all the
initiative that we could to draw up training programmes for these
franchisees and for training the personnel at the village level, if
required, through the active involvement of the REC and other
training institutions in the country.”

2.8.7 On being asked about the status of deployment of franchisees
in the country, the Committee have been informed that all the States
have agreed to deploy franchisee for distribution management, which
is one of the clause in the Quadripartite/Tripartite Agreements, signed
by all the States. States can take help from REC/Power CPSUs in the
formulation of the Franchisee Agreement pursued by the Ministry of
Power. In 14 States franchisees are already in place, covering
63,100 villages. The State-wise details of franchisee development in the
country as furnished by the Ministry to the Committee are given at
Annexure-VIII.

2.8.8 Explaining progress in deployment of franchisees in RGGVY
covered areas, the Secretary, Ministry of Power, stated:
°

“1 do distinctly remember that we did share some Practices on
appointment of franchisees. Particularly in the States like Assam
and Bihar, in rural areas, we shared with the entire participation
there as to what are the good examples that we can learn, how
they have got about it and how they have been able to evince
interest from qualified people who are living in the villages to
come forth and take up such works. It is because, ultimately these
assets have to be guarded and maintained by the people from
those areas themselves. That would be the best methodology.”

2.8.9 The Committee in their 14th report on the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill,2005 had recommended that the Government should
have a re-look on the requirement of ‘Franchisee System’ under Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and ensure that appointment of
franchisees did not lead to cost escalation as apprehended by some

31



States. Regarding present status of implementation of the recommendation
the Ministry replied as under:

“The Central Government has already launched RGGVY for sharing
the responsibility of rural electrification by giving 90% capital
subsidy.

The Central Government has continued RGGVY for implementation
in the 11th Plan. While continuing, the Government has laid
emphasis on introduction of franchisee system in RGGVY areas
with a view to ensure revenue sustainability, improve customer
service and involve local institutions.

The introduction of franchisee system in the country has had a
favourable impact on revenues from the area where it has been
implemented as per studies conducted by independent
organizations like TERI and IRADE.

In developed States, there are no or very few un-electrified villages
whereas in developing States, the number of un-electrified villages
is very large. Under RGGVY, whereas the primary focus is
electrification of un-electrified villages, intensive electrification of
already electrified villages is also being undertaken. The parameters
for financing electrification of electrified villages and for intensive
electrification for already electrified villages are accordingly
different.”

1. Performance Appraisal of RGGVY

2.9.1 The Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) has been made
the nodal agency for Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY). All funds for the programme are channalised through REC,
which apart from releasing the capital subsidy being provided by the
Government, gives the remaining funds as loan assistance, on soft
terms. Besides financing of the project, REC establishes the framework
for implementation involving formulation of technical specifications,
procurement and bidding conditions, guidelines for project formulation,
field appraisal & concurrent monitoring and evaluation to ensure
quality and timely implementation. The REC is state. to be responsible
for complete oversight on the programme from concept to completion.

2.9.2 On being enquired by the Committee, about the role of REC
in the implementation of the RGGVY, the Ministry of Power informed
the Committee inter-alia us under:

¢ “Issuing all necessary guidelines to States for preparation
of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs);

32


* Whenever necessary, assisting States in preparation of DPRs
and of Rural Electrification plans by appointing consultants
or by identifying a Central Power Sector Unit (CPSU) for
the job;

* Scrutiny of DPRs to ensure compliance with RGGVY
Suidelines and with directions given by the Monitoring
Committee from time to time;

* Placing DPRs for approval before the Monitoring Committee;

* Monitoring various stages of implementation right from
invitation of tenders to final completion and hand over to
the utility;

* Preparation of model tender documents for the use of
utilities;

* Preparation of specifications for various equipment to be
used in the programme in consultation with Central
Electricity Authority(CEA) if necessary;

* Timely release of funds and monitoring of expenditure and
utilization by utilities;

* Appointment of agencies to ensure quality control;

* Coordination with Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy(MNRE) and Energy Development Agencies in States
for ensuring that villages not to be covered through
non-conventional means are identified for coverage under
the renewable programme;

* Implementation and monitoring of the franchisees
development (capacity building) programme;

* Ensuring of appointment of franchisees by utilities in all
project villages;

* Concurrent Evaluation of the scheme by independent
agencies; and

* Any other function assigned to it by the Monitoring
Committee.”

2.9.3 Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC), is given one
percent of the project cost as the fee for establishing frame-works for
implementation, meeting the scheme related expenditure, appraisal and
evaluation both at pre-award and post-award stage, monitoring and
complete supervision of the Programme from concept to completion
of the scheme and for quality control of projects at second tier (REC
Quality Monitors) of the Quality Control Mechanism.

33


2.9.4 It has been stated that the REC with a view to augment
implementation capacity for the programme have entered into
Memorandum of Understanding (MOUs) with NTPC, POWERGRID,
NHPC and DVC to make available the project management expertise
and capabilities of these organisations to States willing to use their
services. This is operationalized through a suitable tripartite/
quadripartite agreement.

2.9.5 On being asked whether the States/UTs were free to choose/
contract the implementing agency or are to accept the Central Public
Sector agencies suggested by the REC, the Ministry of Power replied:

“The services of Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSUs) have
been offered to the States for assisting them in the execution of
Rural Eelectrification Projects as per the willingness and
requirement. REC has entered into Memorandum of Understanding
(MOUs)with NTPC, POWERGRID, NHPC and DVC to make
available CPSUs’ project management expertise and capabilities to
States wishing to use their services.”

2.9.6 When asked as to whether the Ministry of Power had
rejected any project proposals of States/UTs forwarded by REC on
technical grounds, the Committee were informed that no proposal was
rejected by the Ministry on technical grounds.

2.9.7 During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Power responding
to queries regarding the problems encountered in implementation of
RGGVY, stated:

in the review of the Bharat Nirman programme in the Planning
Commission last month, I have made this plea that we will be
needing more funds if we want to push this harder into
implementation. But the other side of it remains which we recently
reviewed for all the Eastern States—and we had also called
Chhattisgarh in a meeting in Bhubaneswar extending over two
days in the previous week—we find that States have a lot of
distance to cover for the supply of electricity into those villages.
There are areas of concern....”

2.9.8 To a specific query relating to reasons for shortfalls in targets
and the achievements in the 10th Plan period during which a total of
235 RGGVY projects covering 68,763 un-electrified villages were
sanctioned, the Secretary, Ministry of Power, responding to the point,
stated as under:

“The idea is that we should complete what we have started because

the progress has not been as good as we thought. The problems

are also not too difficult to see that kind of mobilisation at a
34


district or village level for this degree of whole electrification
Programme throughout the country is not easily gettable though
in terms of economic activity it offers a very good opportunity
and this is what we have been telling the Chambers of Industry
and Commerce that you have a programme before you where you
can provide relatively low technology products like pole,
conductors, clamps, small distribution transformers, switches, meters
to the industry. It has got a chance to establish itself and thrive.
We hope that this is picked up but there is a Paucity of contractors.
One possibility is that if we were to launch the whole programme
countrywide in one big go then, Sir, the availability of personnel
and contractors to do that job is limited. The tenders which we
would get may be higher in some situations. We did have a
problem of the awarded cost being higher than the DPR cost quite
substantially in quite a few cases and we had to spend some
months trying to rationalize and also trying to compare that with
the SRs, that is the schedule of rates which the States have in
their PWD Departments and others so that we can find a
justification as to why in some cases the awarded costs are almost
50-60 per cent higher than what the DPR costs were. Some
implementing agencies went by a principle that in the past if they
have given a similar activity contract in the area they would take
that as a benchmark, no matter what the DPR cost has been. The
other fact of the matter is that a large number of these areas are
being visited for the first time in terms of actual assessment when
these people are going out to implement the works; what is the
exact length of the conductor that is required because those villages
and those streets have not been traversed for the preparation of
the DPR. But, Sir, I assure you that REC is reactivating itself. It is
also trying to recruit some extra personnel if necessary to supervise
this programme. I have advised the CMD that he should recruit
some young technical graduates who can go out into the field, see
and supervise this programme may be for even a short contract
period, for the duration of this programme. They should see that
we have adequate superintendence also over the large number of
works which would have been activated.”

2.9.9 However, in response to a post-evidence query as to whether
the REC had sufficient manpower to supervise the implementation of
tural electrification projects in the country, the Ministry replied:

“Yes; The RGGVY Division at Corporate Office, New Delhi
supported by the existing 17 Zonal/Project Offices of REC spread
in various States in the country, is overseeing the implementation
of RGGVY projects in the country. However, wherever required,
REC is also resorting to outsourcing.”

35


2.9.10 In response to another post-evidence query as to how far in
the self-assessment of REC, the organisation had succeeded in
performing their role as nodal agency, the Committee have been
informed that REC has been successful in performing its role as a
nodal agency.

2.9.11 Again on being asked to state whether the manpower (in
terms of employment generation potential) and material requirement
for rural electrification in the country (with State-wise figures) have
ever been properly assessed by the REC, the Committee have been
informed that seminar on the issue of “Requirement and Availability
of Highly Skilled Manpower for the Power Sector” was held under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (P) on 3.10.2007 and that a National
Workshop on Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana was held on
4th January, 2008 which inter-alia, covered franchisee development.
Further, National Workshop on materials and its supply was conducted
by Ministry of Power in association with REC and IEEMA on
10th April, 2008, wherein the implementing agencies/State
representatives also participated. During the workshop specifications
of material, requirement of materials, delivery schedules were explained
to all the manufacturers of major materials.

36


PART II

OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE

A. Facets of Village Electrification Under RGGVY

1, The definition of village electrification was made more
encompassing in February, 2004. The Committee in their subsequent
Reports (1st & 3rd Reports, 14th Lok Sabha) had recommended to
the Ministry to update the State-wise rural electrification statistics
on the basis of new definition on village electrification. However,
the Ministry have not been able to obtain the updated data as per
the new definition. The number of un-electrified villages in the
country has been estimated to be 1,25,000 as on 3ist March, 2004
based on data pertaining to 1991 census. Besides, the data available
with the Ministry regarding household electrification was based on
2001 census. The Committee also take note that non-availability of
authentic lists of BPL households of villages covered under RGGVY
causes hindrances in the execution of RGGVY projects. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate steps to obtain State-wise data on un-electrified rural
villages as per new definition on village electrification effective from
2004-05 and data on un-electrified rural households including BPL
households for proper planning and implementation of the RGGVY
under which all the un-electrified villages are envisaged to be
electrified covering at least 10 percent of un-electrified rural
households in these villages.

2. As per 2001 census, the total number of rural households
and un-electrified rural households in the country were 13,82,71,559
and 7,80,90,874 respectively. The number of un-electrified BPL
households in the rural areas of the country was estimated to be
2.34 crore i.e. approximately 17 percent of total number of rural
households. However, the new definition of village electrification
inter-alia provides that a village will be deemed to be electrified if
the number of electrified households in the village is at least
10 percent of the total number of households in that village. The
Committee feel that the implementing agencies of RGGVY projects
shall experience difficulties in implementing the provision of free
electricity corinection to BPL households in case of villages where the
number of un-electrified BPL households is more than 10 per cent.

37


The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, while
sanctioning a rural electrification project, should examine the
feasibility of 100 per cent electrification of BPL households to obviate
different type of problems relating to electrification of BPL
households. The Committee would also like to know about the action
taken by the Ministry to electrify the left out BPL households in
villages already electrified under RGGVY.

B. Rural Electrification Plan

3. Under the RGGVY, the States are required to finalize their
Rural Electrification Plans in consultation with the Ministry of Power
and notify the same within six months. The prescribed time limit
for notification of Rural Electrification Plans by the States was
August, 2008. However, as per latest information furnished by the
Ministry of Power on 19th September, 2008, only five States
ie. Gujarat, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have
notified their Rural Electrification Plans and five other States namely
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Punjab
have finalized their Rural Electrification Plans. The Ministry further
informed that the States, which have not finalized their Rural
Electrification Plans, have again been requested to finalize the same
by October, 2008. The Committee, taking into account the importance
of Rural Electrification Plans in the implementation of RGGVY,
recommend that the RGGVY Monitoring Committee of the Ministry
of Power should look into the matter and all concerned States which
have not finalized or notified their Rural Electrification Plans as yet
should be extended all possible assistance to finalize and notify
their Rural Electrification Plans without any further loss of precious
time.

C. Implementation of RGGVY

4, In order to formulate and execute rural electrification projects,
the implementing agencies of the States are required to prepare
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) in accordance with the Guidelines
issued by the Rural Electrification Corporation. These DPRs with
recommendations of the respective State Governments are submitted
at the concerned project office of the REC for their field appraisal
of the projects. The DPRs alongwith recommendations of the REC’s
concerned Project Office, are then considered by the RGGVY Division
of REC and on getting the approval of the competent authority, the
project-proposals are submitted to the RCCVY Monitoring Committee
in the Ministry of Power for sanctiui. Tie Committee recommend

38


that the RGGVY Monitoring Committee should stipulate fixed time
frames for the States and other implementing agencies for the
submission of DPRs of RGGVY projects and for the implementation
of the same. The REC should also process the DPRs of projects and
obtain sanction of RGGVY Monitoring Committee in a fixed time
frame,

5. The Committee note that once a rural electrification project
is sanctioned by the Ministry of Power the subsidy component is
released in instalments to REC against claims raised by it. The REC
releases subsidy to the implementing agency(ies) in four instalments
of 30 per cent, 30 per cent, 30 per cent and 10 per cent on fulfilment
of laid down conditions. The first instalment is released when the
implementing agency is ready to award the contract. The Committee
observe that capital subsidy for two RGGVY projects sanctioned
during the 10th Plan and two more projects sanctioned in the
11th Plan for the State of Sikkim has not been released so far.
Similarly, capital subsidy for eight projects in respect of the State of
Bihar has also not been released. The Committee while concurring
with the view of the Ministry of Power that there shall be no parking
of funds released for RGGVY projects with State Governments, are
of the strong opinion that for effective rural electrification in the
country, a more decentralized approach is required. In particular, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into the causes
for the delay and coordinate with the State/State implementing
agencies to ensure immediate release of capital subsidy for RGGVY
projects.

D. Implementation of RGGVY Projects through Decentralized Distributed
Generation (DDG) and Supply Projects

6. According to the Ministry of Power electrification of remote
villages in certain States and a few Union Territories, where grid
connectivity was costly and not feasible, was to be carried out under
RGGVY by way of the Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG)
and Supply Projects. The Committee note that even though an
amount of Rs. 540 crore has been specifically earmarked in the
11th Plan towards capital subsidy for DDG projects, no such project
has so far been formulated, approved and sanctioned. Further,
necessary guidelines in respect of DDG projects were not issued by
the Ministry of Power even after the lapse of more than three years
of launch of the scheme. It was only in January, 2009 that the
Ministry chose to issue the necessary guidelines in this regard, after
the Committee started examination of the subject. While deprecating

39


the inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry in issuing the
necessary guidelines, the Committee hope that these would be
followed in letter and spirit and execution of DDG and Supply
Projects would be completed in a fixed time frame. The Committee
in particular, desire that creation of the proposed Implementation
Support Group (ISG) and finalisation of list of villages/hamlets
for electrification through DDG and Supply Projects as per guidelines
issued, should be done at the earliest. The Committee should be
apprised of the action taken and progress achieved in this regard.

E. Targets and Achievements Under RGGVY

7. The Committee observe that at the time of launch of the
RGGVY in April 2005, the Ministry had set out for themselves a
target of electrification of 1,25,000 un-electrified villages, electrification
of 2.34 crore BPL households and intensive electrification of the
already electrified 4.62 lakh villages in a period of five years
involving expenditure of subsidy component of Rs. 14,750 crore. As
per the information made available by the Ministry as on 31st May,
2008, the Government had sanctioned 551 RGGVY Projects at a total
cost of Rs. 25,275.63 crore. The award cost of these projects is,
however, estimated to be Rs. 32,850 crore involving subsidy of
Rs. 29,565 crore (@ 90 per cost). The Committee also note that the
villages covered in 235 projects sanctioned in X Plan are targeted to
be completed by March, 2009 and connections to BPL households
covered in these projects are likely to be released by March 2010.
323 projects sanctioned in the 11th Plan are likely to be completed
in 18 months from the date of award. Achievement of these targets
is subject to availability of required funds. The Committee also note
that for a comprehensive rural electrification of the country, the
estimated fund requirement is about Rs. 52,000 crore for which the
component of capital subsidy required would be to the tune of
Rs. 47,000 crore. Further, the number of identified un-electrified
villages and households in the country so far are not complete and
absolute. At this backdrop, the Committee are deeply concerned to
note that the Ministry have lost sight of their target of 100 per cent
rural electrification due to unrealistic planning and poor programme
implementation capacity. The Committee, while deploring the
poor implementation of the RGGVY, expect the Ministry to review
all aspects of implementation of RGGVY, to make realistic planning
in future and to speed up the pace of implementation of the
programme.

40


8. The Committee observe that there has been poor utilisation
of approved outlay in the implementation of RGGVY. During the
10th plan period Rs. 4500 crore was allocated and utilized against
the approved outlay of Rs. 5000 crore. In the 11th Plan, although an
outlay of Rs. 28,000 crore was approved for the first two years,
allocation of Rs. 9,444 crore only has been made for RGGVY in the
first two years of the 11th Plan. The Committee, in particular, have
taken serious note of the fact that for the year 2008-09 against the
Projected requirement of funds to the tune of Rs. 24,000 crore, an
allocation of Rs. 5,500 crore has been made even though the
requirement was Rs. 13,000 crore to complete the projects sanctioned
during the 10th Plan period only. The Committee observe that
allocation of insufficient funds for RGGVY is one of the main
constraints causing slow Progress of implementation of the scheme.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry and REC
should reactivate themselves in the implementation of RGGVY and
make sincere efforts to prevail upon the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission to get adequate funds allocation for the
Programme. The Committee also desire that the Government should
take up the case for allocation of balance amount of Rs, 19,056 crore
in the year 2009-10 against the outlay of Rs. 33,000 crore approved
for the purpose and make sincere efforts to complete the 558 projects
sanctioned so far i.e. by 2009-10. The Committee may be informed
of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.

9. The Committee are given to understand that a total of
558 projects were sanctioned by the Government as on Sist August 2008.
The Committee observe that six of the 235 projects sanctioned during
the 10th Plan and 190 of the 323 projects sanctioned in the 11th Plan
period have not been awarded for execution. Out of the total
558 sanctioned projects, the number of Projects reported to be under
implementation are 362 for which the Ministry have released capital
subsidy to the tune of Rs. 8777.71 crore. As on 31.08.2008, 50,717 un-
electrified villages and 32,79,487 BPL households were reported to
be electrified and intensive electrification of 59,337 electrified villages
were completed. Against this backdrop, the Committee feel that the
Ministry have so far failed to visualize and implement the scheme
effectively as even the half-way mark of the set target of 100 per
cent rural village electrification and electricity access by 2010 has
not been achieved even after three years of implementation of the
scheme. While deploring the lackadaisical approach in the
implementation of projects under RGGVY, the Committee,
recommend that the Ministry should, expedite award of contracts in
respect of 196 un-awarded projects including 6 projects sanctioned
during the 10th Plan. The Committee would like to be informed of
the revised targets and time frame for completion of the whole

41



scheme. The Committee would also like to have the details of the
selection of un-electrified villages for electrification, electrified
villages for intensive electrification and BPL households for providing
free electricity connections along with the progress made, sanctioned
cost and cost incurred so far in this regard, district-wise and project-
wise in different phases of the implementation of the scheme. The
Committee further recommend that in the implementation of RGGVY,
electrification of un-electrified villages be accorded higher priority
as compared to intensive village electrification of electrified villages
to facilitate early achievement of the National Common Minimum
(NCMP) goal of providing electricity access to all households by the
way of electrifying all the villages.

10. The Committee observe that out of the 235 rural electrification
projects sanctioned in the 10th Plan period, six projects in respect of
the States of Sikkim, J&K, Mizoram and Tripura, which fall in the
North East region and Border areas, have not been awarded for
execution so far, The Committee further note that in the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Tripura, none of
the sanctioned RGGVY project had been completed till 31 May, 2008.
The Committee recommend that a new impetus be given for
implementation of the RGGVY projects in these States by taking all
the necessary corrective steps and the progress be intimated to the
Committee.

F. Cost Norms for Village Electrification

11. In response to the Committee’s earlier recommendation
(25th Report, 14th Lok Sabha) to revisit and to suitably modify the
cost norms for village electrification taking into account the local
conditions, the Ministry had replied that the cost norms had already
been approved by the Cabinet and as such modification was not
feasible at that stage. The Committee, having taken note of the fact
that the cost norms for electricity connections to BPL households,
electrification of un-electrified villages and intensive electrification
of already electrified villages under RGGVY were revised in January,
2008, do not accept the reply of the Ministry in this regard. The
Committee again recommend that the cost norms should be reviewed
by the Ministry periodically taking into account the general rise in
price level and the cost of the project be fixed after taking into
account the terrain, local conditions and other hindrances/risk factors.
The Committee also recommend that the Standard Rates which the
States have in their PWD Department should be verified at the time

42


of submission of DPRs so as to avoid subsequent delays in awarding
the projects.

12. The Committee note that during the 10th Plan period,
a capital subsidy of Rs. 1,500/- per connection was granted for
providing free electricity connection to BPL households under
RGGVY. The Committee have also been informed that although the
cost norm for giving free electricity connection to BPL household
has been revised to Rs. 2,200/- with effect from January 2008, the
old rate of Rs. 1500/- per connection is permissible in respect of
projects sanctioned prior to January 2008. Against this backdrop, the
Committee recommend that capital subsidy of Rs. 2,200/- per
connection be granted for providing free electricity connection to
BPL households irrespective of date of sanction of RGGVY projects
excluding the RGGVY projects, which were completed on
31 December, 2007.

G. Monitoring Mechanism Under RGGVY

13. In order to ensure effective implementation of RGGVY, there
exist three-tier quality monitoring mechanism and District Electricity
Committees. However, the Committee find that there are many
constraints at the field level in the execution of RGGVY projects
and the implementing agencies face difficulties in resolving issues
relating to timely award of contracts, availability of contractors,
supply of material, availability of BPL lists, forest clearance, way-
bills, allotment of land for sub-stations, safety against theft,
particularly theft of transformers and electric wires and rendering of
village electrification certificates by Village Panchayats, etc. The fact
that out of 47,826 villages electrified as on 31 May 2008, the REC
have received panchayat certificates in respect of 27,426 villages only
is a vivid example of the existing state of affairs. The Committee
also observe that the Ministry of Power have requested all the States
to ensure regular conduct of meetings of the District Electricity
Committees and to constitute a Coordination Committee under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to review the progress of RGGVY
every month. The Committee expect that all the aforesaid issues
which are reported to be the main hindrances in the implementation
of RGGVY would be effectively redressed by the State Coordination
Committees. Nevertheless, the Committee recommend that the role
and responsibilities of State Coordination Committee/District
Comumittee/State/State Utility may be clearly defined and necessary
powers be given to them for effective implementation of RGGVY.
The Committee hope that the Ministry will come out with stricter

43


norms in consultation with the concerned States/UTs for providing
free electricity connection to BPL households under RGGVY in order
to remove constraints in obtaining authentic list of BPL households.
The Committee would like to know the outcome of the efforts of
the Ministry to speed up implementation of RGGVY through
Coordination Committees.

14. The Ministry of Power have informed that they have been
making best efforts to get necessary financial, technical and material
resources to accelerate pace of implementation of RGGVY. The
Committee observe that against the Ministry’s proposed total
requirement of Rs. 42,000 crore for RGGVY in the 11th plan, an
outlay of Rs. 28,000 crore was approved for the first two years of
the 11th Plan. However, the Ministry could envisage utilisation of
Rs. 9,444 crore only during the first two years of the 11th Plan and
the outlay of Rs. 28,000 crore is now reported to be adequate for
next 2-3 years. As regards the efforts to marshal the required technical
and material resources, the Committee find that despite efforts of
Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority and the REC by
interacting with various industrial associations/groups across the
country, the implementing agencies are reportedly experiencing
shortage of supply of material and problems arising out of sub-
contracting in the execution of RGGVY projects. Constraints caused
by sub-contracting of work for RGGVY projects are envisaged to be
resolved through tight monitoring programme of the REC as well as
that of the Central Government. Against this backdrop, the,
Committee, expect the Ministry to draw an action plan concerning
all the problem areas and take necessary steps to accelerate
implementation of RGGVY. The Committee also recommend that
problems arising out of sub-contracting of the works under RGGVY
should be effectively dealt with by incorporating appropriate
provisions in the terms and conditions of the contracts. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the
Ministry along with implementation status thereof.

H. Development of Franchisee System under RGGVY

15. The Committee observe that adoption of franchisee system
for distribution management has been made mandatory under the
RGGVY. State Government can also encourage the Panchayati Raj
Institutions to take on responsibility of franchisee if they are capable
of entering into commercial agreements. Moreover, Panchayati Raj
Institutions have also an important role of overseeing, in advisory
capacity, the delivery of service by the franchisees. The Committee

44


also note that the REC is to arrange training programme to
franchisees and to the personnel at village panchayat level. The
Committee having taken note of these provisions, recommend that
as far as award of franchise for rural distribution is concerned,
preference may be given in the order of Panchayati Raj Institutions,
user associations, cooperatives, Non-Government Organisations
(NGOs) in comparison to private entrepreneurs. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government as
well as REC in this regard.

16. The Committee note that the objectives of development of
franchisees are reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial
losses, maintenance of the infrastructure and to provide uninterrupted
supply of quality power. The Committee have also been informed
that input based franchisee is preferable to revenue collecting
franchisee as it will be accountable for loss and theft in the system,
The Committee, however, on studying the franchisee system already
under operation in 14 States, find that a major part of the franchisee
system developed by different States/UTs/Utilities are based on
Revenue Collection models rather than input based system. Moreover,
the Committee in their earlier Report (14th Report of 14th Lok Sabha)
had also recommended for review of development of franchisee
system under RGGVY to ensure non-escalation of cost of electricity
supplied. Going by the action taken reply of the Ministry on the
recommendation of the Committee on this issue, the Committee feel
that the issue has not been suitably addressed and have genuine
apprehensions that there are grounds for increase in electricity tariff
in the franchisee areas in those States/UTs where generation,
transmission and distribution of electricity are mostly held by the
State/State Utilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
Ministry should review all aspects of development of franchisee
system based on feed back obtained from functioning and
performance of various models of franchisees and necessary
remodeling of the franchisee system should be undertaken in order
to make it more effective. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken in this direction along with the outcome thereof,

I. Performance Appraisal of RGGVY

17. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Power and the
REC have failed to properly assess requirement of manpower and
material for the implementation of the RGGVY in time and as a
result the employment generation potential of the RGGVY
programme has not been exploited fully. During evidence, the

45


Committee were also informed that the REC was reactivating itself
for the implementation of the RGGVY and if necessary, extra
personnel would be recruited by REC for the purpose. In the light
of the above, the Committee would like to be apprised about the
impact of shortfall of personnel, if any with REC, and measures
taken to address the issue.

18. The Committee note that the Rural Electrification Corporation
(REC) is responsible for complete supervision of the programme from
concept to completion. Although the Ministry have praised the
performance of the nodal agency for implementation of RGGVY, the
agency has always fallen short of the targets set for the programme
both in physical and financial terms. Non-availability of funds, lack
of initiatives by States, non-availability of local contractors and some
construction materials and non-availability of BPL lists, etc. are stated
to be some of the factors which caused shortfalls in achieving the
physical and financial targets set for the implementation of RGGVY.
In view of the foregoing, the performance of the nodal agency in
the implementation of RGGVY, has not made the Committee to feel
satisfied. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry and
the REC in particular should multiply their efforts and take all the
necessary corrective measures to overcome the problems identified
in the implementation of the programme.

New Dent GURUDAS KAMAT,
February 12, 2008 Chairman,
Magha 23, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

46


ANNEXURE 1
STATUS OF VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION AS ON 31,3.2004

SI. No, State No. of inhabited Total no. of Balance 4038९ of
villages as villages -—-unelectrified —_electrified
per 1991 electrified villages villages
census
1 2 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh 26586 26565 $ 100
कं Arunachal Pradesh 3649 2335 1314 64
3, Assam 24685 19081 5604 77.30
4. Bihar 38475 19251 19224 50
5. Jharkhand 29336 7641 21695 26
6. Goa 360 360 * 100
eA Gujarat 18028 17940 $ 100
8. - Haryana 6759 6759 = 100
9. Himachal Pradesh 16997 16891 106 99.38
10. Jammu & Kashmir 6477 6301 176 97.28
i. Karnataka 27066 26771 295 98.91
12. Kerala 1384 1384 i 100
13. Madhya Pradesh 51806 50474 1332 97.43
14. Chhattisgarh 19720 18532 1188 94
15. Maharashtra 40412 40351 = 100
16. Manipur 2182 2043 139 93.63
17. Meghalaya 5484 3016 2468 "55
18. Mizoram 698 691 vi 99
19. Nagaland . 1216 1216 = 100
20.

Orissa 46989 37663 9326 80.15

47


1 2 3 4 5 6
21. Punjab 12428 12428 के 100
22. Rajasthan 37889 37276 613 98.38
23: Sikkim 447 405 42 90.60
24. Tamil Nadu 15822 15822 - 100
25, Tripura 855 818 37 95.67
26. Uttar Pradesh 97122 57042 40080 58.73
27, Uttranchal 15681 13131 2550 83.73
28. West Bengal 37910 31705 6205 83.63

Total (States) 586463 473892 112401 80.80
a ee oe ३ ee Total UTs 1093 1090 $ 100%
All India 587556 474982112401" 80.80%

“Balance villages are not feasible for electrification.

“As per the new definition of village electrification (effective from 2004-05) total number
of unelectrified villages is estimated to be around 1,25,000.

48


ANNEXURE II

RURAL HOUSEHOLD ELECTRIFICATION—2001 CENSUS

9. No. State Total no. Households age of

of rural having electrified

households electricity households

1 2 3 4 5

All India 138,271,559 60,180,685 43.52
1. Andhra Pradesh 12,676,218 7,561,733 59.65
2. Arunachal Pradesh 164,501 73,250 44.53
3. Assam 4,220,173 697,842 16.54
4. Bihar 12,660,007 649,503 5.13
5. Jharkhand 3,802,412 379,987 9.99
6. Goa 140,755 130,105 92.43
7. Gujarat 5,885,961 4,244,758 72.12
8. Haryana 2,454,463 1,926,814 78.50
9. Himachal Pradesh 1,097,520 1,036,969 94.48
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1,161,357 868,341 74.77
i. Karnataka 6,675,173 4,816,913 72.16
12. Kerala 4,942,550 3,238,899 65.53
13. Madhya Pradesh 8,124,795 5,063,424 62.32
14... Chhattisgarh 3,359,078 1,548,926 46.11
15. Maharashtra 10,993,623 7,164,057 65.17
16. Manipur 296,354 155,679 52.53
17. Meghalaya 329,678 99,762 30.26
18. Mizoram 79,362 35,028 44.14
19. Nagaland 265,334 150,929 56.88
20. Orissa 6,782,879 1,312,744 19.35



1 2 ES 4 5

21. Punjab 2,775,462 2,482,925 89.46
22. Rajasthan 7,156,703 3,150,556 44.02
23. Sikkim 91,723 68,808 75.02
24. Tamil Nadu 8,274,790 5,890,371 71.18
25. Tripura 539,680 171,357 31.75
26. Uttar Pradesh 20,590,074 4,084,288 19.84
27. Uttaranchal 1,196,157 602,255 50.35
28. West Bengal 11,161,870 2,262,517 20.27
29. A. & Nicobar Islands 49,653 33,807 68.09
30. Chandigarh 21,302 20,750 97.41
31... 0. & Nagar Haveli 32,783 27,088 82.63
32. Delhi 169,528 144,948 85.50
33. Daman & Diu 22,091 21,529 97.46
34. Lakshadweep 5,351 5,337 99.74
35. Pondicherry 72,199 58,486 81.01

50


ANNEXURE III

DETAILS OF RELEASE OF FUNDS UNDER RGGVY

Sl.No. Name of State Cumulative Claim released as
on 10.6.2008 (Rs. Lakh)
“loan Subsidy Total”
1. Andhra Pradesh 4554.15 32336.23 36890.38
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1818.14 16390.42 18208.55
3. Assam 1137.28 10029.76 1167.04
4. Bihar 16155.80 145758.22 161914.02
5. Chhattisgarh 537.72 1179.77 11717.50
6. Gujarat 806.80 3953.69 4760.49
7. Haryana 436.34 3336.96 3773.30
8. Himachal Pradesh 74.78 691.02 765.80
9, Jammu & Kashmir 767.54 6131.44 6898.98
10... Jharkhand 10700.05 $5496.46 96196.52
li. Karnataka 5869.99 42615.77 48485,75
12. Kerala 51.25 2044.79 2096.04
13. Madhya Pradesh 2903.69 23382.97 26286.66
14, Maharashtra 528.88 2205.82 2734.69
15. Manipur 187.43 1669.79 1857.22
16. — Meghalaya 266.19 2132.38 2398.57
17. Mizoram 63.00 63.00
18. Nagaland 91.08 915.57 1006.65
19... Orissa 2490.02 21817.23 24307.25
20... Punjab 300.00 300.00
21. ‘Rajasthan 5110.96 36977.98 42088.95
22... Sikkim
23. ‘Tamil Nadu 1342.23 8734.84 10077.07
24. Tripura 108.00 108.00
25. Uttar Pradesh 29261.62 262764.35 292025.97
26. — Uttranchal 4977.13 42459.35 47436.48
27. West Bengal 4011.31 36116.89 40128.20
Grand Total 94080.37 799612.71 893693.08

51


ANNEXURE IV

No.44/1/2007-RE
Government of India
Ministry of Power

Shram Shakti Bhawan,
Rafi Marg, New Delhi- 110001
Dated the 12th January, 2009

ORDER

Subject : Guidelines for Village Electrification through Decentralized

1.0

2.0

3.0

52

Distributed Generation (DDG) under Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana in the XI Plan - Scheme of
Rural Electricity Infrastructure and Household
Electrification

Guidelines for Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) under
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana in the XI Plan -
Scheme of Rural Electricity Infrastructure and Household
Electrification, for attaining the goal of Providing access to
electricity to all households, electrification of about 1.15 lakh un-
electrified villages and electricity connections to 2.34 crore BPL
households by 2009. The approval has been accorded for capital
subsidy of Rs. 540 crore for DDG during XI Plan period which
is included in capital subsidy of Rs. 28000 crore available for
RGGVY in XI Plan period. This is in continuation of Order
No. File 44/37/07-D(RE) dated the 6th February, 2008.

Ministry of Power, Government of India launched Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana in 2005 vide OM No.44/ 19/2004—
D(RE) dated 18.03.2005. The scheme was continued further in
llth Plan vide OM No.44/37/07-D(RE) dated 6.2.2008. As
per OM dated 6.2.2008 there is a provision of subsidy of
Rs. 540 crore for Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG)
under RGGVY.

Decentralized Distributed Generation can be from conventional
or renewable sources such as Biomass, Biofuels, Biogas, Mini
Hydro, Solar etc. for villages where grid connectivity is either
not feasible or not cost effective.


4.0

5.0

6.0

Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) would be the Nodal
Agency for the scheme. The capital subsidy for eligible projects
under the scheme would be given through REC. In the event,
the projects are not implemented satisfactorily in accordance with
the conditionalities of this order, the capital subsidy would be
converted into interest bearing loans.

The DDG projects would be owned by State Government.
Implementing agencies of the projects shall be either the State
Renewable Energy Development Agencies (SREDAs)/departments
promoting renewable energy or State Utilities or the identified
CPSUs. The State Governments will decide the implementing
agency for their respective States.

The projects under the scheme will be subject to Quality
Monitoring Mechanism. The details of 3 Tier quality control
mechanism is enclosed as Annexure-1.

7.0 SERVICE CHARGES/FEES

(i) The State Implementing Agencies and Central Public Sector
Undertakings who are paid service charges @ 8% and 9%
respectively of the project cost as charges for implementing
the scheme and also for meeting additional expenditure on
compulsory third party monitoring at the first tier of the
quality control mechanism shall concur to pass on the
Service Charges (to the extent required) to the Project
Developer towards meeting the cost of providing power for
a period of 5 years.

(ii) REC will be given 1% of the project cost as fee for
establishing frameworks for implementation, meeting the
scheme related expenditure, appraisal and evaluation both
at pre-award and post-award stage, monitoring, and
complete supervision of the programme from concept to
completion of the scheme and for quality control of projects
at second tier (REC Quality Monitors) of the Quality Control
Mechanism.

(iii) For supporting activities and quality monitoring at third
tier (National Quality Monitors) to be undertaken by
Ministry of Power, a provision of 1% of the outlay would
be kept. The supporting activities would be in the nature
of capacity building, awareness and other administrative and
associated expenses, franchisee development and undertaking
of pilot studies and projects complementary to the Rural
Electrification Scheme.

53


8.0

9.0

10.0

10.1

10.2

54

Monitoring Committee

Monitoring Committee constituted by Ministry of Power under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Power), Government of India will
sanction the projects, including revised costs estimates, monitor
and review the implementation of the scheme in addition to
issuing necessary guidelines from time to time for effective
implementation of the scheme.

The Services of Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) have
been offered to the States for assisting them in the execution of
Rural Electrification Projects as per their willingness and
requirement. With a view to augment the implementation
Capacities for the programmes, REC has entered into
Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) with NTPC, Power
Grid, NHPC and DVC to make available CPSUs programme
management expertise and capabilities to States wishing to use
the services. This has been operationalised through a suitable
Tripartite/Quadripartite Agreement.

Identification of Villages/Hamlets

While implementing the DDG Projects it has to be ensured that
(i) the effort and investment that goes into setting up of DDGs
are utilized for the benefit of the target groups and do not become
sunk investment once the village is being connected to the grid
and (ii) there is sufficient engagement and support of the local
community for this initiative.

For the selection of villages, the following approach should be
followed:—

(i) The list of villages/hamlets to be electrified through DDG
is to be finalized by the State Renewable Energy
Development Agency /departments promoting renewable
energy in consultation with State utilities and MNRE.

(ii) To the extent possible, the selection of the villages/hamlets
is to be carried out in a cluster to take advantage of the
clustering effect, wherever applicable. Depending on the
Proximity of the villages/hamlets, the merit of setting up a
local distribution grid covering all these villages/hamlets
with a central power plant as against setting up of
individual village/hamlet level systems would be evaluated.

(iti) Villages/hamlets that comprise of migratory / floating
population may not be considered.


11.0

(iv) While finalizing the list, the villages/hamlets are to be
prioritized and those villages where grid connectivity is not
foreseen in next 5 to 7 years must be taken up first for
setting up DDG projects.

(९) Villages/hamlets having population of less than 100 shall
not be considered under the DDG Scheme and to be taken
up by MNRE for implementation. Villages/hamlets that are
already being planned to be taken up by MNRE are to be
excluded under the DDG scheme.

(vi) Villages/hamlets that have been provided with solar home
lighting systems under the Remote Village Electrification
program can also be considered under the DDG scheme.

(vii) Infrastructure for these projects is to be established in a
manner so that they are grid compatible. This would ensure
quick interface when grid power reaches the village and
ensure that the investments made today are not sunk when
the village is finally connected to the grid.

Selection of technology

The DDG projects could be based on either conventional or
renewable forms of energy. The choice of technology would
depend on the appropriateness of the chosen technology for
specific villages/hamlets. Since the DDG projects to be
implemented are to be scalable and undertaken within a relatively
stiff timeline, options being considered for the proposed guidelines
are those that have either reached a stage of commercial maturity
or their technical viability is proven under actual field conditions.
A list of such options is presented below:—

* Diesel Generating sets powered by biofuels (non-edible
vegetable oils like Jatropha, Pongamia etc.)

* Diesel Generating sets powered by producer gas generated
through biomass gasification (100 % producer gas engines)*

* Solar Photo Voltaic

* Small Hydro

It may be noted that the above list is based on the technologies
that are presently being employed and are the preferred options
for decentralized power generation. There could be additional
possibilities as listed below, which are not popular now, but may
become relevant in future.

“To be considered only where project design includes dedicated energy plantations to
ensure sustainable biomass supply.

55


12.0

12.1

56

¢ Diesel Generating sets powered by biogas (from animal
waste)

* Wind hybrid systems
* Other hybrid options, including any new technology

Although diesel is the most convenient form of decentralized
Power generation option, it would be advisable to treat the diesel
option as only for standby or under situations where there is
temporary disruption in the supply of local renewable energy
sources.

Annexure-2 provides a technology decision tool that can be taken
as a guide while selecting the most appropriate technological
choice for any particular village/hamlet. It is emphasized that
this tool is only a suggestive one and the actual choice of
technology has to be based on a detailed survey of the village/
hamlet.

Annexure-3 provides a framework which forms the basis of
arriving at the technology decision tool.

The preferred technology options and rating thereof are indicative
in nature and at the time of sorting of DPRs for approval, details
justification will have to be provided for selecting an option.

Financing of Projects and Administering of Funds

The financial assistance for implementing the DDG projects would
include the following project cost:

(a) Capital cost*, comprising of:

* All plant equipment & auxiliary systems and accessories
required for the power plant operation

* All associated civil works. Cost for land, however, has to
be borne by the state government

* Distribution Network with necessary control equipment. The
subsidy applicable to BPL Households under the RGGVY
Programme shall also be applicable for DDG Projects. Access
to electricity has to be provided for common facilities such
as Street light, Schools, Community buildings Panchayat
Bhawan etc.

* Initial capital cost for plantation for sustainable supply of
bio energy (in case of biomass gasification/bio fuel projects
only).


Initial capital cost of setting up non-domestic loads as
specified by the implementing agency.

* For clarification on items not specifically mentioned here the criteria
as applied in Rule 79 of GFR, 2005 published by Government of India
be relied upon.

(b)

(०)

(d)

(e)

Revenue Cost*:

Cost of spare parts for 5 years after commissioning. The cost of
consumables and labour will not be included in the capitalized
project cost.

Cost of providing power for a period of 5 years from
commissioning as identified in DPR after taking into account
recovery from village house holds as per the tariff to be decided
by the State Utility/SREDA/Implementing Agency, but the same
shall not be less than the existing tariff in the neighbourhood
area and shall be indicated in the bid document for identified
load of each household.

Soft Cost comprising of:

¢ Pre-selection of villages, technologies and preparation of
DPRs.

* Cost of social engineering to ensure community engagement.
Pattern of payment

90% of the total project cost (capital cost and soft cost) will be
provided to the implementing agency as subsidy. The balance
10% can be arranged by the implementing agency at their own
or taken as loan from any financial institution or REC. The
following payment terms are recommended for the payment of
capital cost to the project developer

* 70% of the capital cost excluding cost of providing power
as stated above till commissioning of the project, linked to
project completion milestones.

* Balance 30% of the capital cost excluding cost of
providing power as stated above over the 5 year period
(@ 6% per annum).

¢ Cost of providing power shall be paid on annual basis after
taking into account recovery from village house holds.

57


13.0

13.2

13.4

14.0

14.1

58

(f) Administration of funds

The payment to the project developers, as per the terms
outlined above, will be routed through the implementing
agencies.

Project Approval and Implementation Procedure

An Implementation Support Group (ISG) will be created by
Ministry of Power to coordinate/s: Pervise the Scheme
implementation. The roles and responsibilities of ISG are detailed
at Annexure-4,

The MoP will identify a panel of consultants to assist ISG/
Implementing Agencies/CPSUs in terms of providing technical
support, including pre-selection of technology and preparation of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).

The implementing agency will finalize the prioritized list of
villages/hamlets to be electrified through DDG and get the DPRs
made through the panel of consultants.

Implementing Agencies shall submit the DPRs to ISG and
identified CPSUs shall submit the DPRs to Implementing Agencies
who shall forward DPRs to ISG. ISG will review the DPRs and
forward the DPRs to the Monitoring Committee for approval.
Indicative list of information to be covered in the DPR is enclosed
as Annexure-5.

The Monitoring Committee would sanction the Projects on merits.

Thereafter, implementing agency shall invite open tender on Build,
Operate, Maintain & Transfer (BOMT) basis and place award.
Award cost should not be more than 10% of the sanctioned cost.
In case award cost is more than 10% of the sanctioned cost, the
same shall require prior approval of Monitoring Committee.

The flow chart of the approval Process is enclosed as
Annexure-6.

Institutional Framework and Facilitation Support
Implementing Agencies shall:

(i) Assist in land acquisition and execution of the Scheme.

(ii) Help Project Developers in community mobilization and in
creating awareness about DDGs and on the efficient and
safe use of equipments.


15.0 Eligible Project Developers

Eligible Project developers shall be:

State agencies, technology suppliers, Corporate houses, Equipment
Manufacturers and Contractors, Self Help Groups, Users
Associations, individuals, Registered Societies, Cooperatives,
Panchayats, Local bodies, their Consortiums/SPVs/JVs etc. are
all eligible to apply.

16.0 Project Appraisal Components

16.1 Selection of Project developer

0)

Gi)

(iti)

(iv)

The Project Developer shall implement the project on Build,
Operate, Maintain & Transfer (BOMT) basis for a period of
5 years. The plant will be handed over to the State
Government in working condition after 5 years. All the
replaced parts will be handed over to the State Government.

Consultant while preparing DPR, shall estimate the capacity
of the project and shall also estimate the electricity load
and energy required to be generated for five years from the
date of commissioning. While computing the load, provision
of 2 light points (11/18 W each) and one socket (40 W)
may be considered for each household.

Project Developer shall be responsible for collecting the tariff
from villagers.

Selection of the Project developer shall be on the basis of
tenders which will be called by the Implementing agencies
in two parts, one part covering capital cost [as per 12.1 (a)
above] and another covering cost of providing power for
five years [as per 12.1 (b) above]. The reimbursement of
gap between operation and maintenance cost and revenue
recovery to the project developer (after adjusting the
collected tariff) will be paid out of service charges of the
Implementing Agencies (@ 8% for State Governments & 9%
for CPSUs). The second part bid can not exceed the service
charges mentioned above. Only those State Governments
which undertake to provide the service charges to the project
developer will be eligible for taking up the DDG Projects.
The tenders will be evaluated jointly for both the parts te
for the First part and the Second part taken together for
5 years. A tripartite agreement will be signed between

59


SREDA /State Utility /State Energy Deptt. and REC on behalf
of the Ministry of Power and the Project Developer for
agreeing to the commitments and conditions of RGGVy-
DDG sub component. This tripartite agreement will be
approved by Ministry of Power. As part of agreement
(a) the project developer will be authorized to collect tariff
in project area and (b) the State Government will agree to
reimburse the gap between O&M expenditure and revenue
income from out of the service charges of implementing
agencies to the project developer.

16.2 Other components

60

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

(vii)

The selected Project developer shall give 10% Contract
Performance Guarantee in the form of Bank Guarantee of
the total project cost as per 12.1 (a) valid for a Period of
2 years which is to be renewed till 5 years plus 6 months
from date of commissioning.

The successful developer shall be responsible for supplying
the required quantum of power for 6-8 hours of electricity
per day at the identified timings as per the contract, at
least for 25 days in a month, failing which, the developer
shall pay Liquidated Damages (LD) at the rate of the 10%
of the charges for the short supplied power. This amount
may be deducted from the yearly payments to the Project
developer.

The project developer is responsible for Providing training/
capacity building to villagers for running the power plant.

After 5 years, Implementing Agencies will have the option
to take over the projéct or handover the project to the same
agency or any other agency as approved by the State
Government for running the project, either on negotiated
rate basis or limited or open tender basis.

If grid power reaches the village before 5 years then the
Power produced from the DDG Project can be exported to
the grid and imported from the grid, as and when required.

The Project Developer’s will be permitted to mobilize
additional support/funds from other sources for
implementing the DDG Projects.

For sustainability of DDG Projects, it is important to go
beyond lighting and Consultants preparing DPRs shall also


17.0

18.0

19.0

20.0

include some non-domestic/productive work that would
help in the overall development of these villages.

(viii) For DDG projects, a flat rate in terms of money to be paid/
light point/month is a more practical way of setting the
tariff than the classical sale of electricity/kWh. The
concerned Implementing Agency will issue guidelines for
electricity charges to the project developers.

Monitoring and Evaluation

(i) It should be ensured that all the benefits intended by the
project are rigorously monitored and a monthly report is
submitted by the Implementing Agency to REC and MoP
indicating the financial and physical progress of the project.

(ii) The Implementing Agency shall also ensure proper
utilization of the funds.

Earning Carbon Credits from DDG Projects

There are possibilities of earning carbon credits through the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) route for renewable energy based
DDG projects. These projects are eligible under both the regulatory
and the voluntary markets.

Since the volume of Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) on a
single village basis is low, It would be advisable to bundle several
such projects and Implementing Agencies shall endeavour to
obtain such benefits for further community benefit programmes.

Notwithstanding anything mentioned in the guidelines some
projects can be taken up for Implementation by CPSUs as per
the recommendation of Implementing Supporting Group (ISG) &
the Monitoring Committee after proper scrutiny.

The expenditure involved on above scheme would be debitable
to the following Head under Grant No.72 — Ministry of Power
for the year 2007-08 and corresponding head of account for the
subsequent years:—

2801 Power (Major Head)

06 — Rural Electrification (Sub-Major Head)

06.800 - Other Expenditure (Minor Head)

03 - Rural Electrification Corporation — for Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana

03.00.33 - Subsidies

61


21.0 This has been approved by Monitoring Committee on RGGVY in
its meeting held on 23/12/2008.

To

2)

2

3.

4,

Copy to:
LL.
De
3
4,
5.
6.

10.

at;
12.
13.

62

Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Chief Secretaries of all States.

Secretary (Power/Energy) of al States.

Chairman of all State Utilities.

Chairman & Managing Director, REC, SCOPE Complex, New Delhi.

Prime Minister’s Office, South Block, New Delhi.

Cabinet Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan,
New Delhi.

Ministry of Finance , Department of Expenditure
(Plan Finance), New Delhi.

Chairman, Central Electricity Authority, R.K. Puram,
New Delhi.

Secretary Planning Commission, New Delhi.

Secretary, Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources,
New Delhi.

Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, Krishi Bhawan,
New Delhi.

Secretary, Department of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi.

Secretary, Ministry of Programme Implementation,
New Delhi.

Department of Development of North Eastern Region,
New Delhi.

CMDs of NHPC, NTPC, POWERGRID, DVC.
PPS to Secretary (P)/Sr. PPS to AS(AK),/PPS to AS(GBP).
All JSs/All Directors/DS in the Ministry of Power.


ANNEXURE IV(1)

A THREE-TIER QUALITY CONTROL MECHANISM
UNDER RGGVY

A. (a) First Tier

Project implementing agency (PIA) would be responsible for the
first tier of the Quality Control Structure. Further PIA will engage
third party inspection agency, whose responsibility will be to ensure
that all the materials to be utilized and the workmanship conform to
the prescribed specifications. It will be synchronized with phased release
of funds under RGGVY and inspection and proof of corrective action
will be mandatory requirement for release of funds. This inspection
will cover approx. 50% villages on random sample basis for each
project.

(b) Second Tier

Rural Electrification Corporation will get the inspection done of
the works/materials from its non-field staff and by outsourcing, it.
REC may outsource it to retired employees of State Electricity Boards/
State Utilities/CPSUs. All such reports should be organized and
analyzed by REC through the project implementation. These individuals
would be designated as REC Quality Monitors (RQM).

The inspection will cover quality checks at pre-shipment stage at
the vendors’ outlet of major materials and 10% villages on random
sample basis.

(ले Third Tier

1. Independent Evaluators (Individuals/Agency) will be
engaged by the Ministry of Power for evaluation, at random,
of supply and erection under the programme. These persons
would be designated as National Quality Monitors (NQM).
It will be the responsibility of the state to facilitate the
inspection of works by the NQM, who shall be given free
access to all administrative, technical and financial records.
Evaluation will cover 1% villages. They shall also report on
the general functioning of the Quality Control mechanism
in the District.

63


2. The Monitors shall submit their report to the Ministry. The

reports of the NQMs will be sent by REC to the ROM for
appropriate action within a period to be specified. In case
quality check by RQM or NOM reveals ‘unsatisfactory’ work,
the implementing agency shall ensure that the contractor
replace the material or rectifies the workmanship (as the
case may be) within the time Period stipulated. In respect
of NQM Reports, the REC Quality Coordinator shall, each
month, report on the action taken on each of the pending
Reports. All works rated ‘unsatisfactory’ shall be re-inspected
by RQM or NOM after a rectification report has been
received from the REC Quality Coordinator. REC will
designate an Executive Director as in-charge of the
Monitoring system.

Recurrent adverse reports about quality of works in a given
District/State might entail suspension of the Programme in
that area till the underlying causes of defective work have
been addressed.

The REC Quality Coordinator/Third Party inspection unit
shall be the authority to receive and inquire into complaints/
representations in respect of quality of works and they
would be responsible for sending a reply after proper
investigation to the complainant within 30 days. The REC
for this purpose, shall ensure the following:—

(i) The name, address and other details of the REC Quality
Coordinator/third party inspection unit will be given
adequate publicity in the State (including tender notices,
websites, etc.) as the authority empowered to receive
complaints.

All complaints shall be acknowledged on receipt (giving
registration no.) and likely date of reply shall be
indicated. On Teceipt of the report, the complainant shall
be informed of the outcome and the action taken/
Proposed.

(ii

(iii) Complaints received through the Ministry of Power, REC
will normally be sent to the REC Quality Coordinator
for enquiry and necessary action. In case report from
an RQM is desired, this shall be furnished within the
time specified. In case an adequate response is not
received within the stated time schedule, the REC may
depute an NQM and further Processing will be done
only on the basis of NQM report.


(iv) The RQC shall make a monthly report to the REC (in
a prescribed format) and the status of action on
complaints shall be discussed in the District Committees.

(v) REC could develop a web site for complaints, inspection
and rectification.

65


ANNEXURE IV(Ii)

TECHNOLOGY DECISION TOOL
(conventional DG sets will be an option in most cases)

Renewable Energy Resource Assessment

I

Ast Choice

Biofuels based
individual power plants

7th Choice

based DG set

66

Village level biogas Yes

% = Micro-hydel(s) for a
ssible :
3rd Choice Us vie dian es a
Centralised biofuels sri
based plant & expelling “
facility with local grid _
Yes} _ Js clustering of
No villages possible
|
Is biofuels available %
any nd Choice
Micro-hydel for
individual villag
;
40 Choice 5th Choice
No

Is surplus biomass available &
sustainable management

Centralised biomass
based power plant
with a local grid

DDG based on wind /diesel,
wind/solar hybrid or
any other newer

‘ servicing the
possible luster
Yes
Is animal/cattle waste Ls asad Ke
available Eee eae
No 3rd Choice
Individual gasifier
8th Choice based power plant
Village level SPV based
power plant
9th Choice

technological option



T- susu<
w-susa- Sk
1 ~ Sugngod उणर e-sed- SU
६ - Sunnyod yea rs ST
व्‌ + Ayunpoddo pooyyasy क्र] ssauyapin’ ग्णशरणाण $- stsa>| 1: 000002 *
ayy sad se Suuorg “29 ssampppin3 Surmonoy | 2- 00७ “SY ~ 000001 :

yonerauas aysesn prnbiy
se [१४ se pyos ‘spedust yo भछ aN ॥ प७ज/०6 “SU 3q PIO एण्प्रथण्प्ग् | F — 00052 “SU - 005८ SU
sy >
a

‘aaoge paist{ suoydo ayy ysurese suiayshs yons Jo sseuaarpayja ayy Supedisoo उग्र syseq ou गए aay) pure ‘euoneiedo jou

Apuasaid are sardojourpe; yous ७० paseq suiaysh8 DGC se suogdo samou Joyo Aue 3० spuqdy Jasaip/puim उशु००/7०७ जप suondo sopnpxa xueur
Sutioss 33०१४ auf] “saursua poseq ४४0०१ ण paredwo> uondo passayand ९ st जया Jo quod junsaud ayp 1९ pur /(3ण०७पज्म DCC ९ 5४ Paysngeas> Aste}
आए Aayy se Bupjues systy ९ vars are suiaysds paseq Jayise3 ‘oures गए suondo seBorq pue saytsed ९00०१ oy) 40} 9102S ००७० ayy पआण्पाए AION

I 0z € € 4 5 प्र्ट0 ¥ 00009- PPAY-ODIW,
z sl ¢ € € 4 szot g 0000८ ss 90 SPN
के क्र € if € ५ ५८0 € 000५58- बम 90 sesorg
9 6 if a t 1 SFL if 000°00'e~ AdS
e gI फू हद z + Sz € 0008८- spas 90/7ग्प्राएत ४९प्परण[ु
४०प्रथ५0 310% W/L ००5 w/t
sogumpoddo jo कुछ मे.
jing §——poowaary»—Aypqea8euems peda tums) 1॥0/जी
Suyuey = yang = Suey] उ्_्प्ण्ण्ज्प्पु 4902 WORN) sw [धंधे
छमाऊ 30% ayy 20} ajouoo}

ayy 0 agar aseayd ५ 0} | JO भृष5 ४ Ul) २०१ uondg

SNOLLdO 900 GaSVA ADYANA F1AVMINTI SNORIVA ONDINVA YOA WWOMANVAL
(DAL FUNXANNV

67


ANNEXURE IV(IV)

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF IMPLEMENTATION
SUPPORT GROUP (ISG)

Support to funding agency and single window to project developers

for all data/information support:

i.
2.

68

Identification of जोबडु०५/ target project areas

Evolve guidelines and checklist for formulation of Feasibility
Reports & Detailed Project Reports.

- Contents of the Reports

- Compliance to appraisal parameters.

- Listing of clearances and requirements at each stage.
Evolve Guidelines and parameters for Project developers for

- Project implementation support

- Project monitoring

- Quality assurance

- Capacity building

- Project closure

- Operation stage support
Support to REC

- Techno Commercial appraisal

- Project monitoring

- MIS support on scheme implementation

- Evolve guidelines and procedures for all steps in project
implementation and operation

- Set quality benchmark parameters

- Provide monitoring benchmarks and check milestones
Formulate detailed guidelines and check list for
— Detailed Project Report acceptance (for Project approval)

The steps and interfaces between ISG/REC and Implementing
Agency will be detailed through procedural guidelines.


Conduct Grant utilization audit

Maintain data repository on all aspects and deliverables of Scheme
implementation

Single Window to all Stakeholders
- Data/Information support

- Capacity building and awareness about new techniques and
technologies

- Target Project areas identification

Formulate guidelines for funding of application projects based
upon New technologies.

69


70

ANNEXURE IV(V)

INFORMATION TO BE COVERED IN
DETAILED PROJECT REPORT
(THE FOLLOWING IS AN INDICATIVE LIST)

Name of Gram Panchayat, Block & District
No. of Villages under Gram Panchayat
Name of Village/hamiet selected for the Project
Village census code

Distance from nearest road-head

Distance from the grid

Total population of the village/hamlet
Number of households

Number of Hamlets/Dalit Bastis in Village
Number of BPL Households

Type of social structure

Community buildings—school, public health centre,
panchayat ghar, etc.

Main occupation, indicating cash crops

Resource availability—water stream, type of biomass, local
fuel wood/oil-seed bearing species, if any

Availability of fallow land/waste land/uncultivated land ete.
Indicative Estimate of Energy Demand

* Household—lighting, other

* Community services, including 57९९ lights

* Irrigation/ Agriculture Operations

* Commercial

Existing pattern of energy/fuel use and average monthly
expenditure per household


Existing renewable energy devices in the village, if any
Technology package proposed to be deployed
Indicative capacity of the energy systems

Role of local community in planning, implementation and
management, including revenue management

Details of any local NGO already associated with the
village/hamlet

Any other village/hamlet in the vicinity of this village that
is un-electrified

Zt)


ANNEXURE IV(VI)

DDG SCHEME—
THE APPROVAL PROCESS

Activities/Steps Responsibility Facilitated by
Identification of Villages/ Implementing DISCOM/MNRE
Prioritization Agency
a
Preparation of DPR Implementing Consultant
Agency
Review of DPRs and Implementation
recommendation for support Group
approval

Approval of DPR MOP REC

oe: ae

Invitation of bids from Implementing
Project Developers | Agency
(i

[

Shortlist/selection of i Implementing
project developers Agency
Award and Implementing
implementaiton of Agency
Project

72


छक्का कादर IAI
sol HLL 8
WA19S = 582 SORE
Weege &ाश ८७
4599. वांका ८5
प्राह्ष अद्धा १
07% ee 9७6
कक छा5% कहा

54८0

Tee
क्या
45
IT
TRL
छः
Ly
199
6 10st
16069
6

जग >> लय
eaeneg

BEERSEZRSRSRE° §
RAR eA

59६
sel

aaa
or)

oer
RO
Oot
OS SEL
SST
ore

Sele
124

goo की ह+
geawe

ga

wseperg एच
rey

अणफश जे munwef
ysepely प्फथ्णपु
ष्ण्थाणु
1]

wessy
फयृण[ pepeuy
ysepeng ypu

~

aks

3४5 हि मै है है के है
iv

ik

aks

=
कर

(इग्णा.) “sy ur yunoury)

800८918

A FINXINNV

KADOW YAGNN NV'ld IX GNV NV1d X NI GNOLONVS डाउप्रतयिव 40 STIVIEG

73


9४८ दाद HORE कया 686. 15. CLENSLMELROSST OGHT | छह SESE का श्राप CTI 89 rey
Cae a a 2&. a का भर aS | we ध a ig ism ८
ve SI SOIL g$C ध 0७0 0 ooo 0 0. छक्त अगर श्रात्ष क्षा ध धन epee) भर
Ieuz scl we छा 9. 19. 00 0 o 0 0 0 Io Sou awe ue wpe गया]... ५
छह HOF के wl पान छ दा ६ 6. बाप छ. # 1 1 emdyy ऋ
it ISK ONL 0 ॥ AUIS TRL xm NpeN एक. छ.
दे का का #& +$ + Wie He mm 6 z z or we छा भर 2 z wos छ
शक्षा ब्राक्का TIDES EKS कक MOR श्रा 6 जश्ष॒ छछ्ष छक्ष क्र्रा ad ueyseley 17
KE OH कंशा 0 4. eS छा का 0 aoa qhng 6
ए४% छा: Wise कह 18. 1६ कह छक अक छा THEO छ का + + eu 6
का 68SEC OHH CIS छा & & 6 Tl WH Mm ut z pueden gt
cH ua ७ lB 8 ra a क 98 9 9 a भ्रक्ठ हू 6 ६ z wey I
Wee कांग्रा ऋछ का. 828 t WHE 26 बाय छह. $ $ OF १9६ & छा ६ z ७७०७० or
9LSsl SOF ek के 86 Te &छ #& ६ ४ a छः शकभ्रा 7 z andwey sh
#0८ 6छक्षा THUR 9 1६. ६ ४109 छात्र ता 9 0. 0७ भ्रा८ #ऋठा खा 0 F के ese HY
आफ ao भ्र्॒क्ष tt ft ह nt oo 6 8 zk @ g + £ 3 1



stool श्र श्र OT. seg [OL

6961 eect LL ut ee oe
sa
sper MeL 6 = 8६ ot | 0७ ows og OMHN
ote out ७ uw we कप. शक S156 श्र ot ताह989॥07 aug
छा. का. # छह... छा. | wESsy FOL
का oR 0 का # ७ ताह088॥0४
करा 6 9 s 6. 9 धक्का wey ६
lag 2७०३ फगाथह jepeumy — 2
9u9 क्र uy ay 1५] 12५] अ९05800.. apeg थ्याणएण 1
वा ज्ञ दव श्र 8 छः शः हा. ही 7 6 9 < 9 #£ ¥ € z I
sega sige
pags PoE pagupa pagupae अ्यैचा। payupae sq pou
पथ, pM en mL PA NRL PA tne) Pa जी A“)
arse ण्‌ 50-2000 ण
ap ए० st vwonegupae wonEEUDSP asm पक 20900 so-so
uauananpy aBequy 10 afequa 10 NRUNAIPY कण Suunp hoy
anger, syuaasatpy squaua.anpy asgeqnam) suomampy —— SauRNaNpY Suquaueyduy — 34S JO AUN ON IS
(SOV THA)

KADOY YIGNN SYXOM NOILLVOWRLLOA Ta
SHDVTIIA YOd LNAWSASIHOV dSIMADNESV ONILNANE TdT “ASIM-S.LVLS

() IA JYNXANNV


aay eeey zh

Ln a # #% 9४ धाह. tle OSB sWODSIC eaeury या
i a कह. का. | a छछ wt 69. छा Puepyeyl [eo]
का oF & of m fe me oe SASAD धण-का5
ws se we ona
mn om © का वा छ MIN

SRL 1980 Sel ROL sas puepuey OL
CI ol का af remy
Cas छा छा HN

‘wdag 22७०६ nuysey क mumre{ 6

S3SdH Yspey jepeumy —g

me ee cane at SNODSIC tue 2
a का Dm ww wm @ vereing [धणु,
588 ORR ww BD @ CISYIMOd

I 1 ee SNODSIA yearn 9
19. 19 se ste श्र. श्र weenie धणु
Wg se sie 9 भर MIN
HN

ता98008. wesMEN —-¢

6 8ST ८. भर कक्षा शा a तहत a ञँ & 1

76


NEMO
dag 18H0q eundy, कफ
TpeN Wwe,
qydag amg ण्ज़ाष %
0 S18 CEC वाह... a) vagseley TEL,
हार. का दा... #& 68 करा छा. का. 0७ वाहवक्छ॥07
a छह. ॥६ कट a 2 ..2॥ ऋ0ऊात weyseley पर
qeung ए
00 PAL
MIN
dN
1५ wu) हु
ridaq ३2४०4 puresey gl
dag saMmog weezy “Lh
gen 1७७७ की.
* a % * «€ & ठग] samog anda SL
Weel Ise Ww w@ (so O80 605 बात. धफण्णदपर व
कक. भर a ss 9 «© fF aN OL
61 it 6 61z dN
Wr कऋ भर om OL 9 6७ 4 shoved ype कफ.
6: # <ा शभ #& को > 2 का भा € z I

77


19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

ll

10

9

78

Total Tripura
DISCOMs

21813

21813

28
3
558
196

MM
876
B10

py

जरा Pay

12603

6518

25 Uttar Pradesn

6178

m

my

4017

POWERGRID
Total UP
UPCL

2 MM
53916652

7)

my

का

Be

WB 282 WS

83181

mB

1261

ऊ

2080. ३9

3

85 299

mM 22

2% Uttarakhand

West Bengal

413

1392

3

1392

WBSEB

184
m4

1s
1

15 102 138 128

7

POWERGRID
NHPC

455

222

16

16

15

a9
2788
2
65765

3M 22851

79
88
301

26125

10
16
v

2825,

10
16

662
mH

488 2662
अर

20

a0

WB

‘Sub-Total CPSUs
Total WB

Tm!

आफ

2108

14382

32 249% 39640

10682 593468

28

10332

6926 30
mi

Total State Utilities

7” 19307

673

1676

17010

15

15815

195

13094

Total POWERGRID

1821 10 1990

16, 165

1060

1७

Total NHPC

19

674 937

on

168 B

168

15

Total NTPC

151

10 893, 358

0

358

474

Total DVC

508. 2788

दया वाक बा? 48138499 का? 26 iid 180. 226

15

3

2893

Total CPSUs

3810 85. 480. अलछ8ह 93049

575

28961-38262

30)

‘187611880

39 2006. फश 38525

989

Grand Total{ SPUs + CPSUs)



80000. 2८86. 88 1066 699... 1 पद 111॥॥ zeurg TOL
asd
177 «= TETSE COST os 186८६. 1868 उत्ताप
४८८8... 099. 896८ 19% sez 1७७. वाद Scorl aniowaMod eylg %
messy [थणु
anIOYaMOd
aasv uressy a
; sydog zamog ysoperg jeyreumy 4
6geIZOL —‘TROCFZT © 899... 006ाद... 05299... ८8866. PINE 1996 SNODSIG Ysepery eTypuy 4
itt or 6 8 L 9 ५ ¥ € i i
SHH dd = SHH 144 SHH Tad SHH aa
वाह PUSHH «odd कण प्राप्त 8 SS PUSHH Td SHH
60-3002 Ut 80-2002 Ut
ayep UO sv woe प्राग्एभु ४०एणागउगू३
30.0०७गएुएए Ployasnoy Ployasnop, 20-9002 odn 490०
गप्रशाप्पा3 jo quawaaenpy jo 1००००७गप०ए syuaweaanpy Sunuaurayduyy गथ5 jo eweN “ON 15
(saloHasnoH)

KADOW YAIGNN SAIOHASNOH JO

NOLLVORILDITA 04 LNAWAATIHOV aSIM-AONADV SNLLNANE TdT “ASIM-A.LVLS

(7) IA-AUNXANNV

79


$80F 1220 4 ध्प्द्ा छ््द् geez 9eae puewpeuf Teo]

916 9161 821 छा 869 899 श54) 1थण॒-१०५
Ov Ov Ov OW} daa
Lb 9h 8sc1 ध्ष्टा शट शट DdIN

8917 9917 8917 छः (॥ »॥ एप्थ्पकश्पू. 0
7906 790% 2905 790% pel Tear
(220 WF 290% 2905 DdHN

‘pdag 2७०१ anuysey 2p numuref 6

SdH Ysoperg [eypeunty, 8

4069 2069 2069 069 sWoosId euedreyy %
5691. #600 (8. 088. ऋ9. ऋ9 . छा. छा yere(ng) [थण
€95¢9 9629 086. 08६. 056. 0. छा. छा RINYIMOd

Heelb «RETR 00६६ 005 18882... 5888६ SWODSIG yereing 9
west = 0ST. woes! = ZOEST weSsmeyyD [20]
क्छा.. कक्षा का. ZOE dLN
OdHN

anIDYaMOd wessnyeyy धन

1 Ol 6 8 Z 9 g ¥ € z 1

80


a4
ग़क्त LGA u ess [AOL
ज़्क्त v6 “ dIN
उतार

ताह9घप्/॥/04 6

है 4 semog 81

pdaq_ samod ME

aasew 1

00eT vel oct वंश 72006 ‘sl

ezis9 68 28098 swOosId का
6606 6602 6607 IN OL
000 00t उपाए

कक्षा 6601 6601 swoOsId ‘el

9699 969 9699 gasX a

99788. TORE Terese swoosIa w

1 o Z € I

81


O9PLL 10241 829 829 clr 81S 6099 0069 OdHN
SBELT 988६ ६6 ६6 6999 91262 [3794 9298 CRIDYAMOd
8690 668 98 ८६ (902 1b 296८ SPOIL aasam 0000 है. 1 a
24206 4506 9902 990८ कशञ9 क99 6छार 6छाद कण pueypyereyy) ‘%
6E9L9b 6£9L9F ८७६ ५८00८ 9८56 9ZST61 889955८ 88955८ वी [थणु
269091 £69091 eer त्व्त 11५ Te1s6 9५99 9५5७9 तावर089004
द690६ 690६ SSI9L SSTOT ५599 ५9% व्ध्क्ा व्ध्क्ा SWOODSIC Ysapeig गया] 4
छात्रा, [थणु
GRIDYIMOd
अवगत semog vanduy कद
npen [rue a4
अवगत २१४०३ WIS दर
6988 96 ॥1८+ 9665 काभर £91k uempseley [230]
TAZA £5809 SLbLb £5809 ClDYaMOd
POEIET SPCLER T6b8¢ 9665 299861 0998 9६6 610IL SWOODSIC ueyseley Te
IL OL 6 8 Z 9 a के ¢ t T

82


65. भ्राग्राश 200. १865. वा. १0. 88६89. 16% (snsad + ॥१ ) POL एप्४9
ecereh —onesae «= बा... 489... क्र. 1888. 59%. FREMOT SNSd [POL
1969 goz ६ €€ कक क्छा.. भा Ti9¢ 300 [OL
1 a) Ca ool cost «= खाद... &क्षा शा >ग्राप [थण,
98८68. ८0099. 86 866 6ाक्.. ALE 699 0069 उत्रप्ताए [धण,
yoocee — 2526... 996. १68. 092. शोक: 868 "16 ताह्र989१04 [धथ
GIsectz भर. 5४65. क्ष।.. ध्कक्ष.. SOEROLT 89065. शा४9 $ग्राफ़ी AWS [OL
68609. WITL6 (LT Teal कतई... 96809 AGNES aM [POL
6808. 968. शा 4991 6008... क्षक्.. TORT. «= 08७8. SSA THIOL-ANS
[789 ooze (12 ZOlF [co ऋषट 1198 Dad
५005 ६८68 89६ 0999 क्क्ा 1112 ज्गाप

OL

9

£ t



COOL

wrzsoz IzIsb 16ze69l छक्का 9682 cell rad puewpreyf “OT
६6989 दक्ष 0६८१श 99% 0909 €87 #1 murysey यू nuuef 6
91902 001 SPFCL क्र 99901 ६6 a ysoperg yeypeumyy —-g
OF L6T ural eL0bez 286 $866 81 vuedreyy ४
"098 08890 09596 LATA PE6LT @ qareing —-g
22048 6OLPE £46699 288 els 05८ 13 wressmeyyy “Gg
179667 (809 10 22 /0 1999 289€1 Tez & reyig के
00099 S16 S166 08z SIcel 891 9858 & uessy ६
89284 O180% 95८ 6दाट 1 ysoperg jeyoeunry = “7
6008 100 //1 (८ 7 | (॥। 18427 0 9% ysopeig eypuy पथ

ol 6 8 Z 9 g कु € z 1

‘aay yer ‘aanpy pay, 5गएएए pare

(० ut *sy) paiaaoa paraao> pareaoo

380 Sploy, 1204 ॥ sodeypia
pauopaueg asnoy ‘1d¢ Payey>913 paguupajaun pelorg

[PIO], J0 ‘ON 1० ON 2 ON Jo ON aes ON TS

HA-JAUNXINNV

CANOLLONVS 5ा.31087 ASIM-ALVLS

84


PRISIGZ  L8PGLZE —«TLOBLEDT «—««LELGS 60458 2205 TLO9EL 859 [धण,
11 55 4088८ 4८4८ 78६६ eush 8 qe8ueg SQM ८:
68'eh9 szzoot S1918@ 669 SOTPL 6871 6981 el pueypemn = 9
966८ 60909 SP90ZI «66 zsze 660LE L987 19 ysoperd enn 5८
भ्राश 086 कक 091 कु einduy फट
were ॥ “1 ०] भ्रफ़्दा 0 9% npen एप्पशु,. घट
ores SSP sh % i] wes "WZ
66'9921 oserce TSeOS<t —-€8G01 Teste ze9T orb फ़ ueyyseley पट
6S PST 0989 OPSTL 0 a qetung = 05
99525&6 79901 geceste = 90८ P8687 ced 96821 Te essuQ 6
50607 00669 zsIL sot Li pueesen शा
कद 701 //॥ ous cel 8 weozt “LL
Tr06z LPPSTL 9६98 क्वहा 4 edvpeysa OT
9८५9. ८856 Seer ze dh 9८ sor i] indy “ST
Weld 98906 16899... खद६ 620% 9 # eqysereyey “PL
IS'eLbL 68821 क्ादश भरा Tete a 062 हट yseperg पएण्र = “ET
५८6 7998 12010 8६ I yey = “ZT
1८199 71८00 ozzzss 0656 ५68८८ a wel % eqeeurey गा

ol 6 8 Dh 9 ५ क € z I

85


tee ELI 624 ir Ing) TIL, काठ
9८6 ८68 625 6 SORIAHD जञाणूए॥ Jo SuLMosing pada
OPEL FEL 0 zw worDaTIOD anuaasy 1309५ उ्थण5 %
pore LOE ८ट्ट 1288 d¥ [POL ang
कक. कक्षा 0 फ्क्ता ए०प्भ[०3 anuaaay ‘TDddNav
Behe SEH 0 8eh7 worpaTjoy anuaasy ‘Dadsay
ze SOL Tied z ए०ण>ग[०) गाए" गा TDdaaay
+ 5 0 i ए०प>भा०3 anuaaay Today ysoperg erypuy 1
8 Z 9 ¢ कु ६ z I
aasttpuesy
[OL अ््पा0. 09598. ३० ON soostysuesy jo adAy worsiq, jo awey; arg ‘ON IS
SORE
: 2 | ममनिमनशम लि

queweAaTpY sAnEmuT

800290 91 UO sy

AAD YAGNN aASIHDNVUA ‘TWNOLLVYAdO JO SNLVLs

TIA-JUNXINNV

86


ueyseley [RIO] qs

OZ pel 9६ er

10 +1 0 I प्रणाउग[०0 anuaray woosiq seuly

a OL t T प्रणाज्गाण) anuaaay woosiq mdypof

faa a ic I WoRDeT[OD anuanay woosiq, mdre{ ueyjseley ES)

9098 90७98 0 41 RSSHIQ TRIO. NS

0 0 0 0 asd

918 18 0 z uORDATOD anuaray OOSIN

8599 8999 0 + sananpe snoyrea jo SupinosinQ ODHLNOS

701 7e0L 0 8 पएणाजग[०) anuasay 03580 PssuQ) हि

70602 0 70602 96८८ 'प्रश्श्र [BIOL qNS

६89६५ 0 ६984 6sh एणञग[०) anuarey 39589

ol =O 61H कद ए०णभा०) anuaacy WOOsdH

8892८ 0 885८ 65८ एणाजग[०0 anuarey 1४09599

ros 0 कं 102. पणाज्गा०0 anuaaey 1४035प9 श्ञथष्प्पश्प्र 6
के £ t T

87


6८88... 5099 १८६४६ 0806 [थण5

6866... ZOOL £867 6eh YOHDa|JOD anuaary ToaasaM, Te8uag sq का

7986 7986 0 Te oRDaT]OD anuaaay, ‘oan ष्प््प्थ्या “gy

209 709 0 z09 paseq ynduy अवगत samog purjeseny दा

1 #1 % €l uorpal[oD anuarsy (sey 29 19%) IN ysopeig eXypew “TL

919 8g 8209 wz uoRpe[[oD anuaney INAGHC/INAGHN euekeH 0

५99 499 0 oF UoHDaTJOD anuaaay ais wessmeyy 6

oses = 0954 0 962 uoRDaTIOD anuaray aasa yd 8

८8८: 48८1 0 195 ए०प्रज्गाण3 anuaaay aaisv wessy —Z

PSChL = «102 ६94८ 188 ysapeig Jef) [IO] qng

6628 फ्रहट ६48 ta) प०प़जगु०) anuaray — #०्जणाव “INAAT.

L606 9988 147 66 uoRDaJOD anuaray —seueIeA “INAAN

988s (OEE 999 08 uoRDa||OD anuanay ey “INAAG

z08z 09 we 06 uoHDeTJoD anuasay —-NIBIW_“INAASd ysopeig ग्या] 9
8 Z 9 प्र के € z I

88


MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2007-08)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th June, 2008 from 1500 hrs.

to 1745 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

ag Pre

4

10.
a,
12,
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Smt. Susmita Bauri

Shri Mohan Jena

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana
Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
Dr. Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Shri Jesudasu Seelam

Shri Shivpratap Singh
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri R.C. Ahuja _
2. Shri Shiv Kumar -
3. Shri Arvind Sharma _

Joint Secretary
Deputy Secretary
Under Secretary

89


WITNESSES

Ministry of Power

Is Shri Anil Razdan Secretary

2, Shri G.B. Pradhan Addl. Secretary

3. Shri Devender Singh Jt. Secretary

4. Shri V.P. Joy Jt. Secretary

5. Shri C.P Keshari Jt. Secretary

6. Shri Rajesh Verma Jt. Secretary & FA
4 Shri Kapil Mohan Director

Representatives of Public Sector Undertakings

8. Shri P. Uma Shankar CMD, REC

9, Shri K. Vidyasagar ED, REC

10. Shri Rama Raman ED, REC

11. Shri Bal Mukand Director (Tech.), REC
12, Shri PJ. Thakkar GM, REC

13. Shri Atul Trivedi AGM (RGGVY Cell)
14, Shri S. Majumdar CMD, PGCIL

15, Shri Ganesh Singh ED, PGCIL

16. Shri S.K. Dodeja Dir. (Projects), NHPC
17. Shri V.K. Jain ED, NHPC

18. Shri R.S. Sharma CMD, NTPC

19. Shri 5.0 Singh CEO, NESCL

20. Shri Mohan Prasad Chief Engineer, DVC
21. Shri Rakesh Nath Chairperson, CEA

Representatives of State Governments

22. Shri C.D. Kumar Engineer-in-Chief,
Jharkhand State
Electricity Board.

23. Shri Aditya Swarup Secretary (Energy), Govt.
of Jharkhand

24. Shri A.B. Pandey MD, MSEDCL

Before taking up the scheduled agenda for the sitting of the
Committee, Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy apprised
the members of a recent decision to enforce the provisions of Rule 259
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha
regarding quorum at the sittings of the Parliamentary Committees and
requested them to kindly make it convenient to attend the sittings of
the Committee to ensure quorum. In this regard, hon’ble members

90


expressed their concern at the strict enforcement of the provisions of
Rule 259 regarding quorum at the sittings of the Committee in view
of certain practical difficulties associated with it. After discussion over
the matter, the Committee directed the Secretariat to take up the matter
at appropriate level and desired that the convention established in
November, 1957 and which was being followed by the Committees
over the years whereby quorum was not insisted upon at sittings of
the Committee where official witnesses were examined, may be allowed
to be observed.

2. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the members and the
representatives of the Ministry of Power to the sitting of the Committee.
Hon’ble Chairman also welcomed the new members S/Shri Shyamal
Chakraborty and Shivpratap Singh, who were attending the sitting of
the Committee for the first time on their being nominated to the
Committee recently. The Committee took up the examination of the
subject “Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana”.

3. The representatives of Ministry of Power made a presentation
before the Committee on various aspects of implementation of Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY). The Committee then
inter-alia discussed the following important points in connection with
the examination of the subject:—

(i) Definition of village electrification and the extent of coverage
of BPL households in villages under RGGVY.

(ii) Status and progress achieved in implementation of RGGVY.
(iii) Cost norms for sanction of projects under RGGVY.

(iv) Funding pattern of RGGVY so far and requirement of funds,
manpower and associated infrastructure required to achieve
the goal of 100% electrification of villages in the country.

(v) Factors causing delay in the award of projects already
sanctioned under RGGVY by the Ministry of Power.

(vi) Procedure, issues and challenges faced by agencies
implementing projects under RGGVY and the initiatives
taken by the Ministry to address them.

(vii) Implementation of RGGVY in the States of Bihar, Orissa,
J&K and North-eastern States.

(viii) Measures required for effective implementation of RGGVY
including more effective and meaningful participation by
the district level Committees.

4. Members also raised certain queries related to the subject which
were replied to by the representatives of the Ministry.

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

91


MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON
19TH SEPTEMBER, 2008 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘D’, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs to 1350 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailash Baitha

. Shri Mohan Jena

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana

. Shri Kiren Rijiju

. Smt. Susmita Bauri

. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

CP 9 च छः एफ wD

Rajya Sabha

10. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

11, Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha
12. Shri Prakash Javadekar
13. Shri Shivpratap Singh

14. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Under Secretary


WITNESSES
Ministry of Power

. Shri Anil Razdan, Secretary (Power)

. Shri Anil Kumar, Additional Secretary

. Shri G.B. Pradhan, Additional Secretary

. Shri Jayant Kawale, Joint Secretary

. Shri V.P. Joy, Joint Secretary

Shri Devender Singh, Joint Secretary

. Shri Rajesh Verma, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser

NDMP WN E

Central Electricity Authority

1. Shri Rakesh Nath, Chairperson

2. Shri S.M. Dhiman, Member (GO&D)
3. Shri Rohtas Dahiya, Member (Th.)
4. Shri Gurdial Singh, Member (H)

Statutory Bodies
1. Shri A.K. Barman, Chairman, DVC
Public Sector Undertakings

1. Shri P. Uma Shankar, CMD, REC

2. Shri R.S. Sharma, CMD, NTPC

3. Shri Satnam Singh, CMD, PFC

4. Shri S.K. Chaturvedi, CMD, Powergrid
5. Shri S.K. Garg, CMD, NHPC

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of Ministry of Power to the sitting
of the Committee convened in connection with the implementation
status of the Recommendations of the Committee contained in the
Reports of the Standing committee on Energy (14th Lok Sabha)
pertaining to Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs), Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), Development of the National
Grid and Transmission and Distribution of Power. The Chairman then
invited attention of the representatives of Ministry of Power to the
provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha. .

93


2. The Secretary, Ministry of Power then briefed the Committee
about the present status of the implementation of the Recommendations
of the Committee on the aforesaid subjects while simultaneously making
व power point presentation thereon. The following important points
inter-alia came up for discussion at the sitting of the Committee:—

@

(ii)

(ii)

(iv)

(vy)

Role of State agencies for ensuring land identification, land
acquisition, water allocations etc. for the development of
UMPPs.

Role of empowered Group of Ministers in monitoring the
implementation of UMPPs.

Notification of Rural Electrification Plans as envisaged for
the implementation of RGGVY.

Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY) in various States by PSUs.

The revised APDRP scheme, reduction in AT&C losses and
improvements in billing and collection by the distribution
companies.

3. Members also raised some queries, which were answered to by
the representatives of the Ministry of Power.

4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

94

The Committee then adjourned.


MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON
12TH FEBRUARY, 2009 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Smt. Susmita Bauri

. Prof. Chander Kumar

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

. Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

eNnuane wn

Rajya Sabha

9, Shri Prakash Javadekar
10. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
11. Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha
12. Shri Shivpratap Singh

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Kumar — Director
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary-Il

2. At the outset, the Chairman Standing Committee on Energy
welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 31st
Report on ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Power.

95


4. The Committee adopted the draft Report with certain additions/
amendments as suggested by the Members of the Committee.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report after incorporating the changes suggested by the Members of

the Committee and to present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

96


OOO — जननननन्लनननन,

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”

a eee