STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY
23 (2007-2008)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Power for the year 2007-2008]

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


TWENTY-THIRD REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2007-2008)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Power for the year 2007-2008]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.11.2007

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 173

Price : Rs. 108.00

© 2007 By Lox SasHa SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of

Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


ComposiITION OF THE Committee (2007-2008)

INTRODUCTION .....

CuarTer 1

Cuarrer II

Cyarter IIL

Cuarrer IV

CHAPTER V

CONTENTS

Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ...

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government's replies...

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited -

APPENDICES

I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on

22nd November, 2007 ....

Il. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
20th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy

(14th Lok Sabha)

PAGE

(ii)

(vy)

24

81

82

98

102

(i)


my 2
a a =
जी हा
- =_— = =
-“s “. 3
» 24,5
a i i io
p" मा
cater
a =F 5, oe
rT &
1. a =
a =
TT
. बा
7 - ee ०
= oe
1. 7
Z a. =
= _ | ै।
= & Ls
a T 7
art: * a“
a
», 7, * &



yp exuaner OP

मा = eae
PBS छ SR RE छ छ S

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2007-08)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Rabindar Kumar Rana

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkatswamy
Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

(ili)


(iv)

Rajya Sabha
Shri Motilal Vora
Shri Jesudasu Seelam
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Dr. Bimal Jalan
Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Under Secretary

4. Shri Manoj Pahuja — Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 23rd Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
20th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Power.

2. The 20th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 27th April 2007. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
20th August, 2007.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 22nd November, 2007.

4, An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the 20th Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 22, 2007 Chairman,

Agrahayana 1, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2007-08.

2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
20 Recommendations /Observations.

3. Action taken notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:-

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SL. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 19 and 20

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

SL No. Nil

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 7, 13, 15, 16 and 18

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Sl. No. 14

4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported back to the Committee in
time along with reasons for their non-implementation.



5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations:

A. Reducing peak power shortages
Recommendation (51. No. 2, Para 2.2.29)

6. The Committee were concerned to note that peak shortages had
increased from 11.8% in 2001-02 to 13.9% in 2006-07. The Committee
felt that apart from capacity addition and generation of more power,
there was a need to consider other solutions also like having different
time zones for the country and by Staggering the office timings and
school timings by about 1-2 hours so that peak hour/rush hour were
also staggered. However, the Committee desired that these suggestions
should be considered at the appropriate level and the Committee might
be informed of the action taken in the matter.

7. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“Though there exists a time difference between Assam-Arunanchal
and Kutch-Saurashtra of about 1!/, to 2 hours observing a single
IST schedule for the whole country may not appear to be
reasonable, however, there is a great advantage in adopting a single
time reference throughout the country. For one thing, there is no
requirement of adjustment of watches while Passing from one State
to other State etc. It also facilitates the communication between
two places especially when the literacy level in the country is
about 65% as per 2001 census.

The peak energy demand is observed during winter from 06.00
hrs. to 10.00 hrs. in the morning and 17.00 hrs. to 21.00 hrs. in the
evening. During summer, it is from 5.00 hrs. to 09.00 hrs. in the
morning and 18.00 hrs. to 22.00 hrs. in the evening. The shifting
office timing and staggering of commercial and industrial load
beyond peak hours alone would facilitate the reduction in peak
load demand. Shifting of working schedule within peak load hours
would entail marginal benefit to the power sector.

Instead of adopting different Time zones in India, people in various
parts of the country should change their life style by adjusting
their timings of their own regions. This is an easier way to address
the problem rather than to have different time zones in different
parts of India.


The issue of shifting time zones may affect not only power sector
but also other departments like Railways, Transport & Aviation,
IMD and Communication etc.

Secretary, Deptt. of Science & Technology (DST) had earlier
constituted a Committee with the representatives from Nuclear
Power Corporation (NPC), Indian Meteorological Department
(IMD), Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), National Physical
Laboratory (NPL) & Ministry of Power to consider various issues
involved in this matter and its main views were as follows:

“On behalf of NPL, it was pointed out that the country spans
about 30 degrees longitude corresponding to two hours of local
time difference of extreme Eastern and Western ends. This has
given rise to an impression that in the Far-Eastern States, there are
about 41/, hours available between sunrise and the starting of the
offices and it is felt that this results in wastage of valuable daylight
time and may be reducing the efficiency of the workers by the
time they reach their work places. NPL has scientifically
demonstrated that there will be no drastic improvement by
incorporating two time zones. There may be an-hour saving in
daylight in places like Imphal, the same amount would be lost in
Delhi and western parts of the country. According to NPL, balance
of advantage for the purpose of saving daylight may be in
advancing the clocks throughout the country by one hour in
summer as this may -result in saving of one hour daylight in the
morning between sunrise and office time. Perhaps more pragmatic
way may be that the Eastern States resort to a time schedule of
8.00 a.m to 4.30 p.m. where as the western parts follow a time
schedule of 9.00 a.m to 5.30.p.m.

Central Electricity Authority was also of the view that instead of
going in for two standard times for India, the proposal for different
working hours could be considered in different zones of India.

On the current reckoning of consumption of electricity, the Tata
Energy Research Institute is also of the view that the benefit arising
out of the introduction of different time zones is small. Therefore,
before a decision can be taken to have different time zones in the
country, a consensus would have to be built among State
Governments and within various Ministries in the Government
and also among the major interest groups like industry, education
and the users of facilities like telecom, airlines, railways etc.”



8. The Committee have considered the reply of the Ministry in
regard to having different time zones in the country in the light of
submissions made by the Ministry as also in the light of the views
expressed by the expert bodies like NPL, TERI and CEA on the
issue,

9. The Committee tend to agree that adopting different time zones
in India may affect many departments like Railways, Transport &
Aviation, IMD and Communication, etc. and may have some practical
problems in view of low literacy level in the country and involves
many difficulties in arriving at a consensus to this effect between
various players like State Governments and various Ministries, etc.
While there is going to be no drastic improvement on account of
this. However, at the same point of time, the Committee feel greatly
concerned over the increase in peak power shortages in the country
from 11.8% in 2001-02 to 13.9% in 2006-07. The idea behind the
suggestion to have different time zones is to make full use of natural
light, which is available in abundance in our country so that peaking
shortages can be met. The Committee, therefore, find views of the
NPL that the Eastern and Western States in the country to follow
different time schedules and also view of the CEA to follow different
working hours across different zones in the country more pragmatic.
The Committee would like the Ministry to consider these and other
suggestions to check the peak shortages with a sense of urgency
and come up with a solution to the problem before the Committee
within next six months.

B. Encouraging private sector participation in capacity addition
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para 2.2.31)

10. The Committee in their Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) had observed that out of the target of 7121 MW set
for the private sector during the 10th Plan, the likely achievement was
only 1930 MW which cannot be termed as satisfactory at all. Despite
allowing and facilitating the entry of private sector in the power sector
as per promise of the Electricity Act, 2003, its participation remained
very poor. Therefore, the Committee desired that a detailed study
should be made by the Government to know the reasons for poor
participation, the difficulties faced by the private sector and the steps
proposed to be taken to resolve those difficulties. The Committee
further desired to be apprised of the details in this regard.

11. The Ministry in its reply has stated:—
“As far as the participation of the private sector in the hydel

power is concerned, the original target of 1170 MW hydro capacity
addition in private sector in 10th Five Year (2002-07) Plan period


was subsequently revised to 700 MW during mid term appraisal
held in July-August, 2005. As per information available, the two
projects dropped were namely Maheshwar HEP(400 MW) of
M/s. Shree Maheshwar Hydel Power Corp. Ltd., M.P., due to
backing out of the foreign promoters .and Dhamwari Sunda HEP
(70 MW) of M/s. Dhamwari Power Co. Ltd., H.P,, due to non-
achievement of financial closure. The revised target of 700 MW
fixed during mid term appraisal was completely achieved with
the commissioning of Vishnuprayag HEP - 400 MW and Baspa
HEP - 300 MW.

As regards the participation of the private sector in the thermal
capacity addition, the Tenth Plan original target of 5951 MW was
revised to 4199 MW during the mid term appraisal held in
July-August, 2005. As against this revised target of 4199 MW,
projects having capacity totalling 1970.60 MW including two
projects, namely, 119.8 MW Karuppur CCPP, T.N. and 52.8 MW
Valantharavai CCPP, T.N., which were not included in the original
targets, were commissioned during the Tenth Plan period as per
detail given in Annexure-1. Twelve projects totalling 4767.60 MW
were dropped/slipped from the Tenth Plan target. Detail of these
projects including reasons for slippage/dropping is given at
Annexure-2.

The slow pace of private investment has been due to a number of
constraints. The foremost problem has been the inability of
Independent Power Producers( IPPs) to achieve financial closure
(inspite of progressing well on the other inputs/clearances), due
to the poor financial health of the state utilities who did not have
the financial capabilities to support more private projects in terms
of ability to open revolving letter of credit and escrow accounts
for regular payment of power. The other reasons for the private
projects not achieving financial closure, have been inordinate delay
in finalisation of PPA and the high cost of power perceived by the
buying utilities. In addition, some projects could not be
synchronized due to non-availability of gas and delay in supplies
by BHEL.

Government of India has been assisting wherever required, to
resolve issues coming in the way of implementation of IPPs,
including setting up of an Inter-Institutional Group (IIG) comprising
of senior representatives from the Financial Institutions and Ministry
of Power to facilitate early financial closure of power projects.
9 projects totalling 5535 MW have achieved financial closure during
this period and are presently under construction.”


ANNEXURE 1

LIST OF PRIVATE SECTOR THERMAL POWER PROJECTS
COMMISSIONED DURING TENTH PLAN PERIOD

SLNo. Name of the project Capacity (MW)

1. Bambooflat DGPP, A&N Islands 20

2. Jegurupadu CCPP Extn., A.P. 220*

3. Peddapuram CCPP, 2.2 78

4, Vemagiri CCPP, A.P. 370

5. Jojobera TPP, Jharkhand 120

6. Ratnagiri CCPP, Maharashtra (Block-II) 740@

7. Karuppur CCPP, T.N. 119.84

8. Neyveli Zero TPP, T.N. 250

9. Valantharavai CCPP, T.N. 52.8#
Total 1970.60

The capacity was reduced from 230 MW to 220 MW due to revision of Gas Turbine
capacity from 150 MW to 140 MW.

@ The project is now being implemented by the Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Ltd.
(RGPPL), a joint venture of NTPC Ltd., GAIL and State Govt. of Maharashtra and
hence it is no longer in the private sector as envisaged in the original target.

# These projects were not included in the original targets for commissioning during
the 10th Plan.


ANNEXURE II

LIST OF PRIVATE SECTOR THERMAL POWER PROJECTS
DROPPED/SLIPPED FROM THE TENTH PLAN

SLNo. Name of the project Capacity (MW) Reasons for slippage

1... Gautami CCPP, AP. 464 Non-availability of gas. However,
project is ready to commence.

2. Konaseema CCPP, 8.7 445 Non-availability of gas. However,
Project is ready for commissioning.

3. Ramagundam TPP, A.P. 520 Consequent to the termination

notice issued by APTRANSCO,
GOAP have decided to get this
project implemented by APGENCO.
The developer have been
approaching the State Government
of Andhra Pradesh to revive the

PPA,

4. Bihta TPP, Bihar 135 Executing agency not finalized by
developer.

5. OP. Jindal TPP, Chhattisgarh 250 Delay in equipment supplies by
BHEL

6. Jamnagar TPP, Gujarat 500 EPC contract and financial closure
not having been achieved.

7. Sugen CCPP, Gujarat 365 Switchyard for evacuation of power
not being ready.

8. Hassan CCPP, Karnataka 189 Project not cleared by Karnataka
Electricity Regulatory Commission.

9. Kaniniminke CCPP, Karnataka 107.6 Failure of the developer to get
escrow cover from Government of

Karnataka

10. Ratnagiri CCPP, Maharashtra @ 704 Paucity of funds

ll. Bina TPP, MP. 578 Failure to get escrow cover from
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh

12, Goindwal TPP, Punjab 500 Issue of escrow cover and coal

pricing could not be resolved.

Total 4767.6

७ The project is now being implemented by the Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Ltd.
(RGPPL), a joint venture of NTPC Ltd., GAIL and State Govt. of Maharashtra and
hence it is no longer in the private sector as envisaged in the original target.


12. The Committee do not find reply of the Ministry convincing
at all. From the clarifications of the Ministry it is now increasingly
clear that performance of the Private Sector has not come up to the
desired level inspite of all encouragement given by the Government.

13, Ratnagiri CCPP, Maharashtra with a capacity of 740 MW is
no more a private sector venture being implemented solely by
Government agencies. Karuppur CCPP and Valantharavai CCPP in
Tamil Nadu having a joint capacity of 172.6 MW though
commissioned during the 10th Plan were not included in the original
target for 10th Plan. If this 912.60 MW is not taken into account the
total achievement in the private sector gets further reduced from
1970 MW to about 1060 MW, which is really deplorable. From the
data furnished by the Ministry, it is also apparent that contrary to
what has been stated the inability to achieve financial closure is not
only the foremost problem for Independent Power Producers (IPPs).
In fact out of 12 cases of slippages in the 10th Plan cited by the
Ministry only in two cases has this been a factor. Obviously, there
are many other factors, which are leading to such poor achievements
by the private sector in capacity addition. The Committee find reply
of the Ministry, thus, incomplete because while reasons for poor
participation of private sector in power sector have been put before
them, other than resolving the financial closure issue coming in the
way of implementation of IPPs, the steps taken to address other
issues have not been reported to them.

14, The Committee would, therefore, not only want the Ministry
of Power to address all the other issues involved in poor participation
of private sector in power sector and report back to them but also
to ensure that those constraints do not come in the way of private
investment in the power sector during the XIth Plan, by constant
monitoring. There is a need to make a detailed study of the two
factors for delay, which appear to be interlinked. The supply from
gas based power projects is likely to be costlier and supply of gas
has also to be ensured for the gas based projects. The Government
should make a specific study as to at what level of price the gas
based electricity is acceptable to the consumers. While agreeing to
these projects the Government should also see that the private players
have firm availability of gas with them.

९. Supply of power equipments by BHEL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 2.2.32)

15. The Committee noted that 53% of capacity addition target had
slipped to 11th Plan. Out of this, major slippage had been due to

8


delay in Supercritical technology and supply of equipment & materials
by BHEL. The Committee had recommended that to ensure that the
capacity addition does not suffer during the 11th Plan due to delay on
the part of BHEL, the Government should go for international
competitive bidding for procuring equipment from other suppliers as
well.

16. The Committee further desired that the proposal of the
Government to enhance equipment manufacturing capacity in India,
under the flagship of NTPC and other players, should be vigorously
pursued to its logical conclusion in a fixed time frame and the
Committee be apprised of the same. Similarly, the proposal of NTPC
for looking at the possibility of entering into some on-going equipment
manufacturing business should also be pursued simultaneously. The
Committee also strongly endorsed that in order to avoid delays in the
setting up of higher capacity power projects, which were caused mainly
due to non-availability of advance environment clearances for the same,
the Government should invariably try and secure clearances in advance.
The Government should also make all out efforts to get Super Critical
alternate technologies available worldwide for the setting up of Power
Plant as a number of NTPC projects had been held up due to non-
availability of this technology.

17. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“In order to resolve the issue of placing of bulk orders 8-10 units
of Supercritical technology on BHEL and a separate manufacturing
unit through NTPC, Hon’ble Prime Minister had referred the matter
to Chairman, NMCC to give suitable recommendation/suggestion,
the Chairman, NMCC in his report dated 15.06.2007 submitted to
PMO, Ministry of Power and to Ministry of Heavy Industry, has
suggested that Ministry of Power should consider favourably
placement of a specific number of units on a negotiated basis on
BHEL, the Indian manufacturer, who is in the state of readiness to
start the work. Secondly, he is not in favour of setting up of
manufacturing unit by NTPC due to various reasons enumerated
in the report. A meeting on this issue under the chairmanship of
Minister of Power was held on 21.06.2007 in which it was
emphasized that the BHEL should prepare themselves to cater to
the requirement of power manufacturing equipments as envisaged
in the 11th plan and further. Ministry of Power is however in
favour of ICB with mandatory condition of setting up of
manufacturing base in India because of transparency satisfying the
condition of Mega power guidelines and assurance of regulator’s
consent.


So far as NTPC is concerned, International Competitive Bidding
(ICB) procedure is generally followed in respect of Main Plant
Equipment and other major packages of its Projects in view of the
following:—

— Obtaining the best competitive price in a transparent manner.

— Mega Power Project Benefits - In the case of interstate
thermal projects of capacity 1000 MW or more, mega benefits
such as Custom Duty & Excise Duty Exemptions/Refunds
are available for contracts awarded through ICB route.

However for 210/500 MW Main Plant Equipments BHEL has been
the lowest evaluated techno-economically responsive bidder. As has
been the experience in 10th Plan there are serious bottlenecks in
the power capacity addition in terms of delay in supplies,
inadequate deployment of construction machinery, non-availability
of skilled manpower at site and delay in placement of orders for
balance of plants by BHEL, inadequate project management
capability. As capacity addition envisaged in 11th Plan (78601 MW)
is more than three times actually achieved during the 10th Plan
(21094 MW) and even higher capacity targets are envisaged during
12th Plan (100000 MW), it is imperative to have more sources of
equipment supply.

Strong domestic power equipment manufacturing capability will
go a long way in creating generating capacities for meeting the
power demand of Indian economy, and there is an urgent need to
have more than one domestic manufacturer as a long-term strategy
to meet the growth of power sector. Even if action is initiated
immediately, it will take 3-4 years time for a new facility to come
into existence and roll out its first product. As such, the first plant
can be commissioned in 7 years from now i.e. in 12th Plan.

As such, in the short term, BHEL needs to change its focus to be
Project centric from existing focus on Tonnage/Turnover Centric.
They need to bring paradigm shift in their project management
method and strengthen their weak links like Project Engineering
Management (PEM), Piping Centre, Transformer Division etc. This
change needs to be demonstrated in shortest time frame and BHEL
must be put to strict scrutiny thereof by independent authority.

As regards NTPC entering into manufacturing, while NTPC may
not like to go on its own, it is open to the idea of Partnering with
suitable entity on the basis of a sound business model. This might


result in encouraging competition and achieving the overall target
of capacity addition in the long run. It has to partner with a
strategic partner who can bring the expertise in manufacturing
which in combination with NTPC’s strength in Planning,
Engineering, Project Management, Operational Expertise can be
used to develop a viable competitor.

It may be noted in this regard that NTPC has recently entered
into a Business Collaboration and Shareholders Agreement with
Transformers and Electricals Kerala Limited (TELK) and Govt. of
Kerala for synergy in the field of manufacturing and repair of
high voltage power transformers and associated equipment and
shall be acquiring 44.6 % stake in TELK.

As regards supercritical technology based plants, NTPC’s two
projects at Sipat-I (3x660 MW) and Barh (3x660 MW) awarded
through ICB are already under construction and all the units are
targeted for commissioning in 11th Plan. Further, Bidding is
presently in process for two more super critical technology based
projects namely North Karanpura STPP (3x660 MW) and Barh-II
(2x660 MW) for benefits starting in 11th Plan.”

18. The Committee are in full agreement with the views of the
Ministry that strong domestic power equipment manufacturing will
go a long way in creating generating capacities for meeting the power
demand of Indian economy. They, therefore, strongly endorse the
observation that BHEL not only changes its focus to be project centric
from existing focus on Tonnage/Turnover Centric but also strengthen
their weak links like Project Engineering Management (PEM) and
other associated factors in shortest time frame. The Committee desire
that all out efforts should also be made to encourage more firms to
take up power equipment manufacturing so that there is no
constraints on supply of these equipments.

D. Adherence to time schedules in development of UMPPs
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para 2.2.34)

19. In their 20th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08), the
Committee appreciated the initiative of the Ministry of Power regarding
the development of Ultra Mega Power Projects, which the Committee
felt would help in meeting the rising demand of the power in the
country to a great extent. During the course of evidence on Demands
for Grants for the year 2007-08, Members raised a number of queries
regarding the setting up of Ultra Mega Power Projects expressing

"1


concern as to whether these projects would come up as scheduled
earlier. Also an apprehension was expressed that the targets fixed by
the Government for achieving the generation of 1,00,000 MW by 2012
to meet the goal of electricity for all might be jeopardized, the
representative of the Ministry of Power, however, explained that they
had set upon themselves the target of 1,00,000 MW capacity addition
alongwith the transmission links and related activities by the year
2012.

20. The Committee, however, felt greatly concerned with the
present status of development of Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project,
which was awarded to Globleq Singapore Private Limited and Lanco
Consortium. However, Globleq Singapore was later on sold by its
parent company to Prince Stone Investments, a holding company for
Lanco Consortium Limited and Jindal Steel and Power Limited.

21. The Committee had categorically desired to know from the
Ministry as to how the matter concerning award of contract for Sasan
Project consequent on change of ownership of the successful bidder
was proposed to be resolved. The Ministry had informed that they
were seeking legal opinion in the matter and considering all legal
opinions they would take appropriate decision. The Committee,
however, had been informed by the Ministry that the matter is now
under consideration of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). The
Committee felt that an urgent action was required to resolve the issue
at the earliest and desired that all possible steps be taken to ensure
that the setting up of the Project was as per schedule without any
time and cost overruns. But considering the fact that there arose a
need for Central Vigilance Commission’s involvement in the beginning
of the project itself, the Committee felt apprehensive about the project
as due diligence was not shown by the Ministry of Power in award
of the project. The Committee, therefore, desired that responsibilities
be fixed in the matter and stern action be taken against the guilty. The
Committee also wanted to be apprised of the position at the earliest
regarding the development of this project-clearly analyzing the matter
as to how far this controversy was likely to affect the time and cost
overrun of the project.

22. The Committee were surprised to note that while the former
Power Secretary assured the Committee in meeting held on 2.8.2006
that some units of Mega Power Projects would come up by the end
of 11th Plan, the new Secretary in his evidence before the Committee
on 21.3.2007 stated that it was not possible to complete Ultra Mega
Power Projects in the 11th Plan and these would spill over to 12th

12


Plan. The Committee noted that a programme for completion of 1,00,000
MW capacity to ensure electricity for all by 2012 was announced by
the Government with much fanfare. The Committee were concerned
with the turn of events in the case of Sasan project and felt that apart
from non achievement of the targets, it might give bad publicity to
the Government’s move to set up other Ultra Mega Power Projects
and ultimately affected the goal of electricity for all. The Committee
noted that having achieved only 21180 MW during 11th Plan, there
was no likelihood of achieving 1,00,000 MW generating capacity by
2012 as had been envisaged by the Government. The Committee desired
that no effort should be spared to achieve this target if the goal of
electricity for all is to be accomplished. The Committee felt that the
power situation in the country required daily monitoring and
accountability to ensure progress as envisaged by the Government.

23. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“Achieving equilibrium in the demand and supply of power is
essential. Excess demand in the system invariably leads to poor
quality of electric supply including scheduled and unscheduled
cut offs. Therefore, creation of adequate capacity is necessary to
ensure reliable and quality power supply in line with the accepted
international practices. The National Electricity Policy notified on
12th February, 2005, inter alia aims at achieving the following
objectives:

* Access to electricity- Available for all households in next
5 years

¢ Availability of Power- Demand to be fully met by 2012.
Energy and peaking shortage to be overcome and adequate
spinning reserve to be available.

* Supply of reliable and quality power of specified standards
in an efficient manner and at reasonable rates.

Central Electricity Authority has assessed that for elimination of
shortages and achieving the goal of power for all by 2012, capacity
addition to the tune of about 1,00,000 MW is required during X
and XI Plan. During the X Plan, a generation capacity of 21180
MW has been added. For the XI Plan, a generation capacity of
78,577 MW is proposed to be added. Of this capacity, a generation
capacity of above 49,000 MW is under execution. Ordering in
respect of rest of generation capacity targeted in XI Plan is planned
to be completed by December, 2007. With the achievement of

13


proposed capacity addition programme during the course of XI
Plan, it is assessed by Central Electricity Authority that by 2012,
marginal peaking surplus and energy surplus to the tune of 5.6%
is likely to be available in the country.

The recently concluded Conference of the Chief Ministers has
resolved that a Standing Group of Power Ministers under the
Chairmanship of the Minister of Power would be set up to look
into all issues affecting the power sector. Further, the resolution
adopted in the Conference inter-alia includes that Centre would set
up a National Power Project Monitoring Board (NPPMB) for
monitoring the timely commissioning of the unprecedented
generation capacity addition target for XI Plan as also monitoring
of associated transmission projects. Accordingly, Standing Group
and the NPPMB are being constituted.

Regarding the development of Ultra Mega Power Projects it is to
mention that the Central Electricity Authority in consultation with
States has identified 9 sites suitable for development of Ultra Mega
Power Projects based on coal with a capacity of 4000 MW each.
Out of these, 5 are at coastal locations and remaining 4 are pit
head sites. The details of sites are as follows:

(a) Five coastal locations:
(i) Mundra in Gujarat
(ii) Krishnapatnam in A.P
(iii) Cheyyur in Tamil Nadu
(iv) Girye in Maharashtra
(v) Tadri in Karnataka

(b) Four pithead locations:
(i) Sasan in M.P
(ii) Tillaiya in Jharkhand
(iii) Sundergarh (Ib Valley) in Orissa
(iv) Akaltara in Chhattisgarh

Bid documents for UMPPs provide that first unit would be
commissioned not later than 69 months from the effective date of
PPA, and balance units within next 24 months i.e., last unit not
later than 93 months (7 years & nine months) from the effective
date of PPA. According to this prescribed timeline, any UMPP in
case of which effective date of PPA has been attained by first
quarter of 2009-10 is likely to be commissioned fully within 12th
Plan (which ends in March 2017).


The time-schedule for the development of these Ultra Mega Power
Projects depends on:

(a) Time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and
identification and acquisition of land for the Project;

(b) Time taken in completion of bidding process; and

(c) Time Schedule for commissioning of various units submitted
by the selected bidder in his bid, in accordance with
provisions of the bidding documents.

The bid process for two of these UMPPs at Mundra in Gujarat
and Sasan in MP has been completed. The bidders have submitted
their proposed commissioning schedules as under:

Mundra UMPP

The Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was signed on 22.4.2007.
The selected bidder has quoted five units of 800 MW each proposed
to be commissioned as per following schedule:

Unit No. Months from PPA signing Scheduled COD
1 64 22.8,2012
2 70 22.2.2013
3 76 22.8.2013
4 82 22.2.2014
5 88 22.8.2014
Sasan UMPP

The Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) is yet to be signed. The
lowest evaluated bidder has quoted six units of 660 MW each
proposed to be commissioned as per following schedule:

Unit No. Months from PPA signing Scheduled COD
1 60 Exact dates would
2 63 be worked out
3 66 based on the date
of signing of PPA
4 69
5 72
6 75

15


However, bidders have an option under PPA to advance the
commissioning schedule.

It may be seen from the above, according to indicated timeline, all
units of the Mundra Ultra Mega Power Project would be operational
during the 12th Plan. The commissioning schedule for Sasan UMPP
would depend on the date of transfer of the project to the Selected
Developer. The bidding process in respect of Krishnapatnam IMPP
and Tilaiya UMPP has started. Given the time line in the bidding
documents it could be said with fair degree of certainty that four
projects shall be operational well within 12th Plan. In case of
remaining five UMPPs there is again fair chance of completing
them within 12th Plan. However, firm timelines would be known
on completion of bidding process in each case. For this to happen,
it is imperative that the concerned States shall provide necessary
clearances particularly site clearance urgently.

The development of Ultra Mega Power Projects is a major initiative
of the Government. All necessary steps, therefore, would be taken
to see that issues related to Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project are
resolved in a just and fair manner and that this project along with
other projects identified under the initiative, fructify as early as
possible. The CVC report, referred to in the recommendation of
the Committee, has not yet been received in the Ministry of Power.
It may also be added that keeping in view the importance of
Ultra Mega Power Projects, an Empowered Group of Ministers
(EGoM) for facilitating expeditious decision in all cases concerning
UMPPs including Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project has been set up
on 14th June, 2007. Further action in the case of Sasan UMPP
would await consideration by the EGoM.”

24, Though deadlock on Sasan UMPP is over and the project
has been handed over to Reliance Power Ltd. (RPL) after a second
round of bidding, the Committee want the Government to take the
whole episode of Sasan as a learning experience. As has already
been recommended by the Committee in their 22nd Report on the
subject ‘Ultra Mega Power Projects’ the Committee reiterate that the
bidding guidelines be reviewed to plug the loopholes therein so
that Sasan scenario is not repeated. Moreover, the Committee would
like the Government to make up for the time lost owing to this
controversy so that it comes up as scheduled earlier. The Committee
while noting with satisfaction the setting up of an Empowered Group
of Ministers (EGoM) for facilitating expeditious decision in all cases
concerning UMPPs, desire the Central Government to make all efforts

16


to ensure that all the Ultra Meg& Power Projects are developed as
scheduled. And to achieve this goal, the Committee recommend that
both the Central and State Governments should work in tandem.

E. Private sector participation in transmission sector
Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para 2.8.7)

25. The Committee noted that out of 10th Plan Outlay of Rs. 21,370
crore, PGCIL could spend only Rs.18,181 crore. However, with this
lesser outlay, the physical achievements had been more than the 10th
Plan targets. The Committee while appreciating the work done by
PGCIL in the field of transmission of power suggested that financial
targets should be properly assessed. There was a need to encourage
the participation of private sector in the power sector as a whole and
in transmission sector as well. With this purpose the Government has
notified guidelines for encouraging competition in the development of
transmission projects. A Committee had been set up and 14 projects
had been identified for development through the competitive bidding
route. The Committee desired that these projects be taken up for
development by the private sector at the earliest and the participation
of private sector be allowed only in conformity with the provision of
the Electricity Act, 2003. The Committee noted, most of the private
investment had come through Joint Venture route only. Considering
the fact that 11th Plan target was to attract Rs.20,000 crore investment
for creating inter-regional transfer capacity of 11500 MW, the Ministry
should identify sufficient projects in advance, which could be offered
to the private sector. The Committee desired that they should be
informed of the action taken in the matter.

26. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“It may be mentioned that all efforts are made to assess the
financial targets properly. However, as implementation of
transmission schemes are dependent upon system requirements like
generation addition and growth in demand, change/reduction in
outlay of various transmission schemes in Xth Plan was necessitated
to match with the system requirements.

During the Xth Plan, besides cost saving achieved in various
transmission projects from approved/estimated cost at the time of
finalisation of Xth Plan, there was rescheduling of transmission
projects due to deferment/deletion of planned generation projects
(Net Rs. 875 crore), change in mode of implementation of few
system strengthening schemes (Rs. 410 crore) etc. Further some

AT:


new strengthening schemes were taken up for implementation as
per system requirement. Besides there was also a reduction in
telecom outlay (Rs. 1575 crore) on account of change in business
plan considering market condition.

27. The Committee had emphasized the need to encourage private
sector participation in the transmission sector to achieve the targets
set for the 11th Plan. The Committee had desired that projects which
could be given to the private sector be identified in advance and
Committee be apprised of the action taken in matter. The
Government is, however, totally silent in this regard. Now that the
1ith Plan has already started the Committee would like to be
apprised of details of the transmission projects identified for being
handing over to the private sector for development. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the status of the projects, which
had already been identified for development in the private sector
through the competitive bidding route and overall experience of
developing transmission projects in private sector/Joint Venture.

FE Provision of electricity for rural infrastructure under RGGVY
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 2.9.13)

28. The Committee strongly felt that rural electrification means
not only electrification of households and villages but also catering to
the needs of farmers and small-scale industries, which are the backbone
of the rural economy. However, this aspect seemed to have been
ignored by the Government as no mention had been made about
achievements in this regard under RGGVY. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that in addition to electrification of households, electricity
for agriculture and industrial activities should also be given due
importance under RGGVY.

29. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“RGGVY, through creation of Village Electricity Infrastructure (VEI),
Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB) and Decentralized
Distributed Generation (DDG) would also facilitate the following
activities indirectly:—

* irrigation pumpsets
* small and medium industries
¢ khadi and village industries

18


° cold chains
¢ healthcare

* education and IT

However, funds have not been allocated for providing electricity
for agriculture and industrial activities under RGGVY. Therefore,
there can be no targets for these activities under RGGVY. If States
so desire, they can approach financial institutions for loans for
augmenting the infrastructure being created under RGGVY to
adéquately cater for these activities. Ministry of Power has also
requested all the States to prepare a Rural Electrification Plan for
their State which will take into consideration among other things
the demand for electricity from agriculture and industry.”

30, The Ministry has stated that RGGVY, through creation of
Village Electricity Infrastructure, Rural Electricity Distribution
Backbone and Decentralized Distributed Generation would also
facilitate, albeit indirectly, activities like irrigation pumpsets, small
and medium industries, khadi and village industries, cold chains,
healthcare, education and IT. The Committee feel that providing
electricity for agriculture and small-scale industries should have also
been given equal importance under RGGVY as has been given to
electrification of households. By leaving such important areas of rural
economy entirely on the State Governments, the Government is
perhaps shirking from its vowed responsibility.

31. The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary changes be
made in the RGGVY to ensure that in addition to electrification of
rural households, providing electricity for catering to the needs of
rural economy should also be given top priority - without which a
village could not be called as truly electrified.

G. Failure to meet the target under APDRP
Recommendation (51, No. 16, Para 2.10.16)

32. APDRP was launched by the Government in 2002-2003 with
the objective of reducing Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C)
losses to around 15% in five years from the then existing, which were
around 60%. The Committee, however, observed that even after
completion of five years, AT&C losses could only be reduced to 33.5%
by 2005-06. The Committee desired to know the reasons for such slow
progress in reduction in AT&C losses. The Committee also noted that
in a number of States, both Non-Special Category and Special Category

19


States, utilisation of APDRP investment was less than 50% as on
31.12.2006. These States were Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya etc. Similarly, in
a number of cases, loss reduction cash incentive had also not been
released to a number of eligible States like Gujarat, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh etc. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for
less utilisation of funds by certain States as well as reasons for the
non-release of loss reduction cash incentives to some States.

20

33. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“The main objective of Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (APDRP) was reduction of AT&C losses from
the level of around 40% to around 15% in five years to begin with
in the urban areas and high density/consumption areas. Further,
it was also targeted to reduce commercial and cash loss of the
utilities. Under Investment Component Government provided
Additional Central Assistance for strengthening and upgradation
of Sub-transmission and Distribution Network to SEBs/Utilities.
The assistance was in the form of 25% grant and 25% loan of the
project cost. Special category States were provided 90% grant and
10% loan. However, the loan portion was discontinued w.e.f. April
2005 on the recommendation of 12th Finance Commission. Under
Incentive Component SEBs/Utilities were incentivised for cash loss
reduction to motivate them towards reduction of their losses.
Funds are released for actual cash loss reduction, for every
Rs. 2 of cash loss. reduction Rs. 1 is given as grant.

Right from the beginning, it was made clear’to the States that the
programme was reform oriented and not budget and expenditure
oriented. The off take by the States was obviously slow as they
had to agree to various conditionalities for becoming eligible for
APDRP assistance (signing of MOA), standardize their technical
specification, streamline their bidding process and switch over to
turnkey contracting. Only a few States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Uttaranchal
took early initiatives and most of their districts headquarter towns
have been covered under the programme. These States have shown
significant improvement in reduction of AT&C loss and commercial
loss as well. At the town level, wherever they were able to complete
the projects even up to 75-80%, visible improvements have been
seen in most of such cases. Other States were late in signing the
Memorandum of Agreements and in submission of schemes.
Further unrealistic DPRs, heavy quantum of work, increase in price


of material, poor availability of contractors etc. also resulted in
delay in implementation of the scheme. The States of North-Eastern
Region and Jammu & Kashmir were especially late starters. Due
to these constraints APDRP projects of only Rs. 17033.58 crore
could be sanctioned by the Ministry.

The implementation of the sanctioned Projects was also delayed
due to delays in transfer of funds by State Government to the
distribution companies. Under the Additional Central Assistance,
funds mandatorily pass through the State Government and on
account of delay in release to the implementing distribution
companies funds were not available in time for the Project
execution, In many instances, it took even more than a year to
release funds to the implementing agency after release by the
Central Government.

Under the Incentive Component, out of the proposals received from
various States, nine States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, West
Bengal and Punjab were found eligible, as per the guidelines of
the programme, for release of incentive under the programme,
These States had achieved cash loss reduction of Rs. 5254.60 crores
and had become eligible for incentive of Rs. 2627.30 Crore. The
Government has so far released Rs. 1749.03 Crore. The balance
amount will be released during the current financial year
2007-08.”

34, The Committee are not convinced by the logic extended by
the Ministry regarding poor achievement in implementation of
APDRP. After completion of four out of targeted five years the AT&C
losses could be reduced from 40% to 33.5% against the expected
15%, This can only be categorised as a big non-achievement. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to work more
purposefully so that the target of restricting these losses to 15% is
achieved sooner than later.

35. The Committee have noted that funds released by Central
Government are not further released by the State Governments to
the implementing agencies for quite a long time. The Committee
feel that Ministry ought to take immediate steps to ensure that the
funds so released are not held up by the respective State
Governments for unnecessary longer period before being passed on
to the implementing agencies. The Committee feel that it would be
better if certain guidelines are fixed to this effect.

21


36. Unless and until such a system is put in place the success of
APDRP cannot be fully ensured. The other systemic infirmities are
also to be attended to and solved by the Ministry as the coordinating
agency for the programme.

The Committee expect the Ministry to get down to the task in
right earnest so that APDRP does not get mired in red tapism and
other incidental delays. Because on this very important programme
hinges the entire power sector reforms agenda.

37. The Committee would also like to know the reasons for
releasing the incentives to States like Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh etc., in installments. The Committee desire that the balance
amount be released at the earliest and in future no delay should be
made in releasing the full cash incentives to the States because delay
in this regard can have a demoralizing effect on the States.

H. Research Schemes of CPRI
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para 2.11.8)

38. Scheme of research and development in the field of electric
power was implemented through CPRI. However, the R&D activities
of CPRI suffered during the 10th Plan as outlay Rs. 90.00 crore could
not be fully utilized. One of the reasons given by the Government for
this was ‘delay in approval of the project proposals in absence of a
regular Director General for first three years of the plan period’. The
Committee noted that some research schemes on Power were
discontinued midway after a review of these schemes. The Committee
felt that a lot of precious Government money could have been saved
if these schemes were judiciously selected. The Committee felt that the
Ministry should ask various power utilities and CEA to prepare the
list of such areas based on their day-to-day work experience, which
needed further research to seek their solutions. This should be a
continuous process.

39, The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“The Standing Committee on Energy has desired that Research
Schemes should be judiciously selected by various power utilities
and CEA.

The Ministry of Power had formed a Standing Committee on R&D
in February 2001 for formulating perspective R&D plan for Indian
power sector for the next 15 years under the chairmanship of
Chairman, CEA and members drawn from various power utilities.

22


The Committee after 2 brainstorming sessions held at New Delhi
and Bangalore, had identified R&D areas in Transmission,
Distribution and Generation and submitted its report in June 2002.
Currently, 5 R&D projects identified under this plan are under
implementation at various power utilities like Electrical Research
and Development Association (ERDA), Bharat Heavy Electricals
Limited (BHEL), National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML), EMCO
Limited. An amount of Rs. 11.55 crores is being kept aside under
National Perspective Plan during the 11th plan period.”

40. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry incomplete
because it is silent on an important point regarding discontinuation
of research schemes midway after a review of these schemes; as the
Committee maintain that a lot of precious Government money could
have been saved, if these schemes were judiciously selected, The
Committee reiterate the point that the schemes should be finalized
in such a way so that these are not discontinued midway. However,
the Committee stress that identification of areas for research &
development should be a continuous process.

“23



CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (S.No. 1, Para 2.1.5)

The Committee were concerned to note that peak shortages had
increased from 11.8% in 2001-02 to 13.9% in 2006-07. The Committee
observe that utilization of the budgetary allocation during the last few
years has not kept pace with the allocation. Though the budgetary
allocation to the Ministry of Power is being hiked every year, the
utilization of the same keep on decreasing. During the year 2004-05,
BE was Rs.15630.32 crore whereas during the year 2006-07, it was
increased to Rs.27623.70 crore. However the utilization of the same
has declined from 92.21% in the year 2004-05 to only 57.6% in the
year 2006-07. The Committee feel it is a matter of serious concern. The
Committee , therefore desire that the Government should retrospect
and analyze the reasons for this trend so that the same story is not
repeated during the year 2007-08. The Committee also note that
quarterly utilization of the funds has also not been on the desired
norms. The Ministry should make all out efforts to improve quarterly
utilization of funds so that annual allocations can be fully utilized.

Reply of the Government

The Budgetary estimates and actual expenditure of the Ministry of
Power during last three years is as follows:—

Year BE RE Actual % utilization % utilization
wat. RE wt, BE
2004-05 15630.32 1404.06 1294757 92.21 82.84
2005-06 23013.90 19050.11 1684754 88.44 73.21
2006-07 2762370 25325.77 2848.72 90.2 82.71

From the above table it is clear that though the utilization
percentage in 2005-06 decreased to 73.21% but the trend had reversed
in 2006-07 and utilization percentage increased to 82.71%. Actual
utilization with respect to RE though reduced to 88.44% in 2005-06
from 92.21% in 2004-05 but it increased to 90.22% in 2006-07.

24


The quarterly utilization of funds by the Ministry of Power during
2006-07 comprising of GBS of Rs. 5500 crores and IEBR of Rs. 22123.70
croes (BE) is given below:—

(Rs in crores)

GBS TEBR Total % Utilization in
financial year 2006-07
(७.४. BE)
Expenditure during 678.74 2860.40 3539.14 12.81%
Ist quarter
Expenditure during 627.17 3695.32 4322.49 15.65%
2nd quarter
Expenditure during 970.31 4846.36 5816.67 21.05%
3rd quarter
Expenditure during 2394.94 6775.47 9170.41 33.20%
4th quarter

In accordance with the instructions of the Ministry of Finance,
there should be an even spread of quarter wise expenditure and there
should not be more than 33% expenditure of GBS in the last quarter.
The lesser expenditure in the first three quarters was mainly due to
delay in project related approvals. It is mentioned that higher
expenditure in the last quarter of 2006-07(GBS) was on account of the
special relaxation given by the Ministry of Finance from the limit of
33% in the last quarter for the flagship scheme of Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Viduytikaran Yojana.

As regards the remedial actions for utilization of the allocated
fund during the current financial year by the Ministry, it is mentioned
that an intensified monitoring mechanism has been put in place as
indicated below:—

(i) Weekly review by Secretary (Power) of the status of
investment approval of new projects. Constant follow-up
with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission is being
done to expedite the approval process which in turn results
in better budget expenditure.

(ii) Monthly review by Chairman, CEA of all projects.

(iii) Three-stage approval process for hydro Projects to ensure
adequacy of Survey & Investigation, creation of all essential
infrastructure required for commencement of construction
before accord of final approval by the CCEA.

25



(iv) Comprehensive quarterly review by Secretary (Power) of
status of all ongoing and new projects.

(v) Periodical reviews with States on Capacity addition/
APDRP/ Village Electrification

(vi) Periodical Inter-ministerial coordination meetings with M/o
Petroleum &Natural Gas; M/o Coal; M/o Environment &
Forest; M/o Water Resources for expeditious clearances for
the projects.

(vii) Periodical reviews with private project developers.

(viii) Periodical visits to States—Comprehensive individual review
with the State Governments.

(ix) Periodical visits to sites by senior officers from Ministry of
Power/CEA.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 10/2/2007-Budget Dated 15.06.2007]
Recommendation (51 No. 3, Paragraph No. 2.2.30)

The Committee note that a target of 41110 MW was fixed for 10th
Plan, which was reduced to 36956 MW during the Mid Term Appraisal.
However, the Committee further note with great concern that at the
end of 10th Plan only 21180 MW has been achieved. The performance
of the Ministry regarding capacity addition in the 10th Plan is thus
abysmally disheartening. The actual achievement has been only 51.5%
of targeted capacity addition. It is a matter of great concern in a fast
growing economy like India where generation of power has to grow
almost in direct proportion to the growth of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). The Committee find many a reasons responsible for this
scenario. Delay in the award of works/ order placement, delay in
supplies by BHEL, delay in supply of Aux. Boiler, delay in placement
of order for material handling plant, etc., are the reasons which show
slackness on the part of executing agencies and should have been
tackled through proper monitoring. Starting from the planning stage,
the Committee feel that the targets for the plan period are seemingly
unrealistic. Since gestation period for development of Power Project
varies from 4 years to almost 7-8 years, many projects spill over into
two plans. The Committee fail to understand as to how the proposed
capacity addition of 68,869 MW for the 11th Plan would be achieved
- especially when the 10th Plan target of 41110 MW could not be
achieved. The Committee, therefore, desire that the annual and plan
targets for capacity addition should be fixed realistically.

26


Reply of the Government

The target for the 11th Plan is yet to be fixed by the Planning
Commission. However, it is Proposed to add a capacity of 78577 MW
during the 11th Plan period. Out of this capacity, a capacity of 47595
MW is already under construction and efforts are being made to place
order for the remaining capacity of 29402 MW by December, 2007 so
as to achieve the target as planned. Further a capacity of 1580 MW
has already been commissioned in 11th Plan till 21.06.2007.

As regards fixing realistic capacity addition target for 11th Plan,
only those thermal projects, where orders are to be placed by 12/2007
to 3/2008 are being considered for inclusion in 11th Plan target. The
hydro projects included for yielding benefits in 11th Plan are those
Projects which are already under construction, and for which order for
main civil package has already been placed before March 2007 and
the projects with lesser gestation period where main civil package
order is likely to be placed by December 2007.

[Ministry of Power's U.O No. 2/7/2007-P &P Dated 2.07.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Paragraph No.2.2.32)

Committee note that 53% of capacity addition target has slipped
to 11th Plan. Out of this, major slippage has been due to delay in
Supercritical technology and supply of equipment & materials by BHEL.
Since BHEL is the sole supplier of equipment, it seemed to be
overburdened with work. Extremely worried by the situation as
obtaining presently in regard to the equipment supply for the Power
Plants, the Committee strongly recommend that to ensure that the
capacity addition does not suffer during the 11th Plan due to delay on
the part of BHEL, the government should go for international
competitive bidding for procuring equipment from other suppliers as
well.

The Committee further desire that the proposal of the Government
to enhance equipment manufacturing capacity in India, under the
flagship of NTPC and other players, should be vigorously pursued to
its logical conclusion in a fixed time frame and the Committee be
apprised of the same. Similarly, the proposal of NTPC for looking at
the possibility of entering into some on-going equipment manufacturing
business should also be pursued simultaneously. The Committee also
strongly endorse that in order to avoid delays in the setting up of
higher capacity power projects which are caused mainly due to non-
availability of advance environment clearances for the same, the

27



Government should invariably try and secure clearances in advance.
The Government should also make all out efforts to get Super Critical
alternate technologies available worldwide for the setting up of Power
Plant as a number of NTPC projects have been held up due to non-
availability of this technology.

Reply of the Government

In order to resolve the issue of placing of bulk orders 8-10 units
of Supercritical technology on BHEL and a separate manufacturing
unit through NTPC, Hon’ble Prime Minister had referred the matter
to Chairman, NMCC to give suitable recommendation/suggestion, the
Chairman, NMCC in his report dated 15.06.2007 submitted to PMO,
Ministry of Power and to Ministry of Heavy Industry, has suggested
that Ministry of Power should consider favourably placement of a
specific number of units on a negotiated basis on BHEL, the Indian
manufacturer, who is in the state of readiness to start the work.
Secondly, he is not in favour of setting up of manufacturing unit by
NTPC due to various reasons enumerated in the report. A meeting on
this issue under the Chairmanship of Minister of Power was held on
21.06.2007 in which it was emphasized that the BHEL should prepare
themselves to cater to the requirement of power manufacturing
equipments as envisaged in the 11th plan and further. Ministry of
Power is however in favour of ICB with mandatory condition of setting
up of manufacturing base in India because of transparency satisfying
the condition of Mega power guidelines and assurance of regulator’s
consent.

So far as NTPC is concerned, International Competitive Bidding
(ICB) procedure is generally followed in respect of Main Plant
Equipment and other major packages of its projects in view of the
following:

— Obtaining the best competitive price in a transparent manner.

— Mega Power Project Benefits—In the case of interstate
thermal projects of capacity 1000 MW or more, mega benefits
such as Custom Duty & Excise Duty Exemptions/ Refunds
are available for contracts awarded through ICB route.

However for 210/500 MW Main Plant Equipments BHEL has been
the lowest evaluated techno-economically responsive bidder. As has
been the experience in 10th Plan there are serious bottlenecks in the
power capacity addition in terms of delay in supplies, inadequate
deployment of construction machinery, non-availability of skilled

28


manpower at site and delay in placement of orders for balance of
plants by BHEL, inadequate project management capability. As capacity
addition envisaged in 11th Plan (78601 MW) is more than three times
actually achieved during the 10th Plan (21094 MW) and even higher
capacity targets are envisaged during 12th Plan (100000 MW), it is
imperative to have more sources of equipment supply.

Strong domestic power equipment manufacturing capability will
go a long way in creating generating capacities for meeting the power
demand of Indian economy, and there is an urgent need to have more
than one domestic manufacturer as a long-term strategy to meet the
growth of power sector.Even if action is initiated immediately, it will
take 3-4 years time for a new facility to come into existence and roll
out its first product. As such, the first plant can be commissioned in
7 years from now ie. in 12th Plan.

As such, in the short term, BHEL needs to change its focus to be
Project centric from existing focus on Tonnage/Turnover Centric. They
need to bring paradigm shift in their project management method and
strengthen their weak links like Project Engineering Management (PEM),
Piping Centre, Transformer Division etc. This change needs to be
demonstrated in shortest time frame and BHEL must be put to strict
scrutiny thereof by independent authority.

As regards NTPC entering into manufacturing, while NTPC may
not like to go on its own, it is open to the idea of partnering with
suitable entity on the basis of a sound business model. This might
result in encouraging competition and achieving the overall target of
capacity addition in the long run. It has to partner with a strategic
partner who can bring the expertise in manufacturing which in
combination with NTPC’s strength in Planning, Engineering, Project
Management, Operational Expertise can be used to develop a viable
competitor.

It may be noted in this regard that NTPC has recently entered
into a Business Collaboration and Shareholders Agreement with
Transformers and Electricals Kerala Limited (TELK) and Govt. of Kerala
for synergy in the field of manufacturing and repair of high voltage
power transformers and associated equipment and shall be acquiring
44.6 % stake in TELK.

As regards supercritical technology based plants, NIPC’s two
projects at Sipat-I (3x660 MW) and Barh (3x660 MW) awarded through
ICB are already under construction and all the units are targeted for

29


commissioning in 11th Plan. Further, Bidding is presently in process
for two more super critical technology based projects namely North
Karanpura STPP (3x660 MW) and Barh-II (2x660 MW) for benefits
starting in 11th Plan.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 3/3/2007- Th.-1 Dated 14.08.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Paragraph No. 2.2.33)

The Committee observe that out of the three sectors viz, Central,
State & Private, the performance of the State Sector, in terms of capacity
addition during the 10th Plan has been better as compared to Central
and Private Sectors. Though Central & Private Sectors could manage
to achieve only 60% and 27% respectively, of the targets—the
achievement of State Sector has been 68%. However, out of 68,869
MW proposed capacity addition during the 11th Plan, State Sector has
been given the target of only 22,989 MW.

Considering the performance of the State Sector during 10th Plan,
the Committee feel that more responsibility could have been assigned
to State Sector. The Central Government, on its part could extend the
required support, as necessitated by the States to achieve this objective.
Moreover, exemptions which are given for Mega Power Projects should
also be available to the State Sector Power Projects of 1000 MW and
above.

Reply of the Government

The status of capacity addition in 10th Plan is as follows:—

(in MW)

Original Mid-term Mid-term Actual % of

target Appraisal by Appraisal by achievement original

MOP Planning target

Commission

Central 22832 19817 17097 13005 57%
State 1157 12240 11103 6245 56%
Private 21 4899 3090 1930 27%
Total 410 36956 31290 21180 52%

It may be seen from the above table that the performance of State
Sector in 10th Plan with reference to the original target is 56% as
compared to the performance of Central Sector which works out to
57%.

30


The target for 11th Plan is yet to be fixed by the Planning
Commission. However, out of 78,577 MW envisaged for XI Plan,
Projects aggregating to 27952 MW (36%) pertain to State Sector.
Additionally, based on the discussions in the Conference of Chief
Secretaries of States on 23-24 April, 2007, additional Projects totaling
10695 MW have been indicated in the State Sector for likely benefits
during XI Plan of which projects totaling to 4050 MW have been
assessed as doable during the XI Plan. Further, Central Electricity
Authority is convening region-wise meetings where the programme of
the States for addition of capacity in the State Sector is being discussed
in detail. It is the primary responsibility of the States to firm up the
projects which are to be included in the State sector as capacity addition
target. Projects, where preparedness in terms of land availability, DPR
and tying up of other critical inputs is such that Project is likely to be
completed within a particular Plan period, is invariably included in
the Plan document.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 2/7/2007-P &P Dated 2.07.2007]
Recommendation (SI, No, 8, Para No. 2.3.4)

The Committee note with concern that no exemption in Excise
and Customs Duty has been proposed in the current budget for
equipment to be used in the power sector. The capacity addition during
the 10th Plan has suffered due to delay in supply of equipment by
BHEL. To meet the increasing demand of equipment it is necessary to
procure equipment through international competitive bidding. In this
light, there is a need for exemption in Excise & Customs Duty for
equipment as exemption in taxes and duties will act as incentive for
both foreign and domestic players to participate in the bidding process.
Exemption in duties will encourage competition which will ultimately
lead to reduction in cost of generation of power. Hence, the Committee
strongly recommend that Ministry of Power should take up the matter
of exemption of Excise & Customs Duty on equipment/materials useful
for the development of power with the Ministry of Finance as they
feel that exemption in Customs and Excise Duties will not only ensure
the supply of equipments, but would also reduce the cost of plant
and power production and thereby leading to reduction in per unit
tariff of power and thus making the projects viable. In view of the
pace of development as envisaged by the Government, such exemptions
need to be thought of urgently.

Reply of the Government

In the pre Budget Memorandum submitted by the Ministry of
Power to Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Power has taken up the
following proposals for exemption in Excise & Customs Duty:

31



Excise Duty:

0)

(2

Rationalisation of Excise Duty: In case of power sector,
electricity is not cenvatable/modavtable, as the finished
product ie. electricity is not an excisable good. Therefore, it
is suggested that Excise Duty on power sector be reduced
from present level of 16% to a moderate level of 8% and
CVD be accordingly aligned.

Complete waiver of Excise Duty on specified Fly Ash
Products: To promote use of fly ash, which is in the interest
of environment, the Excise Duty of 8% may be waived on
products manufactured at the site of power plants, in which
not less than 25% of weight of fly ash or phospho-gypsum
or both have been used.

Customs Duty:

32

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Rationalisation of Customs Duty:

(a) There are many duty structures for power sector
projects/equipment imports which are quite confusing.
There should be only two sets of duties, namely,
concessional zero Customs Duty as exists for mega
power project imports and another uniform set of duty
for imports for other than mega power project for
goods/project import @ CD - 5% and CVD - 8%.

(b) Transmission Projects associated with mega power
project should get the same duty benefit ie. zero duty
and project imports for transmission projects associated
with other than mega power project should attract the
uniform Customs duty of 5% and CVD of 8%.

Complete Customs Duty waiver on import of LNG/NG:
LNG and NG presently attracting Basic Customs Duty of
5% may be made completely exempt from Customs Duty
to make them an affordable fuel by reducing cost of CNG/
NG in the fuel starved regions of the country.

Complete Customs duty and CVD waiver for LNG
Regasification plants: To reduce the high cost of LNG, the
capital goods for LNG Regassification plants should be fully
exempted from Customs Duty and CVD.

Rationalisation of duty on bulk power Transmission
equipment: All high power (765 KV & above) transmission


0)

(8)

equipment should also attract 0 % Basic Customs Duty as
is applicable for HVDC miain equipment presently, since
both kinds of equipment serve the same purpose of bulk
power transmission over long distance.

CD Exemption for construction equipment being used in
hydro projects: Import of construction equipment (Tunnel
Boring Machines (TBM) Cable cranes/tower cranes, heavy
earth moving equipment etc.) for Hydro Power Project
construction should be exempted from Customs Duty on
the lines of such exemption for the equipment used in road
works of NHAI

Concessional CD on cement, steel, etc used in setting up
/substantial expansion of project: Raw materials like cement
and steel required for initial setting up/substantial expansion
of the project should also be classified under Chapter 98.01
of the First Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act. Present
definition covers only machinery, equipment and raw
material for manufacture of these machinery/ equipment
but not cement/steel for civil construction.

Excise Duty and Customs Duty combined:

(9)

(10)

Complete duty waiver for equipment for decentralized
distributed generation projects in rural areas (upto 5 MW):
100% Duty waiver should be granted for all equipment used
for creating the infrastructure of decentralized distributed
generation (upto 5 MW) in rural areas. This will bring about
rapid provision of good quality electricity in rural hinterland
and also reduce the investment requirement of Bharat
Nirman which includes 90% grant funded by Government
of India for rural electrification projects including
decentralized distributed generation projects.

Complete waiver of Customs Duty and Excise Duty on
CFL, LED & Electronic Ballast: CFL, LED and Electronic
Ballast which are highly energy efficient should be fully
exempted from all duties.

Waiver of CD/ED on Naphtha: Complete waiver of Basic Customs
Duty and CVD/Excise Duty on Naphtha to make it an affordable fuel
for power generation.

However, none of these proposals finally figured in the Union
Budget for 2007-08. Ministry of Finance only reduced peak customs

33


duty rate from 12.5% to 10%. [This has reduced customs duty on
spare parts for power plant equipments like steam boilers, steam
turbines, gas turbines etc.]. This Ministry would again take up the
matter requesting exemption of Excise & Customs Duty on equipment/
materials useful for the development of power with the Ministry of
Finance in the Budget proposal for 2008-09.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 8/6/2007-Fin. Dated 10.07.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No. 2.4.8)

The Committee feel that the hydro power generation has not been
given the desired impetus. The percentage of hydro share in aggregate
capacity during the 9th & 10th Plan has been only 25% & 26%
respectively whereas the ideal ratio between thermal & hydro should
be 60:40. Considering the shortage of coal and gas and also combined
with the fact that India has an estimated unutilized hydro-power
potential of 1,50,000 MW, the Committee strongly desire that more
emphasis should be given to hydro power generation. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Government should work out a strategy
for exploiting the hydro power and increasing the share of hydro
power generation to an ideal 40% during the 11th Plan.

The Committee note that the tariff policy notified in January 2006
requires that all distribution utilities shall procure power only through
competitive bidding. But there are uncertainties and risks associated
with construction of hydro projects like geological surprises,
resettlement and rehabilitation problems inaccessibility of sites, law
and order problems etc. This renders tariff based bidding as a difficult
Proposition for hydroelectric projects. The Committee are happy to
note that to address this complex issue, the Central Government has
prepared a policy, which is yet to be firmed up after having a re-look
at the same and taking into consideration the concerns expressed by
the States in regard thereto. The Committee expect the Government to
come up with this policy within a definite time fame so that the road
blocks or irritants in the way of exploiting huge unexploited hydro-
power potential in the country could be removed on due priority.
Since delay in getting environment clearance is a major reason for
delay in hydro power projects, the Committee feel that there is a need
to reassess the remap the forest area in the country so as to ensure
that the environment clearances are secured early. The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Power should take up this matter with the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. The Committee further desire that a Joint
Coordination Committee—consisting of the representatives of the

34


Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Environment and Forests be
formed to address and resolve the issues involved in power generation.
The Committee desire that this matter should also be brought to the
notice of PMO for necessary action.

Reply of the Government
Capacity Addition Target for Hydro Projects during 11th Plan:

In Ith Plan (2007-12) 16553 MW is proposed to be added through
hydro Projects. In addition, hydro projects with total capacity of
2745 MW have also been identified on which additional efforts would
be needed to realize benefit during 11th plan.

To realize the planned benefits during 11th Plan, advance action
on the identified hydroelectric schemes has been initiated in the early
part of the 10th Plan itself as pre-DPR activities are normally time
consuming and relatively longer period is required for obtaining various
clearances,

50,000 MW Hydroelectric Initiatives:

For speedy development of hydro power potential this Ministry
had launched 50,000 H.E. Initiatives. Under the programme, Preliminary
Feasibility Reports (PFRs) of 162 hydro-electric projects (47,930 MW)
were prepared in the year 2003-04. As a follow up of preparation of
PFRs, it was decided to take up implementation/preparation of DPRs
for attractive schemes selected from PFR schemes thereby providing a
shelf of projects for execution in the near future. Out of 162 schemes
(47930 MW) for which PFRs have been prepared, at first instance,
based on their preliminary techno-economic analysis, 77 schemes
(33951 MW) whose first year tariff works out below Rs. 2.50/kWh
have been taken up for detailed survey & investigation and preparation
of DPR/ implementation.

Constitution of Task Force:

Pursuant to the decision taken in the Conference of Chief Ministers
on the Power Sector on 28th May, 2007 where Hon’ble Prime Minister
was also present, it was decided to constitute a Task Force for Hydro
Power Development. Since the bulk of the undeveloped hydro potential
is along the Himalayas ie. in hill States of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and North-East more particularly Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh, this Ministry has proposed for constitution of Task
Force for accelerated development of hydro potential in the country

35


especially in the above said States. The Task Force would be headed
by the Hon’ble Minister of Power with representation from the above
said States and concerned Ministries/Departments of Government of
India. In addition to ensuring coordinated and balanced hydropower
development, the Task Force will also look into the issues of
rehabilitation & resettlement of project-affected persons. The Secretary,
Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) has also been proposed to
be nominated as a Member in the Task Force. The issues relating to
environment/forest clearance will also be looked into by the said Task
Force.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. No.5/3/2007-H-II Dated 18.07.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.5.9)

The Committee are concerned with the poor performance of NHPC
during the 10th Plan. NHPC failed to achieve both physical as well as
financial targets set for the plan period. Out of financial outlay of
Rs. 32226 crores, the anticipated expenditure is only Rs. 10983 crores.
Similarly, against the target capacity addition of 4357 MW, the
anticipated capacity addition is only 1970 MW.

The Committee note that in a number of cases, CCEA sanction
was delayed like Parbati-IIl, HP, Uri-[I and Chamera Stage-III resulting
in delay of subsequent activities. In case of Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak
Projects, sanction from the State Government was delayed. In case of
Siang Upper and Siang Lower Projects, there was delay in Survey &
Investigation. There are some other projects also where delays were
due to small problems, which could be visualized and resolved in
advance. Inspite of an elaborate monitoring mechanism of targets is a
matter of serious concern. Now, the target for the 11th Plan has been
set at 5233 MW. In addition four projects with installed capacity of
604 MW have been targeted for completion under best efforts category.
The Committee desire that before embarking on the ambitious plan
for the 11th Plan period, the reasons for shortfall in achieving the
targets should be analyzed deeply so that repetition of same could be
checked while executing projects during the 11th Plan.

The Committee further note that the Ministry had informed during
examination of Demands of Grants (2006-07) that the procedure for
sanction of hydroelectric schemes has been streamlined. Moreover, a
Committee had been set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary to examine the existing procedures relating to environment,
forest and wild life clearances and give its recommendations to

36


streamline the procedures. Since, delays at various levels lead to
avoidable delays in implementation of Projects, the Committee desire
that the time schedule fixed for implementation of power projects be
strictly adhered to. Further, the Committee desire to be apprised of
the outcome of the report submitted by the Committee set up for the
purpose.

Reply of the Government

1. Following are the reasons for slippage in physical and financial
targets:

Reasons for physical slippage of targets: Originally 10th Plan
capacity addition target was 4357 MW (11 No. of Projects).
Subsequently, during the mid term appraisal in the year 2004 the target
was revised to 3252 MW (8 No. of projects) against which the actual
capacity addition has been 1970 MW (4 No. of projects).

One of the major reasons for slippage in achievement of capacity
addition was that the slipped projects, except Teesta-V, which were
included in X plan, were at initial stages of preparation of DPR and
as a result the approvals could not be obtained in time. In some cases,
the contracted completion dates were beyond the 10th Five Year Plan.

The project-wise main reasons for slippage in the capacity addition
are as under:

(a) Purulia Pumped Storage Scheme (900 MW): During the
meeting taken by Secretary (Power) on 23.6.05 on the
proposal submitted to PIB for formation of joint venture
between NHPC and Govt. of West Bengal for execution of
Purulia Pumped Storage Scheme, Chairman, WBSEB was of
the view that joining of NHPC at this stage (when civil
and hydro-mechanical works have almost been completed
and electro-mechanical works were to start from August
2005) would not be of much advantage to the project except
by way of additional equity to the tune of about Rs. 300
crores. WBSEB was confident to arrange further equity for
completing the project. Considering the opinion of Govt. of
West Bengal that equity and managerial support of NHPC
was no longer needed for the project, Purulia Pumped
Storage Scheme (900 MW) was taken out from the NHPC
capacity addition plan.

(0) Bav II Project (37/20 MW): The project could not be started
because it being commercially unviable. The scheme was

37



38

(c)

(d)

revised twice to make it commercially viable. Maharashtra
State Electricity Development Company Ltd. (MSEDCL) vide
its letter dated 15.2.07 had intimated NHPC to treat the
PPA signed between NHPC and MSEDCL as cancelled as
the tariff for this project is high and hence the project is
commercially unviable.

Sewa-II Project (120 MW): At the time of finalisation of
X Plan, the project was slated to be commissioned by
February 2007 subject to CCEA approval by February 2003.
The DPR of the project was submitted by NHPC in June
2002, The CEA accorded the techno-economic appraisal in
October 2002. The pre-PIB meeting was held in December
2002. The environment clearance for the project was accorded
in March 2003 through NHPC had applied for it in
September 2002. After complying with the observations of
Pre-PIB, the project was posed to PIB in April, 2003. While
recommending Sewa-II Project, PIB made an observation that
provision under the head misc. contingency and
establishment cost were to be examined in Ministry of
Power. The matter was examined in the Ministry of Power
in consultation with CEA/CWC, which took some time.
Finally, CCEA clearance was obtained in September 2003.
The commissioning of the project as per CCEA approval
was scheduled as September, 2007. However, the project was
targeted for commissioning in March, 2007 with best efforts.
The pace of works suffered in Head Race Tunnel (HRT)
due to poor geological strata. Besides, the performance of
sub-contractor of M/s. Gammon India Ltd. (GIL), namely,
M/s. Satav was also found unsatisfactory. Ultimately, the
works were taken over by M/s. GIL in March 2006.
Thereafter, the progress of works has improved. The project
is now expected to be commissioned by December 2008.

Teesta Low Dam-III Project (132 MW): The project was to
be commissioned by March 2007 subject to the CCEA
approval by February 2003. The DPR was submitted by
NHPC in June, 2002. The CEA accorded techno-economic
appraisal in November 2002. The pre-PIB meeting was held
in January, 2003. After complying with the observations of
the pre-PIB, the project was posed to PIB in April 2003.
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) issued the
environment clearance in July 2003 for which application
was made by NHPC in October 2002. The environment/
forest clearance of the project took some time because of


(e)

the Net Present Value (NPV) issue. The State Government
was insisting for excessive NPV before giving forest
clearance. CCEA considered and cleared the project proposal
thereafter in October 2003. The commissioning of the project
as per CCEA approval was scheduled as March 2007. Due
to delay in formal forest clearance, the land could become
available in April 2004 only, which delayed the start of the
works, although the contract for the works was awarded
on 28.10.03, Further, the construction work of the project
suffered on account of slope failure in power house area
including sliding of National Highway road itself in
monsoon during 2006-07. Due to the reasons cited above,
the project could not be commissioned during Xth Plan.
However, the project is now expected to be commissioned
in September 2008.

Omkareshwar Project (520 MW): At the time of finalisation
of Xth Plan, the project was assumed to be commissioned
by March, 2007 subject to CCEA approval by January 2003.
The CEA accorded techno-economic clearance (TEC) in
favour of NHPC in July 2001. Ministry of Environment and
Forests issued environment clearance in October 1993.
Formation of joint venture was approved in March 2002.
The pre-PIB meeting was held in July 2002, PIB meeting
could only be held on 23.1,03 because of certain conditions
to be fulfilled by State Government, such as consent of State
Government for not demanding any free power, consent for
bearing cost towards irrigation etc. CCEA cleared the project
in May 2003. The commissioning of the project as per CCEA
approval was scheduled as February 2008. However, the
project was targeted for commissioning in March 2007 as
best effort project. Project authorities sought permissions
from State Government for filling the reservoir up to
EL 189 m corresponding to which rehabilitation works had
also been completed.

The State Government accorded the approval on 28.3.07 to
start filling of reservoir from 4.4.07. Narmada Bachao
Andolan, a NGO filed PIL on 30.3.07 in Madhya Pradesh
High court praying for stoppage of closure of sluice gates
and radial gates restraining to fill the reservoir on the
ground of rehabilitation and resettlement works. On the
same day the High Court ordered to maintain the status-
quo with respect to closure of gates till the matter is heard

39


40

(f)

on 9.4.07. Thereafter hearings were held on 9th, 17th April
and 19, 9th, 10th May 2007 and High Court passed the
interim order on 18.5.07 to maintain the status-quo and that
further hearings would be conducted in the first week of
July 2007. In the meantime, the project authorities and the
State Government filed Special Leave Petition on 1st June
2007 in the Supreme Court against the orders dated 18.5.07
of High Court. The matter was heard on 4th and 11th June
2007, thereby Supreme Court ordered the stay on High Court
order dated 18.5.07 with the request to High Court that
matter be heard on 19.6.07 for final orders. Subsequent to
Supreme Court orders on 11.6.07, the project authorities
started closure of sluice gates and raising the reservoir level.
The level of 189.0 m was achieved on 18.6.07 and project is
making all preparation for testing and commissioning. The
first unit of the project which was synchronised on 21st
July 2007, has been connected to the grid on continuous
generation mode from 15 August 2007. The Second unit of
the project was also synchronised on 10th August 2007. The
final disposal of PIL is pending in the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh and rehabilitation and resettlement works
for the areas above EL 189.0 is in progress. The project is
now expected to be commissioned in October 2007, which
would still be prior to the commissioning schedule approved
by CCEA.

Teesta Low Dam-IV Project (168 MW): At the time of
finalisation of Xth Plan, the project was assumed to be
comunissioned by March 2007 subject to the CCEA approval
by March 2003. The layout of the project had to be revised
to avoid Mahananda Wildlife Sanctuary existing at the earlier
location, which resulted in delay in finalisation of DPR with
revised capacity of 160 MW. NHPC submitted the DPR in
September 2003. The CEA accorded techno-economic
clearance in favour of NHPC in December 2003. The
pre-PIB meeting was held in May 2004. The EIA/EMP
reports were finalised in April 2004 and State Government
was requested to conduct public hearing by NHPC letter in
April 2004 itself. However, public hearing was held on 8.9.04
and its report was submitted by State Pollution Control
Board (SPCB) on 14.10.04 and MoEF was accorded on
31.3.05. As a result, the PIB meeting could not be held. The
PIB was then ultimately held in July 2005. CCEA approved
the project in September 2005 with commissioning by


September 2009. The project was dropped from capacity
addition in Xth Plan during mid-term review. The project is
now expected to be commissioned by September 2009.

(g) 1७९७७ V Project (510 MW): The project was accorded CCEA
approval in February 2000 and was scheduled to be
completed in February 2007 as per CCEA approval. The
execution of the project got delayed due to delay in land
acquisition by the State Govt. Poor rock and bad geological
conditions resulted in collapse on of HRT on 26.5.02 at HRT
Adit-I junction. The work remained suspended from 26.5.02
to 24.8.03. Rock falls at intake tunnels and desiliting
chambers on 1.7.02 (work remained suspended from 1.7.02
to 30.9.02) and left bank slope failure of dam on 1.11.03
(work remained suspended from 1.11.03 to 15.01.04) resulted
in loss of time on account of no/slow progress. During
July 2003, the highest ever flood level occurred in Teesta
river resulting in washing away of portion of coffer dam
and subsequently it delayed the activities of dam excavation.
Poor rock strata in HRT particularly in Face 8 (rockfall
occurred on 12.4.07), Pressure Shaft, Surge Shaft and LSG
etc. have also contributed to delays. The project is now
expected to be commissioned by January 2008.

Reasons for Financial Slippage of Targets:

The total Xth Plan allocation for NHPC was Rs. 32,226 crore
including Rs. 14,200 crore as Budgetary Support. The Plan outlay was
revised (during Mid-Term Appraisal) to Rs. 20,107 crore, which included
budgetary support of Rs. 10,645 crore. The actual utilization during
Xth plan has been Rs. 10,888 crore including budgetary support of
Rs. 4,982 crore. The major reasons for less utilization are given at
Annexure.

2. Reasons for taking more time for CCEA clearance in respect
of Parbati-III, Uri-If and Chamera-III projects are described below:

(i) Parbati-I1I (520 MW):

The DPR of the project was submitted by NHPC in 8.8.03. The
CEA accorded the techno-economic clearance to the project proposal
on 12.11.03. The pre-PIB meeting was held on 5.3.04. Pre-PIB
recommended the project subject to the condition that CEA would
work out the power demand & supply position with & without
Parbati-III project taking into account the likely addition upto 2009.

4


CEA furnished the report in this regard on 21.4.04. CEA was also
required to re-look into the provisions of Establishment, Building &
Communications, special T&P, Misc. head etc. Report in this regard
was submitted by CEA on 14.6.04. Besides, the environment clearance
of the project also got delayed. The proposal along with public hearing
{held earlier by Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board (HPSEB) on
27.8.98] was submitted by NHPC to MoEF on 12.3.04. MoEF directed
HPPCB to conduct a fresh public hearing, which was conducted on
22.1.05. Thereafter, the environmental clearance could be available only
on 16.4.05. After complying with the observations of pre-PIB and
obtaining the environment clearance, the project was posed before the
PIB. The PIB meeting was held on 15.7.05. After the conditions laid
down by the PIB was complied with, the project proposal was brought
before CCEA in its meeting held on 20.10.05. The sanction of the
project was issued on 9.11.05.

(ii) Uri-ll (480 MW):

The DPR of the project was submitted by NHPC to CEA in August
2003. The CEA accorded the techno-economic clearance to the project
on 11.02.04. ‘In principle’ approval of the Planning Commission, (which
was not in vogue at the time of preparation of Xth plan proposal),
could be obtained only on 6.4.04. Pre-PIB note was circulated on 2.06.04.
Appraisal note from the Planning Commission received on 29.7.04.
Thereafter, the pre-PIB meeting was held on 30.7.04, where conditions
like confirmation from GSI on design parameters (which was conveyed
to NHPC on 2.9.04), reduction in tariff etc. were laid down. The
environment clearance was accorded by MoEF 13.8.04. PIB note was
circulated on 30.11.04. Appraisal note from the Planning Commission
was issued on 29.12.04. The PIB meeting thereafter was held on 2.2.05.
One of the main observations made by the PIB was regarding the cost
of project land, which appeared to be excessive. The matter was taken
up with Govt. of J&K. Chief Secretary, GoJ&K vide his letter
dated 3.3.05 informed that the acquisition of land in the State is
governed by the State Land Acquisition Act and statutory rules framed
there under and that any effort to scale down the acquisition rates
arbitrarily may result in avoidable litigation.

After complying with conditions of PIB (held on 2.2.05), the
Proposal was posed again before the PIB on 9.5.05. CCEA approved
the proposal in its meeting held on 25.8.05. The sanction was issued
on 1.9.05,

(iii) Chamera-III (231 MW):

The DPR of the project was submitted by NHPC to CEA in 19.6.03.
The CEA accorded the techno-economic appraisal on 10.10.03.

42


‘In principle’ approval of the Planning Commission, (which was not
in vogue at the time of preparation of Xth plan proposal), could be
available on 01.03.04. Draft pre-PIB note was circulated on 21.4.04.
Comments on the draft pre-PIB note were issued by Planning
Commission on 26.5.04. Comments of Ministry of Finance were issued
on 1.6.04. The pre-PIB meeting was held on 5.7.04. The public hearing
by Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board (HPPCB) could be held
on 17.8.04 although, ELA and EMP reports were submitted to them on
28.10.03, The proposal for environment clearance was submitted to
MoEF on 16.9.04 and the environment clearance was available only on
10.3.05. Thereafter, the project was posed before PIB. The meeting of
PIB was held on 13.5.05. The project was cleared by the CCEA on
25.8,05 and the Government sanction for implementation of the project
was issued on 1.9.05.

3. In case of Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak Projects, Government
sanction was issued at a later date on account of the following:

The DPR of Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak projects were submitted to
CEA on 8.12.03 and 16.01.04 respectively. CEA did techno-economic
appraisal of these projects on 16.3.04 and 23.4.2004 respectively. The
issue of ‘in-principle’ approval was thereafter taken up with the
Planning Commission. However, the Commission initially objected to
the high cost and high tariff of the project and also keeping in view
the proposed Srinagar-Leh transmission line etc. The Commission after
received full justification on implementation of the project and keeping
in view its economic viability, accorded ‘in-principle’ approval on
31.3.05. Environment clearance for Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak HEP
Projects were available only on 30.5.05 and 17.11.05 respectively. These
two projects were considered together in the pre-PIB meeting held on
6.6.05 and the PIB meeting held on 8.6.05. After complying with the
observations of PIB viz. tie up of sale of power with bulk consumers
like Army and para-military forces, substituting high cost power with
hydel power, no free power to J&K, persuading J&K Govt. to provide
Govt. land free of cost or minimum cost, working out different tariff
scenarios with interest free as well as interest bearing subordinate debt,
the proposal was brought before CCEA in its meeting held on 2.6.06
where the proposal was approved subject to conditions that question
of interest on the subordinate debt would be cleared by the
Prime Minister’s Office. The Government sanction could therefore, be
issued only on 24.8.06 in case of Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak HEP
Projects after obtaining the approval from Prime Minister’s Office.

43


4, Feasibility Report of Siang Upper and Siang Lower projects got
delayed due to delay in receipt of hydrological data for the catchment
area falling in China and due to local resistance. Subsequently, Siang
intermediate site as an alternative to Siang Upper Project (11000 MW)
as single project, was to be investigated to maximize flood moderation
benefits where no S&I works could be carried out due to law and
order problem created by locals. In the meeting held on 4th and
5th July 2006 in Ministry of Power, it was agreed that Govt. of
Arunachal Pradesh shall carry out studies to determine optimum
utilization of hydro potential and submersion, revised lay out through
one or more professional agencies and prepare a pre-feasibility report
within six months. However, no development has taken place at site
in this regard.

Secondly, signing of agreement unilaterally by Govt. of Arunachal
Pradesh with an IPP, i.e., M/s. Jaiprakash Industries Limited for Siang
Lower project on 22.2.2006 has also resulted in delays as DPR of the
project for which field investigation work was completed could not be
complied.

5. Considering the experience of X plan—the main reason for
slippage being inclusion of the projects which were at initial stages of
development/clearances and were not fully prepared/ready for the
execution, only those projects have been included in the capacity
addition program of XI plan which have already been sanctioned by
Government of India. Even out of sanctioned projects, two projects
viz. Nimoo Bazgo (45 MW) and Chutak (44 MW) have been targeted
under “Best Effort” category due to location of these projects in hostile
climatic conditions of Laddakh region.

The procedure for sanction of hydro electric schemes was
streamlined in August 2005—pre-PIB and ‘in principle’ approval of
Planning Commission dispensed with time bound programme for PIB/
CCEA clearances.

In compliance of the decision of the 5th EEC on 10.2.2006, a
proposal along with draft of the order for constituting the committee
was sent on 4.4.06 to the Cabinet Secretariat to set up a committee
under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to review the present
procedures regarding environment and forest clearances including
clearances from National Board for Wild Life (NBWL). PMO vide their
ID Note dated 4.7.06, conveying Action Taken Report on the decisions
arrived at ECC meeting held from time to time indicated vide issue
No.V that meeting of Committee of Secretaries (CoS) had been fixed
for 20.6.06.

44


The Committee of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of
Cabinet Secretary, reviewed the existing procedure regarding
environment and forest clearance including clearances from National
Board for Wild Life (NBWL) in the meeting held on 20.6.2006 wherein
the following decision were taken:

(i)

i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Inter-departmental meeting between the project proponents
and the M/E&F should be held periodically to expedite the
processes.

Existing mechanisms for site clearance, environment
clearance, forest and wild life clearance should be monitored
and coordinated effectively to remove impediments to the
developmental projects.

Ministry of Environment & Forests should take up 15 to
20 major pending projects with the State Governments to
expedite the processes.

Ministry of Environment & Forests should issue guidelines
simplifying processes, prescribing time limits and putting
in place a mechanism to coordinate with State Governments
on the issues connected with environment clearance, forest
clearance and public hearing.

Ministry of Law would take up with the Supreme Court
the matter of referring each case of wild life clearance for
its approval and try to get the procedure simplified.

Multi-departmental Committee, under Secretary, M/E&F
with representation from Ministries of Power, Water
Resources, Mines, Coal and Law, may finalise Government's
stand before the Supreme Court on the recommendations
relating to computation of NPV.

Subsequent to the above decisions, the following actions have been

taken:
(a)

(b)

Regular meetings are being held between MoEF and MoP
to sort out the issues relating to environment and forest
clearances of power projects.

The Ministry of Environment & Forests have since issued
the revised Environment Impact Assessment Notification,
2006 revising the procedure for obtaining environment
clearance.

45


46

©

(d)

Ministry of Law has been requested by Ministry of Power
on 8.8.06 to take up with Supreme Court the matter of
referring each case of wild life clearance for its approval.
However, no reply has been received from Ministry of Law.
So far as the issue relating to wild life clearance of Subansiri
Lower HEP is concerned, the Ministry of Power has filed
an affidavit in the Hon’ble Supreme Court for modifying
its order dated 19.4.2004 (CWP No. 202 of 2005) while
conveying wild life clearance in respect of the project. The
Ministry of Environment & Forests has also filed a similar
affidavit supporting modification of the orders of Supreme
Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has referred the matter
for examining to a Central Empowered Committee.

The comments of Ministry of Power on the report
submitted by the Expert Committee constituted by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court relating to computation of NPV has
been forwarded to MoEF and Secretary, MoEF has been
requested to constitute an inter-Ministerial Committee
relating to computation of NPV.


ANNEXURE I

REASONS FOR LESS UTILIZATION OF FUNDS

S.No. Name of Project

t
A

Reasons

2

3

Dropped Schemes

Upper Krishna

Farakka
Cauvery Power Projects

Koel Karo

Purulia Pumped
Storage Project

Projects abandoned due to non-
availability of commercial viability.

These projects could not be taken up
due to non settlement of inter-State
issue between the Govts. of Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu for construction of the
Projects.

NHPC Board in the meeting held on
30,7.2004 had decided that steps should
be taken to close down the project due
to high tariff. Finally, CCEA sanction
for closure of the project has been
issued on 30.9.2005.

During the meeting taken by Secretary
(Power) on 23.6.05 on the proposal
submitted to PIB for formation of joint
venture between NHPC and Govt. of
West Bengal for execution of Purulia
Pumped Storage Scheme, Chairman,
West Bengal (WBSEB) was of the view
that joining of NHPC at this stage
(when civil and hydro-mechanical
works have almost been completed and
electro-mechanical works were to start
from August 2005) would not be of
much advantage to the project except
by way of additional equity to the tune
of about Rs. 300 crores. WBSEB was

47


B.

है न

Schemes not Started
in X Plan

Pakal Dul

confident to arrange further equity for
completing the project. Considering the
opinion of Govt. of West Bengal that
equity and managerial support of
NHPC was no longer needed for the
project, Purulia Pumped Storage
Scheme (900 MW) was taken out from
the NHPC capacity addition plan.

While proposing the draft mitigatory
measures for Kishtwar High Altitude
National Park (KHANP), Govt. of
J & K has proposed the following:

(a) 5% of the total cost of the project
should be earmarked for
development of National Park.

(b) 10% of the income of the project
should be given to State for
developmental works.

(c) The local educated youth of J&K
should be given preference in jobs
for employment and labourers
should be engaged from the
locality.

Since the above conditions had
implication on cost of the project and
its viability, NHPC took up the matter
with Govt. of J&K on 19.02.07 to review
the above conditions. While finalizing
the Plan by the State Government, the
above three conditions have not been
included in the final Management
Action Plan for mitigatory measures of
KHANP. The same has been forwarded
by the State Govt. to MOEF vide letter
dated 19.4.07 for consideration of
Standing Committee of NBWL.

48


Bursar

The EIA & EMP reports have been
finalised by CISMHE. Final EMI & EMP
reports submitted by CIMHE needs
certain rectification/additions which are
being attended to.

An expenditure of Rs. 58.82 er. has been
incurred till May, 2007.

In the meeting taken by the
Hon'ble Prime Minister on 8.11.2006 to
review the progress of Reconstruction
Plan for Jammu & Kashmir it was,
inter-alia, decided that the Ministry of
Power, in consultation with the
Planning Commission would ensure
follow-up action on the request of the
Government of Jammu & Kashmir for
transfer of the Pakal Dul Hydroelectric
Project (1000 MW) from the NHPC to
the State Sector, with the equity
component envisaged under the NHPC
proposal being provided as grant under
the State Plan. A meeting in this respect
was taken by Secretary (Power) with
the representatives from NHPC, CEA
and Govt. of J&K on 9.4.07. The issue
was deliberated in detail. A report is
being sent to the PMO separately in
this regard.

The commercial viability given on
28.9.2001 and stage-II estimates cleared
by CEA on 18.10.2001. DPR is under
preparation by NHPC. The proposal for
denotification/diversification of forest
land comprising a part of KHANP for
non-forestry purposes to construct
Bursar HEP was considered in the
meeting of the Standing Committee of
NBWL, held on September 14, 2006.
After discussion it was decided that

49


“a detailed study on impact of Bursar
HEP on wildlife and required mitigative
measures to be carried out by WII,
Dehradun and the proposal be
submitted for the consideration of the
Standing Committee.” WII vide letter
dt. 07.11.2006 intimated that as NHPC
has already engaged CISMHE,
University of Delhi for conducting the
EIA and EMP studies of Bursar HEP,
WII would not like to duplicate the
ongoing efforts and at the most WII can
help in developing scope of work for
EIA and EMP of Bursar HEP and also
subsequently review the EMP
incorporating conservation plan
Prepared by CISMHE. NHPC vide letter
dt.20.11.2006 has sought the consent of
MOEF for undertaking the requisite
study and getting the mitigatory
management plan for KHANP prepared
through CISMHE. MoEF have informed
NHPC on 5.12.2006 that all directions
specified by the Standing Committee of
NBWL in its meeting held on 14.9.2006
should be fulfilled. The matter is being
taken up with WII and CISMHE.

The EIA & EMP studies have been
awarded to CISMHE, University of
Delhi vide letter dated 14.7.2005

The task force on development of
Jammu & Kashmir constituted under
the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Ranga Rajan
have recommended the transfer of
Bursar Project to J&K Government for
development in State Sector. A meeting
in this respect was taken by Secretary
(Power) with the representatives from
NHPC, CEA and Govt. of J&K on

50


3. Subansiri Middle

4. Kishanganga

5. Bav-II

6. Siang Lower

9.4.07. The issue was deliberated in
detail. A report is being sent to the
PMO separately in this regard.

An expenditure of Rs. 35.61 crore has
been incurred till May, 2007.

At the time of approval of X Plan
outlay, projects were anticipated to be
sanctioned in 2003-04. But work could
not progress as envisaged due to non
availability of site clearance for Stage-
II activities from MoEF on the basis of
recommendation of IBWL in case of
Subansiri Lower Project that “there will
be no construction of dam upstream of
Subansiri river in future”. The same
condition has also been repeated by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order
dated 21.4.2004 while disposing the IA
966 filed against Subansiri Lower
Project.

The project proposal was reviewed from
Storage to ROR scheme and its
approval took some time on account of
various issues like financing of the
project, risk mitigation measures etc.
The project was posed before CCEA on
21.6.07.

Project was found unviable due to high
Tariff.

Feasibility Report got delayed due to
delay in receipt of Hydrological Data
from various agencies. Secondly, signing
of agreement unilaterally by Govt. of
Arunachal Pradesh with IPP, ie.,
M/s. Jaiprakash Industries Limited for
Siang Lower project on 22.2.2006 has
also resulted in delays as DPR of the
project for which field investigation
work was completed could not be
compiled.

51


Te

CG

1.

Siyom

Schemes sanctioned
later than envisaged

Subansiri Lower

DPR of the project was submitted to
CEA on 16.9.2003, CEA vide letter dated
12.01.04 intimated that for taking into
consideration the cost apportionment on
flood control aspect, it is essential to
get the clearance of Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC) of MoWR. This
aspect is to be cleared by MOWR. Both
TAC clearance and TEC of the project
is still awaited, thus delaying the
sanction schedule of the project.
Subsequently, Govt. of Arunachal
Pradesh signed MOA with an IPP, i.e.,
M/s. Reliance for execution of the
project on 22.2.2006 which resulted in
a statement and this issue is yet to be
resolved with GoAP.

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

* The submergence area of the
project involved 42 ha. of Tale
Wild Life Sanctuary which was
required to be de-notified with the
permission of Hon’ble Supreme
Court, which was obtained by
NHPC in May-02 subject to
clearance from IBWL. The IBWL
recommended clearance in its
meeting held on 6.5.03 and
clearance letter to this effect was
issued by MoEF on 27.5.03.
Environmental clearance could
only be available on 16.7.03 which
delayed the CCEA sanction.

52


a

Uri-II

* Issuance of formal forest clearance
by MOEF took almost one year
after Govt. Sanction on account of
settlement of NPV issue.

¢ Further, the progress of works on
the Subansiri Lower getting
affected due to resistance from
local people and non-signing of
MoU by the State Government.

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

¢ Pre-PIB meeting held on 30.7.04
after receipt of appraisal note from
the Planning Commission on
29.7.04. The draft PIB note was
circulated on 2.6.04.

* Compliance to the conditions by
pre-PIB i.e. confirmation from GSI
on design parameters (which was
conveyed to NHPC on 2.9.04),
reduction in tariff etc.

¢ Revising the cost before PIB on
account of high tariff with the
provision of grant for Govt. of
India.

* Obtaining in-principle clearance
from Planning Commission which
was not in vogue at the time of
preparation of the 10th Plan.

« PIB meeting was held on 2.2.05
after receipt of appraisal note from
Planning Commission on 29.12.04.

* Complying with the observations
of PIB about excessive cost of the

53


3.

4.

Chamera-IIT

Teesta Low Dam-IV

project land which was taken up
with the GoJK. Govt. of J&K
replied on 3.3.05 informing that
acquisition of the land in the State
governed by State Land
Acquisition Act and any effort to
scale down the acquisition rates
arbitrarily would result in
avoidable litigation.

* Posing the proposal again before
the PIB on 9.05.05 and the CCEA
approving the proposal pn
25.08.05.

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

¢ Obtaining in-principle clearance
from Planning Commission which
was not in vogue at the time of
preparation of the 10th Plan. The
clearance could only be available
on 1.3.04.

* Public hearing by Himachal
Pradesh Pollution Control Board
(HPPCB) could be held on 17.8.04
although EIA & EMP reports were
submitted to them on 28.10.03. The
environmental clearance could be
available only on 10.3.05, though
the proposal was submitted to
MoEF on 16.9.04.

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

* Obtaining in-principle clearance
from Planning Commission which
was not in vogue at the time of
preparation of the 10th Plan.

54


5:

Parbati-III

* Public hearing by West Bengal
Pollution Control Board (WBPCB)
could be held in September 2004
while EIA & EMP report were
submitted to them in April 2004.
Public hearing report was
submitted to SPCB on 14.10.04 and
environmental clearance could be
available only on 31,3.05.

* Signing of PPA with the Govt. of
West Bengal as advised by
Ministry of Finance after
circulation of PIB Memo.

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

* The CEA according techno-
economic clearance on 12.11.03 and
the pre-PIB meeting held on
5.03.04

* Pre-PIB recommending the project
with in conditions such as PPA
with beneficiaries for entire power,
revised cost with interest rate at
8% ete.

* Obtaining in-principle clearance
from Planning Commission which
was not in vogue at the time of
preparation of the 10th Plan.

* The proposal along with public
hearing (held earlier by Himachal
Pradesh State Electrticity Board)
(HPSEB) on 27.8.98 submitted to
MOEF on 12.3.04. MOEF directed
HPPCB to conduct a fresh public
hearing, which was conducted on
22.1.05. Environmental clearance
could be available only on 16.4.05.

55


6.

56

Nimoo Bazgo

Govt. Sanctions for the projects were
available at a later date than as
envisaged. More time was taken mainly
on account of resolving the followings:

In principle clearance from
Planning Commission was
obtained on 31.3.05. Planning
Commission took time to sort out
the issues of high tariff and the
development of Srinagar-Leh
transmission line.

The pre-PIB meeting was held on
6.6.05 and PIB meeting was held
on 8.6.05.

After complying with the
observations of PIB viz. tie up of
sale of power with bulk consumers
like Army and para-military forces,
substituting high cost power with
hydro power, no free power to
J&K, persuading J&K to provide
Govt. land free of cost or
minimum cost, working out
different tariff scenarios with
interest free as well as interest
bearing sub-ordinate debt. The
CCEA meeting was held on 2.6.06.

As desired by MOP, revised draft
CCEA note was submitted to MOP
on 26.10.05 during the meeting
taken by Principal Secretary to PM
on 31.3.06, it was decided that
updated draft CCEA note
incorporating replies to be
comments of MOP, MOF and
Planning Commission. Accordingly,
revised draft CCEA note was re-
submitted on 4.4.06.



7. Omkareshwar The pre-PIB was held in July 2002. PIB
meeting could only be held on 23.1.03
because of certain conditions to be
fulfilled by State Government, ‘such as
consent of State Government for not
demanding any free power, consent for
bearing cost towards irrigation etc.
CCEA cleared the project in May 2003.
The commissioning of the project as per
CCEA approval was scheduled as
February 2008.

8. Loktak D/s NHPC Board in the meeting held on
30.7.2004 has decided that steps should
be taken to close down the project due
to high tariff. Now the project is being
revived as JV with State Govt.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 1/19/2007-DO(NHPC) Dated
18.07.2007]

Recommendation (51, No. 11, Para No. 2.6.5)

The Committee note that 10th Plan outlay for NEEPCO was
Rs. 4224 crore out of which only Rs. 832.62 crore are likely to be
utilized. The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that even at
BE stage annually, funds were not allocated as per 10th Plan outlay.
At RE stage these were further reduced drastically every year and
actual utilization turned out to be much less. The Committee are
concerned to note that NEEPCO have totally failed to achieve the
prescribed financial and physical targets of 10th Plan. The Committee
feel that this is a clear case of poor planning. Where the Ministry of
Power, Government of India does not appear to have taken any
corrective steps. Considering the immense importance of NEEPCO and
the objective behind its establishment—exploiting the power potential
of North Eastern Region which would lead to development of North
Eastern Region, the under utilization of funds is a serious matter. The
Committee desire that the reasons for gross under-utilization of funds
by NEEPCO during the 10th Plan be analyzed in details and the
corrective steps taken accordingly. The Committee desire that 11th Plan
targets, both physical and financial, should be based on more realistic
assessment keeping in mind the various factors which have led to
gross under-utilisation of 10th Plan outlay.

57


The Committee also find that most of the reasons cited by the
Ministry of Power, for under-utilisation of funds are such which could
have been easily known if any serious examination of those projects
would have been done. But this is perhaps lacking even when review
meetings are held for the projects in hand. The Committee desire that
every review meeting should identify various reasons for delays and
also take immediate steps to remove those reasons. This should be a
standard practice for all the review meetings.

Reply of the Government

Reasons of Underutilisation of 10th Plan Outlay/Failure to achieve
the financial & physical achievements during the 10th Plan:—

The 10th Plan outlay in respect of NEEPCO was Rs. 4224.18 cr.
out of which Rs. 747.40 cr. has been utilized during the period
(2002-2007). The Project-wise analysis of underutilization of funds
during 10th Plan is elaborated hereunder.

1. Tuirial H.E. Project (60 MW), Mizoram: Out of total outlay
of Rs. 255 cr. during 10th plan, only an amount of
Rs. 119.14 cr. was utilized during 10th plan period. Adverse
law & order situation due to frequent bandhs, kidnapping
sand extortion threats were major concerns which hampered
timely implementation of the project. Further, all project
activities came to a total stop wef. 09-06-04 because of
agitation called by Tuirial Crop Compensation Claimants’
Association (TCCA) demanding payment against crop
compensation.

Other attributable reasons for underutilization of funds include:

(i) Delay in Review of Feasibility: One year delay had
occurred in the preparation and submission of the Review
of Feasibility by the review consultant primarily due to
adverse law and order situation and non-availability of
principal access roads.

(ii) Lack of Principal Access Road: Access road to the Project
was of very poor condition and NEEPCO had to
imperatively engage itself a substantial period of time in
developing these infrastructural works resulting in delayed
starting of the main works.

(iii), Change in Technical Parameters of the Project: Review
report submitted by the consultant, M/s Electro Watt
58


(iv)

Engineering Ltd., Zurich, Switzerland has brought about
major changes in the technical parameters of the project
which had resulted in time over run causing underutilization
of allocated funds.

Bad Geological Formation: Rock formation of unfavourable

dip and strike had necessitated taking of extra measures to
ensure overall safety of the structures. Despite precaution
being taken, slope failures repeatedly occurred in the
spillway excavation, power house excavation and tunnel
boring with casualty in some cases due to bad geological
formation.

Kopili HEP—2nd Stage (25 MW), Assam: The execution of
this hydro project of NEEPCO started in 9th Plan in the
year 1998, Although the 10th Plan outlay against this project
was fixed at Rs. 33.49 cr., the project got commissioned in
December, 2003 with expenditure of Rs. 34.10 cr. during
10th Plan with GBS=30.23 cr. & IEBR = 3.87 cr. during
10th plan.

Kameng H.E. Project (600 MW), Arunachal Pradesh: CCEA
clearance of this project was accorded on 02-12-2004 with
commissioning schedule in November, 2009 and project cost
at Rs. 2496.90 cr. However, the revised commissioning
schedule of this project is March, 2011.

On receipt of CCEA clearance on 02-12-2004, a period of 2 years
4 months only was available for implementation of the project during
10th FYP due to which out of 10th plan outlay of Rs. 1000 cr., an
amount of Rs. 529.26 cr. only could be expended. In addition, following
are the other unavoidable factors, which have also rendered slow
Progress at different major structures of KaHEP that led to the
underutilization of the allocated funds.

6)

(ii)

Lowering of Spillway Crest Level of Bichom Spillway: As
per the recommendations of the committee constituted by
MOP, GOI, the lowering of the crest level of Bichom Dam
by 20 m. was initiated on 17th August, 2006 and the decision
was finalized on 19th December, 2006. The revision of design
& engineering of the same is under progress.

Change in Layout of Tenga Dam Axis: The asymmetrical
flow was observed in the model study of original dam axis
of Tenga Dam and as a result, the alignment of dam axis

59


(iii)

(iv)

needed to be changed by carrying out further detail survey
at site and re-aligning of the dam axis. Accordingly, further
detail survey was carried out at site, model test conducted
with satisfactory result and the dam axis finalized and re-
aligned in December 2006 and the works have been started.

Change in HPT Layout: The original layout of wholly
underground High Pressure Tunnel (HPT), a portion of
which was vertically inclined, was reviewed due to bad
geological formation. After further detail survey at site, in
the month of January, 2007 it has been decided that the
HPT will run partly underground and partly over ground.
Thus, non-finalization of HPT layout has not only delayed
the HPT works but also has delayed works of other
connected structures like surge shaft, finalization of thickness
of the penstock etc. causing underutilization of allocated
fund.

Adverse Geological Surprises in HRT: The tunnel is passing
through adverse geology having series of shear zones, strata
of banded quartzite and phylletic/mica schist/tale schist etc.
Boring also encountered with heavy seepage, occasional
loose fall resulting in formation of deep cavity, encounter
of methane gas etc. Due to this adverse geology and limited
numbers of Adit due to topographical constraints, the
progress of HRT works are badly affected leading to
underutilization of fund.

Also it may be mentioned that frequent Bandhs called in the

adjacent state, Assam by different groups etc. often create problems in
transportation and mobilization of man, machine & materials leading
to the unavoidable hindrance in the progress.

In the face of the above impediments, progress at all the major

fronts of KaHEP have suffered a lot during the years of the 10th plan
period which in turn led to the less utilization of the allocated funds.

60

4.

Tuivai HEP (210 MW), Mizoram: The MoU between
NEEPCO & Govt. of Mizoram was signed in May’96 for
execution of this project. The DPR was already submitted
to CEA by Govt. of Mizoram in 1992 which was later
updated by NEEPCO at March’97 PL Considering soft loan
from JBIC, Japan and submitted to CEA for accordance of
TEC and TEC was accorded by CEA vide No. 2/NEEPCO/
10/98/1518-40 dated 19-02-99 at completion cost of


Rs. 1258.84 cr. However, due to imposition of economic
sanction by the Govt. of Japan in 1998, the loan from JBIC
did not materialize and further exploration for loan from
PFC and other Financial Institutions failed due to resultant
high tariff which led to the withdrawal of the process of
according TEC by CEA. Further attempts by NEEPCO by
updating cost estimate at April’'03 PL and getting approval
from CEA on the same with low interest rate of JBIC loan
@ 1.3% even did not bring viability to this project. Moreover,
Govt. of Mizoram did not respond to the request of
NEEPCO to waive 12% free power or to restructure the
free power disiribution scheduled over a period of 35 years
for making the project viable.

In a further development, Govt. of Mizoram vide letter no. B18013/
1/99/P&E dated 22-02-2005 had requested the corporation to hand
over the project back to the State Government for its development
under: State Sector.

In view of above, the matter of handing over of the project was
approved in 147th meeting of Board of Directors of NEEPCO. The
matter was further discussed by the Board of Directors of NEEPCO in
its 152nd meeting held in June 2006 and the Board accorded its
agreement to the decision arrived at in the meeting chaired by the
Secretary (Power) held on 12.01.2006 and agreed to the handing over
of the project to the Govt. of Mizoram. As decided, the Govt. of
Mizoram has been requested by the Project Authority of NEEPCO to
depute a team for finalizing the modalities and make arrangement for
receiving back the project from NEEPCO. Till 31-03-07, NEEPCO has
made expenditure of Rs. 17.51 er. from the GBS of Rs. 20 cr. received
against this project during IXth Plan. Considering committed liability
of Rs. 5.32 cr. payable to the Govt. of Mizoram, the total expenditure
against this project so far stands at Rs. 22.83 cr. A further expenditure
of Rs. 24.30 Lakhs in addition to above amount is to be incurred by
NEEPCO as balance payment to Survey of India for Topographical
Survey and establishing spirit level heights at the Project Site, subject
to approval of the Board of Directors of NEEPCO. There was no GBS
during Xth Plan for this project.

5. Tripura Gas Based Power Project (280 MW), Tripura: MOP,
vide letter No.7/31/2000-H.I. dated 24-11-05 has informed
their decision to abandon this project in view of foundation
stone laid by the Hon’ble Prime Minister for 750 MW
combined cycle gas based power project at Tripura and no

61


further expenditure to be incurred on this project. As such,
only a sum of Rs. 33.20 cr. out of the 10th plan outlay of
Rs. 1695.49 cr. could be expended by NEEPCO for
infrastructural developments of this project.

6. Tipaimukh HEP (1500 MW), Manipur: The 10th Plan outlay
against this project was Rs. 250 cr. However, since the CCEA
clearance is not accorded so far, no major work could be
taken up. Total fund released by the GOI till end of 10th
plan (up to 31-03-07) is Rs. 4.08 cr. and has already been
expended.

7. Lower Kopili HEP (150 MW), Assam: Due to the non-
signing of MOU between NEEPCO and Govt. of Assam,
the project could not make headway leading to non-
utilisation of plan outlay of Rs. 50 cr., earmarked for
10th plan. No fund has been released during 10th plan
period.

8. Pare H.E. Project (110 MW), Arunachal Pradesh: 10th plan
outlay against this project was Rs. 30 cr. Since the CCEA
clearance of this project is not accorded so far, only an
amount of Rs. 6.84 cr. has been released against this project
during 10th FYP, which has already been expended.

9. Ranganadi HEP—Stage-II (130 MW), Arunachal Pradesh:
The 10th plan outlay against this project was. Rs 100 cr.
However, since the CCEA clearance has not been accorded
so far, only an amount of Rs. 8.35 cr. was released against
this project during 10th FYP, which has already been
expended.

10. S & I Schemes: The 10th Plan outlay against 5 & I Schemes
was Rs. 20 cr. During the 10th FYP period, all the Sé&I
works were going on smoothly and NEEPCO had submitted
DPR of 5 ( five) hydro projects to CEA for TEC during the
period (2002-2007) apart from making ready few more DPRs
to submit shortly. However, there was an instruction to carry
out the Sé&I schemes with only the Internal Resources by
the Ministry of Power in the later part of the 10th plan vide
MOP’s letter No. 7/41/2003-H.I. dated 13-04-06. In the
backdrop of these factors, during the 10th plan period, an
amount of Rs. 12.43 cr. out of the plan outlay of Rs. 20 cr.
was incurred by NEEPCO comprising of GBS = 2.03 cr. &
TEBR = 10.40 cr.

The abstract of the 10th Five Year Plan projects of NEEPCO
showing the Plan Outlay vis-a-vis the actual expenditure indicating the
respective GBS & IEBR components is given in Annexure-I.

62


The 1ith Plan proposals of NEEPCO:—

For 11th Five Year Plan NEEPCO has Proposed an outlay of
Rs. 18594.46 cr. including NBS=5726.50 cr., MNES Grant =10.13 er. and
TEBR= 12857.83 cr. against 19 nos. of project including S&I Schemes.
The detailed phasing out of the expenditures against the said projects
during the years of the 11th Plan (2007-2012) has been shown in
Annexure-II.

However, it is to mention here that timely execution of 11th plan
proposals and utilisation of funds thereof in respect of the proposals,
mentioned in enclosed Annexure-II depend on timely signing of MOA/
MOU with the respective State Governments, timely accordance of all
statutory clearances viz. Environmental Clearance, TEC, CCEA clearance,
Coal/Gas Linkage (for thermal projects) etc.

Corrective steps taken for accelerated progress in the on-going
projects in order to avoid underutilization of funds:—

Several measures are taken/being taken up by the Corporation to
commission the projects as per schedule as enumerated below:

* Effective planning at different stages and at different levels.
* Review of progress both at project and corporate office level.

* Monitoring and analysis of rate of progress of all important
work fronts, at all levels and review of the same by higher
officials.

* Deployment of additional machineries to cope up with
prevailing site condition as and when required.

* By engaging consultant and technical experts in different
project works.

* The MOP, GOI also reviews the progress of the works
periodically through various review meetings like Quarterly
Progress Review Meeting, Video Conferencing etc.

* Of late the Ministry of Power and Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation of GOI have introduced online
monitoring systems viz. (1) Hydropower net & (2) On-line
Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) for monitoring
progress of the various projects under execution by various
agencies. NEEPCO is regularly updating latest status of
progress in these webs.

63


However, despite adoption of the above steps for accelerated

progress at different projects, the following inherent constraints still
remain as retarding factors of progress which are beyond the control
of the corporation.

64

* Remoteness of almost all the ongoing / S&I projects coupled

with extremely inconvenient geography in almost all the
project locations.

Frequent road blockades especially during the monsoon due
to landslides, falling of trees etc. in the hilly areas causing
interruptions in the transportation of manpower, machineries
& constructions materials to the project sites.

Frequent Bandhs, Strikes etc. particularly in the state of
Assam amongst others, the same being the threshold state
to almost all the project sites of NEEPCO including the
ever growing insurgency problems in the entire NE region
cause hindrances in the progress as a whole by interrupting
in the timely transportation of manpower, machineries and
construction materials.

[Ministry’s U.O No. No.3/2/2007-H-I Dated 13.07.07]


ANNEXURE I

ABSTRACT OF 10TH FYP PROJECTS AND EXPENDITURE
THEREOF IN RESPECT OF NEEPCO

(Rupees in crore)

Sl.No. Name of project/ 10th Plan Actual Expenditure Remarks
scheme Outlay during 10th Plan
GBS IEBR Total
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1. Tuirial HE. Project 255.00 00 119.14 119.14 Works held up since
(60MW), Mizoram 09-06-04
2. Kopili HEP-2nd Stage 3349 3023 387 34.10 + Commissioned in
(25 MW), Assam December, 2003

3. Kameng HE Project 1000.00 52926 000 529.26 Works Under Progress
(600 MW), Arunachal
Pradesh

4. Tuivai HEP 790.20 0.00 0.00 0008 Board of Directors in
(210 MW), Mizoram its 152nd Board Meeting
held in June’ 06 agreed to
the handing over of this
Project to the Govt. of
Mizoram. However, there is
no GBS during 10th Plan
period against the project
5. Tripura Gas Based 16549. 000 3.2 320. MOP ide letter n0.7/31/
Power Project 2000-ELL dated 24-11-05 has
(280 MW), Tripura informed their decision to
abandon the project in view
of foundation stone laid by
the Hon’ble Prime Minister
for 750 MW combined cyde
gas based power project at
Tripura and no further
expenditure to be incurred
on this projet.



2 3 4 5 6 7
Tipaimukh HEP 250.00 408 0.00 408. CCEA clearance not yet
(1500 MW), Manipur accorded.
Lower Kopili HEP 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Due to non-signing of
(150 MW), Assam MoU with the Govt. of

66

Assam, the activities
including Survey &
Investigation works,
undertaken by NEEPCO
had to be stopped


Recommendation (SI, No. 12, Para No. 2.7.5)

The committee are concerned to note that in Satluj Jal Vidyut
Nigam Limited out of the sanctioned strength of 2069, only 1718
positions have been filled, that is, almost 315 posts at various levels,
ie. the executive, supervisor and workmen are lying vacant. The
existence of so many vacancies is a matter of concern as in the absence
of proper manpower the work stands to suffer. Moreover, existence of
50 many vacancies in the background of rising unemployment in the
country does not present a good scenario. The committee desire that
all the vacancies on SJVN be filled up within six months and the
committee be apprised of the same.

The committee is unhappy to note the gross under-utilization of
budgetary allocation by SJVNL year after year. The reasons cited are
not such which could not be visualized in advance. The committee
desire that the Ministry should take immediate steps to make
immediate steps to make review meetings meaningful to ensure that
the funds are utilized fully.

Reply of the Government

With reference to the remarks of the committee regarding shortfall
of 315 posts on various levels, i.e, Executive, Supervisor and Workmen, ~
the following clarification are submitted:—

1. The 2069 posts are sanctioned for the following projects as
detailed given below:—

Table ‘A’

Level Himachal Projects Uttranchal Projects Total
CC NJHEP Bal. RHEP LHEP KHEP LO- Devsari Jakhol DM
Works D/Dum HEP HEP HEP

of NJHEP

Executive 36 19 8a a औऑ a no 87
Supervisor nr 51 S 2 & | ६ 0 1 0 0. 189
Workmen 202 418 15 110 130 130 2 2 B nN 1053

Total 52 62 8 26 24 28 5 80 24... 2. 206

67


Ore 0७ 6906 ४ 9 10 छा CS & धर छू CEC 6 1 66 ०99 89 # ५७ URS [धणु,
1 09७ esol ५ ६ध कक्ष A & Ol क#॒ ०8 Ol दा छा था € व TD fe OM शा ८ WT WW ण्ग्पजव
S Pl 6 0 I I 9 9 TeHaAasS & छ ८ 1 6 SF 9#% 1८ & ८ sosiaradng
कट 4५ ८&8 06७ | ६४ शावा 9भ & | #ा छा भ्र रू ६ SOARTOSKY
aoumpeg —vowsoduy —oqoweg ‘vomsog woRsog पथ wonisog vomsog womsog
Te a ण॒ ०००७ य्ण्यवा मैफास ४०४०७ अ्यष्1 _थ ण्ण्फर्छुम्ण्यष ण ४०फणरुम्ण्यदय भ॒ ००फ्ण्क ग्ण्णणा जग ण्प्पर्वग्ण्यण न ण्पफण्थ
aD ‘GH an Dae ‘SHIN »D =D

1०७ PURE,

SIDNVOVA  NOLLISOd-NI ‘NOLLDNYS SSIMLOa[Oud

4, FIV


2, The overall sanction, in-position and vacancy status excluding
BTRT and KHEP is given below in Table ‘C’ for perusal. From the
below given Table, it may please be seen that the overall vacancy is
77 and except for the Executive category in other categories there are
surplus manpower.

TABLE ‘C’

OVERALL SANCTION, IN-POSITION & VACANCY STATUS
(EXCLUDING BTRT & KHEP)

(As on 31.05.2007)

Cadre Sanction In-Position Vacancy
SJ HP Total
Executive 719 470 94 564 155
Supervisor 168 63 131 194 -26
Workmen 910 397 565 962 -52
Total 1797 930 790 1720 77

३. The BTRT strength of 51 is temporary sanction and has to be
abolished after September, 2007. The 39 personnel deployed in BTRT
will be re-deployed in other projects.

4. LHEP and KHEP projects were cleared by Govt. of Himachal
Pradesh for doing the DPR. Hence, without signing of the
Implementation Agreement, for the above projects recruitment can not
be made. Accordingly, the vacancies totaling to 447 have not been
filled with permanent employment.

5. As Govt. of Himachal Pradesh has given green signal recently
for allotting LHEP to SJVN, the posts have been taken into account
for the purpose of determining vacancies which are proposed to be
filled through recruitment for which Board Agenda is being put up
for approval for filling 128 vacancies.

6. With regard KHEP, for which decision has to be taken by GOHP
for allotting to SJVN, is having 65 personnel to carry out the
preliminary investigation, survey, compilation of Hydrological data for
preparation of DPR.

69


7. On simple analysis, it may be seen that after taking out the
sanctioned manpower of 223 of KHEP, the total vacancies comes to
1846 which will be further reduced by 51 Nos. engaged in BTRT after
September, 2007, hence, the vacancies will further be reduced to 1795.

8. From the Table ‘B’, it may please’be seen that there is shortfall
in the category of Executive and Workmen whereas there are surplus
manpower in Supervisory category.

9. Furthermore, the Uttrakhand Projects are at the stage of DPR,
hence, the manpower requirement for various ongoing projects have
to be made on phased manner as per the stages of the projects and
requirement projected by the respective projects.

Accordingly, after detailed analysis of the requirement, it is
proposed to fill up 128 vacancies in the category of Executives-116,
Supervisory-07 and Workmen-05 as per enclosed statement and all out
efforts will be made to fill up the posts within six months.

SJVN is presently in a state when all the projects in hand are in
nascent stage. Only Rampur Hydel Project (412 MW) has landed into
initial phase of construction while Luhri and Khab HEPs are pending
signing of Implementation Agreements. Projects in Uttrakhand namely,
Devsari HEP (300 MW), Naitwar Mori HEP (34.5 MW) and Jakhol
Sankari HEP (36 MW) are under investigation and facing various
clearances. Devsari Projects being a storage Dam project and run into
problem of submergence inviting local hindrances and has been forced
to undergo a review which is till in process of clearance from Govt.
of Uttarakhand. It has been generally observed that the expenditure in
the project during the initial stages are much less compared to when
the project construction activities are at full swing.

However, the observation of the Committee on energy regarding
underutilization of budget allocation has been viewed seriously and
possible measures adopted for exercising prudence in the formulation
of the Budget for the next year using realism rather than provisional
allocation. A strict regime of monitoring the budget utilization during
rest of the current financial year through the Monthly Project Progress
Review has also been initiated which is being reviewed by the
functional Directors in charge of the expenditure centers.

[Ministry’s U.O No. No. 5/3/2007-H-II Dated 13.08.2007]
70


Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.10.17)

The Committee further note that APDRP is Proposed to be
continued during 11th Plan also with revised terms and conditions to
make it more result oriented. The Committee desire that the scheme
should be finalized at the earliest in consultation with the State
Governments. The Committee, however, recommend that the new
scheme should not adversely affect the State Governments in regard
to the liabilities which they might have committed under the pre-
revised APDRP.

Reply of the Government

The work on restructuring of Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (APDRP) for implementation during the 11th Plan
is already going on. The Hon’ble Prime Minister has recently discussed
the matter with the Chief Ministers’ of all the States in a conference
called to discuss the various issues plaguing the power sector.

The focus of the revised programme shall be on actual,
demonstrable performance in terms of loss reduction. This will enable
objective evaluation of the performance of utilities before and after
implementation of the programme, and will enforce internal
accountability.

The endeavour of the Government is to encourage and motivate
the States to commit themselves to achieve loss reduction targets and
to undertake other reforms/actions so that the ultimate benefit of the
programme could reach the end users.

Provisions for meeting the commitments of pre-revised APDRP
has been kept in the revised APDRP for 11th Plan.

Annexure to Para 19
Reducing cost of generation of power
Past and Current activities:

The cost of generation of power depends primarily on the fuel
related costs. Reducing cost of power generation must, therefore, focus
on reducing costs associated with fuel. The cost of fuel input in a
power station is dependent on the unit heat rate, the station heat rate
(which considers the coal yard losses in a coal fired unit), the auxiliary
power and the specific secondary oil consumption (for coal fired units
only).

71


Coal Combustion:

Currently coal based power generation capacity in India is about
69366 MW and represents 54% of total installed capacity. There is
good scope for improvement right from coal pit head to generation of
power. CPRI has taken up several studies/assignments in this
endeavour. Some of them are:

Techno-economic feasibility study of blended coal firing at
210 MW unit, (RSTPS, KPCL Raichur)

Design and development of instrumented drop tube furnace
for combustion characterization (CFRI, Dhanbad)

Abrasion index evaluation (BHEL and AEC)
Comprehensive index survey of TPS (CPCB — ongoing)

Slagging and fouling studies and other coal combustion
studies like long flame characteristics (MSEB, MPEB)

Hydrogen embrittlement of water wall tubes, corrosion of
heat exchanger tubes, short-term over heating of super heater
tubes.

Wear Resistant materials in TPS

Any improvement that can be brought about in the coal grinding
componets in a pulverized coal power plant will reduce cost of
pulverizing coal and replacement cost and also reduce outages. Some
of the important works carried out in this area are:

72

Establishment of wear index of carbon steels, SG irons,
chromium irons, Nihards, Sintered alumina and cast
ceramics, HDPE and Teflon polymers, ceramic and metal
coatings used in pulverizes, coal chutes and bunkers, fuel
pipes, bends and elbows orifice and burner nozzles, pressure
parts, slurry media including wear life estimation modeling
studies.

Development and comprehensive wear and erosion
characterization of high chromium alloyed irons, transition
metal hard carbide deposits, duplex steels, and austempered
ductile irons.

Assessment of boiler steels and coatings for fluidized
combustor applications.


Fly ash utilization

According to one estimate 33 million tonnes of fly ash come out
of thermal power plants fuelled on coal. In spite of the availability of
many of the technologies for fly ash utilization , the implementation
of utilization measures needs to be increased. Institute has undertaken
up many many projects in this area and major ones are given below:

Comprehensive characterization of fly ash.

Fly ash utilization and demonstration centre (FAUDC),
Raichur Thermal Power Station (1992-2005).

Establishing correlation between particle size and blaine
fineness ‘of fly ash generated at NIPC Power Plants.

Development of value added products from fly ash.

Establishment of Centre for Ash Utilization Technologies &
Environment Conservation (CASHUTEC) at Raichur Thermal
Power Station under Indo-Norwegian Environment
Programme - Demonstration of fly ash building products
manufacture on commercial scale.

Characterization and Beneficiation of fly ash cenospheres
generated at NTPC, Ramagundam.

Establishment of Centre for Industrial Solid Waste Utilization
(CISWU) for development of high value products such as
polymer composites, ceramic composites, coatings etc., using
fly ash, fly ash derivatives, and other industrial solid wastes
under the ongoing Capital Project.

Showcasing of novel construction practices using fly ash
building products.

Remaining Life Assessment

More than 30 % of the power plants in the country are older than
20 years and hence study with the perspective from RLA, LE & R&M
are to be carried out. Some of the studies done in CPRI is summarized

below:

RLA in over seventy units since 1998 (in-situ steam side
oxide scale measurement approach)

Weld restoration of LP turbine at OEM
73


Energy audit

Energy audit undertaken on thermal and electrical systems in a
wide range of coal, hydro, nuclear and gas based power stations have
tried to focus on the heat rate and determination of the efficiencies of
equipments and suggestions for improving the efficiency. The energy
audits have also addressed the conservation of auxiliary power
consumption and secondary ‘oil consumption. CPRI had conducted
instrumented and diagnostic energy audits in nearly 75 thermal power
plants and some of the salient audits are given as follows:

* Sponsored by Ministry of Power, Govt. of India, New Delhi
- 20 units. The energy audits have identified potential for
energy savings to the tune of 1-2 t/h of coal, 100-500 kl/
year of fuel oil and 100-800 MWh/year of electric power
(auxiliary power).

* Performance enhancement in thermal power plants through
tuning of equipment during capital/annual overhaul for
7 thermal power plants sponsored by Ministry of Power,
Govt. of India, New Delhi. In this scheme, we had
conducted energy audit/performance test before overhaul,
suggested simple energy conservation measures, participated
in overhaul for implementing the energy conservation
measures and conducted performance test after the overhaul
to quantify the energy saving. Thereby we have
demonstrated energy saving to the tune of 3,7-8.1 t/h of
coal, 300-800 kl/year of fuel oil and 270-1450 MWh/month
of electric power (auxiliary power).

¢ For National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and
Electricity board owned thermal power plants for
improvement in the performance of boilers, turbine,
generators, auxiliary power systems, coal handling plants,
ash handling plant, water circulating system, compressed
air systems, etc.

¢ For the purpose of renovation, modernisation and uprating
of TPS in nearly 10 plants where the focus is on regaining
of lost capacity, restoring of efficiency to design values or
better and meeting new environmental norms.

* Special consultancy is provided in the following areas:
* Energy audits in industries and establishments

* Energy audits in thermal power stations
74


* Performance enhancement studies in power stations
* Studies in refineries

* Studies on retrofitting of turbines with new 3-d blades-
dispute resolution

Future plans:

CPRI plans to update the energy audit facilities with the aim of adding
capabilities in terms of:

* Higher range of operating parameters to cover newer
areas thereby generating a data bank of information on
energy efficiency of different classes of equipment.

Higher accuracy of equipment as required by new
standards for energy efficiency thereby obtaining data
on energy efficiency to higher limits of accuracy.

Automation and high speed transfer of data collected
during energy efficiency measurements and thereby
higher quality of test data collection & computation of
energy indices

* Use of new non-interactive, non-reactive instrumentation
to obtain more accurate energy indices.

* Research & development in the area of optimization of
fuel and equipment for specific site conditions.

Some critical areas which call for strengthening of the technology
data base, energy efficiency, bench marking and energy audit are
identified as follows:

* Cooling towers in thermal power stations

+ Milling systems in thermal power stations

* Lighting systems

¢ ESPs in thermal power stations

* Pumps , fans and compressors in thermal power stations

* Energy efficiency problems related to ultra super critical
power plants

* Energy efficiency problems related to gas based power
stations

75


¢ Energy efficiency problems related to Hydro power
plants

The Institute plans to carry out studies in the following areas
apart from the Energy Audit:

* Interactive R & D and Demonstration programmes in the
materials engineering related to energy sector (interaction
with CSIR Labs., NTPC, PGCIL, BHEL, IITs and IISc.)

* Clean Development Mechanisms (CDM) (Fuel blending,
plant efficiency and environmental programmes, materials
conservation, advanced coal combustion).

¢ Decentralized Generation including solar sterling engine and
micro-turbines.

* Sensors and Transducers for Energy Efficiency.
¢ IGCC and fuel cells.
Reduction of Transmission & Distribution losses

Past and Current activities:

The Ministry of Power has appointed CPRI as Advisor cum
Consultant (AcC) on 31st Aug, 2001 for the purpose of capacity
building exercise in the State Electricity Boards/ Power Utilities of
Karnataka, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh for upgradation of Distribution
network in their circles.

The CPRI played major active role as AcC in the following
activities:
* Training Manpower

* To collect relevant data from SEB officials related to 11 KV
feeder in the identified Circles

* Feeder-wise Analysis of data using computer tools
* Supervision of implementation

* Submission of periodical evaluation report

* MIS Development

* Development of GIS Mapping

76


Since May 2005, the activities of CPRI as AcC has been extended
to the entire States of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala apart
from three circles in each State as mentioned above.

* With the implementation of APDRP works in the respective
circles, the Transmission and Distribution losses and AT &C
losses reduced for the past four years in the nation-wide
except few States,

° The negative growth is completely reduced which enables
all the utilities stop further erosion in the commercial
viability,

APDRP team conducted pilot studies on segregation of Technical
and commercial losses with the support of utility engineers and the
same presented in the Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) meetings
chaired by Chairman and Managing Director of KPTCL .This pilot
study reports helps to give first hand information for the policy and
decision makers and over view about the technical and commercial
loss.

Feeder-wise analysis carried out by APDRP team with the help of
hardware and software facilities. The periodical evaluation reports
submitted in the different forums.

Under APDRP programme, streamlined the data base at Section,
Division and circle level so that the data getting from utilities from
different sources are uniform. With the accuracy of data, the analysis
and evaluation of the studies will be more accurate.

Major Contributions by CPRI
1. Assisting SEBs in Detailed Project Report (DPR) preparation
& Approval
Finalising specifications for equipment

3. Quality assurance of energy meters, distribution
transformers, circuit breakers

4, Identification of software packages for distribution system
analysis & upgradation

5. Quality assurance of works.

6. Evaluation of performance improvement and Energy Audit
study on rural feeders and comprehensive report
preparation.

of


The one of the main task under APDRP is preparation of Detailed

Project Reports (DPRs). Each activity in the DPR directly or indirectly
contributes to T&D loss reduction. The details of activities and
Contribution for reducing T&D losses is given below:

SI.No.

1

Suggested Activity

Replacement of all
consumer meters with
the static meters

Computerisation of
Collection/billing offices

Proposed Downloadable
feeder Metering/
Distribution Transformer
Metering

Proposed HVDS system

Proposed New Distribution
Transformer Installation/
DTR up- gradation &
11KV line Construction

Consumer Indexing

Contribution to T&D loss reduction

Consumption Energy will be
improved /Metering Efficiency will
be improved which ultimately
leads to Reduction of T&D losses.

Improves billing efficiency,
Human error can be eliminated,
Delays can be reduced which
ultimately Leads to less T&D loss.

The energy Accounting/ Audit
system introduced in the utilities
by installing downloadable feeder
Metering/Distribution Transformer
Metering which creates awareness
to all the utility engineers and it is
made routine activity in stead of
one time activity. Energy
accounting and audit system helps
to intervene the Technical and
commercial loss in the system.

The HVDS eliminates the theft
specially in rural areas and
agriculture consumers. It reduces
the T&D losses.

Over loading of the system
reduced which ultimately leads to
reduction in the technical loss.

Consumers interlinking to DTR
level/pole level in which total
consumers connected and their
consumption and location of the
consumers can be identified. Due
to consumer indexing, the LT losses
can be measured accurately.

78


Other activities:

Future

Technical loss estimation in 66kV, 132kV, 220kV,400kV
systems for Maharashtra State Utilities & MERC and APERC

Material characterization of energy meter components for
M/s. KPTCL, BESCOM, APEPDCL and MESCOM.

Evaluation of Resistance to corrosion and UV radiation of
energy meters.

Corrosion resistance evaluation of single-phase motor body.

Evaluation of UV resistance and weatherability of cable
sheath materials (PVC, FRLS, etc.,)

Assessment of corrosion of 33 kV tie bracket angles.

Failure analysis of AAA panther conductors stored in Power
Grid stores in northeastern region. (two case studies).

Failure analysis of ACSR conductors (NTPC, Farakka)
Studies on Porcelain Insulators for RDSO Lucknow and
PGCIL, Hissar

Product development and benchmarking programs in erosion
resistant media used in circuit breaker components for
M/s. CUMI Hosur.

plans:

Action plan road map for reduction of T&D losses/AT&C
losses to below 10% under APDRP programme.

Routine feeder wise studies in the APDRP states to identify
the areas of high losses to take up appropriate technical
and commercial interventions to reduce AT&C losses.

With the exposure to APDRP programmes, Our APDRP team
can play vital role at national level for interacting with
utilities, Government bodies in reforming the power sector
to make it self sufficient, technically & commercially viable
centers of excellence.

Our APDRP team can take up more monitoring activities in
the Power Distribution network.

79


Exploring more Consultancy opportunities like APDRP/RGGVY
programmes,

[Ministry of Power’s FNo. 5/1/2007-APDRP Dated July 4, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 19, Para No, 2.11.9)

The Committee appreciate the work done by CPRI in the field of
energy conservation. The Committee recommend that CPRI should
undertake some research activity with the objective of reducing the
cost of generation of power. The Committee feel if the cost of generation
could be reduced it will ultimately benefit the consumers. The
Committee further desire that some devices should also be developed
by CPRI to reduce transmission and distribution losses—as these losses
constitute a major chunk of the losses in the power sector and have
a direct bearing on the financial health of the state utilities and, as
such, viability of generation of power.

Reply of the Government

The activities undertaken by CPRI & future action plan with regard
to reducing cost of generation of power and transmission & distribution
losses are enclosed at Annexure-I.

[Ministry's U.O No. 41/2/2007-T&R Dated 28.06.2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 20, Para No. 2.11.10)

The Committee observe that CPRI was financially constrained
during the 10th plan and hence could neither undertake new research
activities nor invest in improvement of the infrastructure. The allocation
under the 10th plan was only Rs.63.14 crores which according to CPRI
was insufficient to meet its demands. The Committee are of the
considered view that research & development activities in the power
sector should not suffer due to resource constraints. Hence the
Committee recommend that 11th Plan outlay of CPRI be substantially
increased so as to enable CPRI to not only carry out its research
activities but also to establish itself as an internationally competitive
research institute of excellence.

Reply of the Government
As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee on Energy
that the 11th Plan outlay for CPRI be substantially increased, the outlay
of CPRI for the 11th Plan has been proposed at Rs.761 crores.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 41/2/2007-T&R Dated 28.06.2007]
80


CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE

DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

81


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (SI.No. 2, Para 2.2.29)

The Committee are concerned to note that peak shortages have
increased from 11.8% in 2001-02 to 13.9% in 2006-07. The Committee
feel that apart from capacity addition and generation of more power,
there is a need to consider other solutions also like having different
time zones for the country and by staggering the office timings and
school timings by about 1-2 hours so that peak hour/rush hour are
also staggered. The Committee desire that these suggestions should be
considered at the appropriate level and the Committee may be informed
of the action taken in the matter.

Reply of the Government

Though there exists a time difference between Assam-Arunanchal
and Kuch-Saurashtra of about 1-1/2 to 2 hours observing a single IST
schedule for the whole country may not appear to be reasonable,
however, there is a great advantage in adopting a single time reference
throughout the country. For one thing, there is no requirement of
adjustment of watches while passing from one State to other State etc.
It also facilitates the communication between two places especially
when the literacy level in the country is about 65% as per 2001 census.

The peak energy demand is observed during winter from
06.00 hrs to 10.00 hrs in the morning and 17.00 hrs to 21.00 hrs in the
evening. During summer, it is from 5.00 hrs to 09.00 hrs in the morning
and 18.00 hrs to 22.00 hrs in the evening. The shifting office timing
and staggering of commercial and industrial load beyond peak hours
alone would facilitate the reduction in peak load demand. Shifting of
working schedule within peak load hours would entail marginal benefit
to the power sector.

Instead of adopting different Time zones in India, people in various
parts of the country should change their life style by adjusting their
timings of their own regions. This is an easier way to address the
problem rather than to have different time zones in different parts of
India.

82


The issue of shifting time zones may affect not only power sector
but also other departments like Railways, Transport & Aviation, IMD
and Communication etc.

Secretary, Deptt. of Science & Technology (DST) had earlier
constituted a Committee with the representatives from NPC, IMD, BIS,
NPL & MOP to consider various issues involved in this matter and its
main views were as follows:

“On behalf of NPL, it was pointed out that the country spans
about 30 degrees longitude corresponding to two hours of local
time difference of extreme Eastern and Western ends. This has
given rise to an impression that in the Far-Eastern States, there are
about 4!/ 2 hours available between sunrise and the starting of the
offices and it is felt that this results in wastage of valuable daylight
time and may be reducing the efficiency of the workers by the
time they reach their work places. NPL has scientifically
demonstrated that there will be no drastic improvement by
incorporating two time zones. There may be an-hour saving in
daylight in places like Imphal, the same amount would be lost in
Delhi and western parts of the country. According to NPL, balance
of advantage for the purpose of saving daylight may be in
advancing the clocks throughout the country by one hour in
summer as this may result in saving of one hour daylight in the
morning between sunrise and office time. Perhaps more pragmatic
way may be that the Eastern States resort to a time schedule of
8.00 a.m to 4.30 p.m. where as the western parts follow a time
schedule of 9.00 a.m to 5.30. p.m.

Central Electricity Authority was also of the view that instead of
going in for two standard times for India, the proposal for different
working hours could be considered in different zones of India.

On the current reckoning of consumption of electricity, the Tata
Energy Research Institute is also of the view that the benefit arising
out of the introduction of different time zones is small. Therefore,
before a decision can be taken to have different time zones in the
country, a consensus would have to be built among State
Governments and within various Ministries in the Government
and also among the major interest groups like industry, education
and the users of facilities like telecom, airlines, railways etc.”

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 14/8/2007-EC Dated 18.07.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para Nos. 8-9 of Chapter I of the Report)

83


Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.2.31)

The Committee observe that out of the target of 7121 MW set for
the private sector during the 10th Plan, the likely achievement is only
1930 MW which cannot be termed as satisfactory at all. Despite
allowing and facilitating the entry of private sector in the power sector
as per promise of the Electricity Act, 2003, its participation remains
very poor. The Committee desire that a detailed study should be made
by the Government to know the reasons for poor participation, the
difficulties faced by the private sector and the steps proposed to be
taken to resolve those difficulties. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details in this regard.

Reply of the Government

As far as the participation of the private sector in the hydel power
is concerned, the original target of 1170 MW hydro capacity addition
in private sector in 10th Five Year (2002-07) Plan period was
subsequently revised to 700 MW during mid term appraisal held in
July-August, 2005. As per information available, the two projects
dropped were namely Maheshwar HEP(400 MW) of M/s Shree
Maheshwar Hydel Power Corp. Ltd., M.P., due to backing out of the
foreign promoters .and Dhamwari Sunda HEP(70 MW) of
M/s Dhamwari Power Co. Ltd., H.P., due to non-achievement of
financial closure. The revised target of 700 MW fixed during mid term
appraisal was completely achieved with the commissioning of
Vishnuprayag HEP—400 MW and Baspa HEP-300 MW.

As regards the participation of the private sector in the thermal
capacity addition, the Tenth Plan original target of 5951 MW was
revised to 4199 MW during the mid term appraisal held in July-August,
2005. As against this revised target of 4199 MW, projects having capacity
totaling 1970.60 MW including two projects, namely, 119.8 MW
Karuppur CCPP, T.N. and 52.8 MW Valantharavai CCPP, T.N., which
were not included in the original targets, were commissioned during
the Tenth Plan period as per detail given in Annexure-1. Twelve
projects totaling 4767.60 MW were dropped/slipped from the Tenth
Plan target. Detail of these projects including reasons for slippage/
dropping is given at Annexure-2.

The slow pace of private investment has been due to a number of
constraints. The foremost problem has been the inability of Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) to achieve financial closure (inspite of
progressing well on the other inputs/clearances), due to the poor

84


financial health of the state utilities who did not have the financial
capabilities to support more private projects in terms of ability to
open revolving letter of credit and escrow accounts for regular payment
of power. The other reasons for the private projects not achieving
financial closure, have been inordinate delay in finalisation of PPA
and the high cost of power perceived by the buying utilities. In
addition, some projects could not ‘be synchronized due to non-
availability of gas and delay in supplies by BHEL.

Government of India has been assisting wherever required, to
resolve issues coming in the way of implementation of IPPs, including
setting up of an Inter-Institutional Group (IIG) comprising of senior
representatives from the Financial Institutions and Ministry of Power
to facilitate early financial closure of power projects. 9 projects totaling
5535 MW have achieved financial closure during this period and are
presently under construction.


ANNEXURE 1

LIST OF PRIVATE SECTOR THERMAL POWER PROJECTS
COMMISSIONED DURING TENTH PLAN PERIOD

SLNo. Name of the project Capacity (MW)

ue Bambooflat DGPP, A&N Islands 20

2 Jegurupadu CCPP Extn., A.P. 220°

3. Peddapuram CCPP, A.P. 78

4, Vemagiri CCPP, A.P. 370

5. Jojobera TPP, Jharkhand 120

6. Ratnagiri CCPP, Maharashtra (Block-II) 740@

7. Karuppur CCPP, T.N. 119.84

8. Neyveli Zero TPP, T.N. 250

9. Valantharavai CCPP, T.N. 52.8%
Total 1970.60

+ The capacity was reduced from 230 MW to 220 MW due to revision of Gas Turbine
capacity from 150 MW to 140 MW.

@ The project is now being implemented by the Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Ltd.
(RGPPL), a joint venture of NTPC Ltd., GAIL and State Govt. of Maharashtra and
hence it is no longer in the private sector as envisaged in the original target.

# These projects were not included in the original targets for commissioning during
the 10th Plan.


ANNEXURE II

LIST OF PRIVATE SECTOR THERMAL POWER PROJECTS
DROPPED/SLIPPED FROM THE TENTH PLAN

SLNo, Name of the project Capacity (MW) Reasons for slippage

im

2.

bby

12.

Gautami CCPP, 8.2 464
Konaseema CCPP, AP. 445

Ramagundam TPP, A.P. 520

Bihta TPP, Bihar 135
O.PJindal TPP, Chhattisgarh 250
Jamnagar TPP, Gujarat 500
Sugen CCPP, Gujarat 365
Hassan CCPP, Karnataka 189
Kaniniminke CCPP, Karnataka 107.6
Ratnagiri CCPP, Maharashtra @ 704
Bina TPP, M.P. 578

Goindwal TPP, Punjab 500

Non-availability of gas. However,
project is ready to commence.
Non-availability of gas. However,
project is ready for commissioning.
Consequent to the termination
notice issued by APTRANSCO,
GOAP have decided pases t this
project implemented ICO.
The developer have been
approaching the State Government
of Andhra Pradesh to revive the
PPA.

Executing agency not finalized by
developer.

Delay in equipment supplies by
BHEL

EPC contract and financial closure
not having been achieved.
Switchyard for evacuation of power
not being ready.

Project not cleared by Karnataka
Electricity Regulatory Commission.
Failure of the developer to get

escrow cover from Government of
Karnataka

Paucity of funds

Failure to get escrow cover from
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh

Issue of escrow cover and coal
pricing could not be resolved.

Total 4767.6

@ The project is now being implemented by the Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Lid.
(RGPPL), a joint venture of NTPC Ltd., GAIL and State Govt. of Maharashtra and
hence it is no longer in the private sector as envisaged in the original target.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. PS-4/2006-IPC Dated 18.07.2007]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para Nos. 12-14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

87


Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.2.34)

The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Ministry of Power
regarding the development of Ultra Mega Power Projects, which the
committee feel will help in meeting the rising demand of the power
in the country to a great extent. During the course of evidence on
Demands for Grants for the year 2007-08, Members raised a number
of queries regarding the setting up of Ultra Mega Power Projects
expressing concern as to whether these projects would come up as
scheduled earlier. Also an apprehension was expressed that the targets
fixed by the Government for achieving the generation of 1,00,000 MW
by 2012 to meet the goal of electricity for all may be jeopardized, the
representative of the Ministry of Power, however, explained that they
have set upon themselves the target of 1,00,000 MW capacity addition
alongwith the transmission links and related activities by the year
2012.

The Committee, however, are greatly concerned with the present
status of development of Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project, which was
awarded to Glogleq Singapore Private Limited and Lanco Consortium.
However, Globleq Singapore was later on sold by its parent company
to Prince Stone Investments, a holding company for Lanco Consortium
Limited and Jindal Steel and Power Limited.

The Committee had categorically desired to know from the Ministry
as to how the matter concerning award of contract for Sasan Project
consequent on change of ownership of the successful bidder was
proposed to be resolved. The Ministry had informed that they were
seeking legal opinion in the matter and considering all legal opinions
they would take appropriate decision. The Committee, however, have
now been informed on 23rd April, 2007 by the Ministry that the matter
is now under consideration of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC).
The Committee feel that an urgent action is required to resolve the
issue at the earliest and desire that all possible steps be taken to
ensure that the setting up of the Project is as per schedule without
any time and cost overruns. But considering the fact that there arose
a need for Central Vigilance Commission’s involvement in the
beginning of the project itself, the Committee feel apprehensive about
the project as due diligence was not shown by the Ministry of Power
in award of the project. The Committee, therefore, desire that
responsibilities be fixed in the matter and stern action be taken against
the guilty. The Committee should be apprised of the position at the
earliest regarding the development of this project-clearly analyzing the
matter as to how far this controversy is likely to affect the time and
cost overrun of the project.

The Committee are surprised to note that while the former Power
Secretary assured the Committee in meeting held on 2.8.2006 that some
units of Mega Power Projects would come up by the end of 11th Plan,

88


the new Secretary in his evidence before the Committee on 21.3.2007
stated that it was not possible to complete Ultra Mega Power Projects
in the 11th Plan and these would spill over to 12th Plan. The
Committee note that a programme for completion of 1,00,000 MW
capacity to ensure electricity for all by 2012 was announced by the
Government with much fanfare. The Committee are concerned with
the turn of events in the case of Sasan project and feel that apart from
non achievement of the targets, it may give bad publicity to the
Government's move to set up other Ultra Mega Power Projects and
ultimately affect the goal of electricity for all. The Committee note
that having achieved only 21180 MW during 11th Plan, there is no
likelihood of achieving 1,00,000 MW generating capacity by 2012 as
had been envisaged by the Government. The Committee desire that
no effort should be spared to achieve this target if the goal of electricity
for all is to be accomplished. The Committee feel that the power
situation in the country requires daily monitoring and accountability
to ensure progress as envisaged by the Government.

Reply of the Government

Achieving equilibrium in the demand and supply of power is essential.
Excess demand in the system invariably leads to poor quality of electric
supply including scheduled and unscheduled cut offs. Therefore,
creation of adequate capacity is necessary to ensure reliable and quality
power supply in line with the accepted international practices. The
National Electricity Policy notified on 12th February, 2005, inter alia
aims at achieving the following objectives:

* Access to electricity—Available for all households in next 5
years

* Availability of Power—Demand to be fully met by 2012.
Energy and peaking shortage to be overcome and adequate
spinning reserve to be available.

¢ Supply of reliable and quality power of specified standards
in an efficient manner and at reasonable rates.

Central Electricity Authority has assessed that for elimination of
shortages and achieving the goal of power for all by 2012, capacity
addition to the tune of about 1,00,000 MW is required during X and
XI Plan. During the X Plan, a generation capacity of 21180 MW has
been added. For the XI Plan, a generation capacity of 78,577 MW is
proposed to be added. Of this capacity, a generation capacity of above
49,000 MW is under execution. Ordering in respect of rest of generation
capacity targeted in XI Plan is planned to be completed by December,
2007. With the achievement of proposed capacity addition programme
during the course of XI Plan, it is assessed by Central Electricity

89


Authority that by 2012, marginal peaking surplus and energy surplus
to the tune of 5.6% is likely to be available in the country.

The recently concluded Conference of the Chief Ministers has
resolved that a Standing Group of Power Ministers under the
Chairmanship of the Minister of Power would be set up to look into
all issues affecting the power sector. Further, the resolution adopted in
‘the Conference inter alia includes that Centre would set up a National
Power Project Monitoring Board (NPPMB) for monitoring the timely
commissioning of the unprecedented generation capacity addition target
for XI Plan as also monitoring of associated transmission Projects.
Accordingly, Standing Group and the NPPMB are being constituted.

Regarding the development of Ultra Mega Power Projects it is to
mention that the Central Electricity Authority in consultation with States
has identified 9 sites suitable for development of Ultra Mega Power
Projects based on coal with a capacity of 4000 MW each. Out of these,
5 are at coastal locations and remaining 4 are pit head sites. The
details of sites are as follows:

(a) Five coastal locations:
(i) Mundra in Gujarat
(ii) Krishnapatnam in A.P
(iii) Cheyyur in Tamil Nadu
(iv) Girye in Maharashtra
(v) Tadri in Karnataka
(b) Four pithead locations:
(i) Sasan in M.P
(ii) Tillaiya in Jharkhand
(ii) Sundergarh (Ib Valley) in Orissa
(iv) Akaltara in Chhattisgarh

Bid documents for UMPPs provide that first unit would be
commissioned not later than 69 months from the effective date of
PPA, and balance units within next 24 months i., last unit not later
than 93 months (7 years & nine months) from the effective date of
PPA. According to this prescribed timeline, any UMPP in case of which
effective date of PPA has been attained by first quarter of 2009-10 is

likely to be commissioned fully within 12th Plan (which ends in March
2017).

90


The time-schedule for the development of these Ultra Mega Power
Projects depends on:

(a) Time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and
identification and acquisition of land for the Project;

(b) Time taken in completion of bidding process; and

(c) Time Schedule for commissioning of various units submitted
by the selected bidder in his bid, in accordance with
provisions of the bidding documents.

The bid process for two of these UMPPs at Mundra in Gujarat
and Sasan in MP has been completed. The bidders have submitted
their proposed commissioning schedules as under:

Mundra UMPP

The Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was signed on 22.4.2007.
The selected bidder has quoted five units of 800 MW each proposed
to be commissioned as per following schedule:

Unit No. Months from PPA signing Scheduled COD
1 64 22.8.2012
2 70 22.2.2013
3 76 22.8.2013
4 82 22.2.2014
5 88 22.8.2014
Sasan UMPP

The Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) is yet to be signed. The
lowest evaluated bidder has quoted six units of 660 MW each proposed
to be commissioned as per following schedule:

Unit No. Months from PPA signing Scheduled COD
1 60 Exact dates would
5 63 be worked out
based on the date
° & of signing of PPA

4 69

5 72

6 75

91


However, bidders have an option under PPA to advance the
commissioning schedule.

It may be seen from the above, according to indicated timeline, all
units of the Mundra Ultra Mega Project would be operational during
the 12th Plan. The commissioning schedule for Sasan UMPP would
depend on the date of transfer of the project to the Selected Developer.
The bidding process in respect of Krishnapatnam IMPP and Tilaiya
UMPP has started. Given the time line in the bidding documents it
could be said with fair degree of certainty that four projects shall be
operational well within 12th Plan. In case of remaining five UMPPs
there is again fair chance of completing them within 12th Plan.
However, firm timelines would be known on completion of bidding
Process in each case. For this to happen, it is imperative that the
concerned states shall provide necessary clearances particularly site
clearance urgently.

The development of Ultra Mega Power Projects is a major initiative
of the Government. All necessary steps, therefore, would be taken to
see that issues related to Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project are resolved
in a just and fair manner and that this project along with other Projects
identified under the initiative, fructify as early as possible. The CVC
report, referred to in the recommendation of the Committee, has not
yet been received in the Ministry of Power. It may also be added that
keeping in view the importance of Ultra Mega Power Projects, an
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) for facilitating expeditious
decision in all cases concerning UMPPs including Sasan Ultra Mega
Power Project has been set up on 14th June, 2007. Further action in
the case of Sasan UMPP would await consideration by the EGoM.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O. No. 2/7/2007-P&P Dated 9.07.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No. 2.8.7)

The Committee note that out of 10th Plan Outlay of Rs. 21,370
crore, PGCIL could spend only Rs. 18,181 crore. However, with this
lesser outlay, the physical achievements have been more than the 10th
Plan targets. The Committee while appreciating the work done by
PGCIL in the field of transmission of power would suggest that
financial targets should be properly assessed. There is a need to
encourage the participation of private sector in the power sector as a

92


whole and in transmission sector as well. With this purpose the
Government has notified guidelines for encouraging competition in
the development of transmission projects. A Committee has been set
up and 14 projects have been identified for development through the
competitive bidding route. The Committee desire that these projects
be taken up for development by the private sector at the earliest and
the participation of private sector be allowed only in conformity with
the provision of the Electricity Act, 2003. Presently, the Committee
note, most of the private investment has come through Joint Venture
route only. Considering the fact that 11th Plan target is to attract
Rs. 20,000 crore investment for creating inter-regional transfer capacity
of 11500 MW, the Ministry should identify sufficient Projects in advance,
which can be offered to the private sector. The Committee should be
informed of the action taken in the matter.

Reply of the Government

It may be mentioned that all efforts are made to assess the financial
targets properly. However, as implementation of transmission schemes
are dependent upon system requirements like generation addition and
growth in demand, change/reduction in outlay of various transmission
schemes in Xth Plan was necessitated to match with the system
requirements.

During the Xth Plan, besides cost saving achieved in various
transmission projects from approved/estimated cost at the time of
finalisation of Xth Plan, there was rescheduling of transmission projects
due to deferment/deletion of planned generation projects (Net Rs. 875
crore), change in mode of implementation of few system strengthening
schemes (Rs. 410 crore) etc. Further some new strengthening schemes
were taken up for implementation as per system requirement. Besides
there was also a reduction in telecom outlay (Rs. 1575 crore) on account
of change in business plan considering market condition.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O. No. 9/1/2007-PG Dated 18.07.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 2.9.13)

The Committee strongly feel that rural electrification means not
only electrification of households and villages but also catering to the
needs of farmers and small scale industries which are the backbone of

93


the rural economy. However, this aspect seem to have been ignored
by the Government as no mention has been made about achievements
in this regard under RGGVY. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that in addition of electrification of households, electricity for agriculture
and industrial activities should also be given due importance under
RGGVY.

Reply of the Government

RGGVY, through creation of Village Electricity Infrastructure (VEI),
Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB) and Decentralized
Distributed Generation (DDG) would also facilitate the following
activities indirectly:—

* irrigation pumpsets

* small and medium industries
* khadi and village industries
* cold chains

* healthcare

* education and IT

However, funds have not been allocated for providing electricity
for agriculture and industrial activities under RGGVY. Therefore, there
can be no targets for these activities under RGGVY. If States so desire,
they can approach financial institutions for loans for augmenting the
infrastructure being created under RGGVY to adequately cater for these
activities. Ministry of Power has also requested all the States to prepare
a Rural Electrification Plan for their State which will take into

consideration among other things the demand for electricity from
agriculture and industry.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 44/3/2007-RE Dated 6.07.07]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 30-31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, Para No. 2.10.16)

APDRP was launched by the Government in 2002-2003 with the
objective of reducing Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses
to around 15% in five years from the then existing which were

94


around 60%. The Committee, however, observe that even after
completion of five years, AT & C losses could only be reduced to
33.5% by 2005-06. The Committee would like to know the reasons for
such slow progress in reduction in AT & C losses. The Committee
note that in a number of States, both Non-Special Category and Special
Category States, utilisation of APDRP investment is less than 50% as
on 31.12.2006. These are Chattisgarh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya etc. Similarly, in a number
of cases, loss reduction cash incentive has also not been released to a
number of eligible States like Gujarat’ Kerala, Madhya Pradesh etc.
The Committee would like to know the reasons for less utilisation of
funds by certain States as well as reasons for the non release of loss
reduction cash incentives to some States.

Reply of the Government

The main objective of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (APDRP) was reduction of AT&C losses from the level of
around 40% to around 15% in five years to begin with in the urban
areas and high density/consumption areas. Further, it was also targeted
to reduce commercial and cash loss of the utilities. Under Investment
Component Government provided Additional Central Assistance for
strengthening and upgradation of Sub-transmission and Distribution
Network to SEBs/Utilities. The assistance was in the form of 25%
grant and 25% loan of the project cost. Special Category States were
provided 90% grant and 10% loan. However, the loan portion was
discontinued w.e.f. April, 2005 on the recommendation of 12th Finance
Commission. Under Incentive Component SEBs/Utilities were
incentivised for cash loss reduction to motivate them towards reduction
of their losses. Funds are released for actual cash loss reduction, for
every Rs. 2 of cash loss reduction Rs.1 is given as grant,

Right from the beginning, it was made clear to the States that the
programme was reform oriented and not budget and expenditure
oriented. The off take by the States was obviously slow as they had
to agree to various conditionalities for becoming eligible for APDRP
assistance (signing of MOA), standardize their technical specification,
streamline their bidding process and switch over to turnkey contracting.
Only a few States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Uttaranchal took early initiatives
and most of their districts headquarter towns have been covered under
the programme. These States have shown significant improvement in
reduction of AT&C loss and commercial loss as well. At the town
level, wherever they were able to complete the projects even up to

95


75-80%, visible improvements have been seen in most of such cases.
Other States were late in signing the Memorandum of Agreements
and in submission of schemes. Further unrealistic DPRs, heavy quantum
of work, increase in price of material, poor availability of contractors
etc. also resulted in delay in implementation of the scheme. The
States of North-Eastern Region and Jammu & Kashmir were especially
late starters. Due to these constraints APDRP projects of only
Rs. 17033.58 crore could be sanctioned by the Ministry.

The implementation of the sanctioned projects was also delayed
due to delays in transfer of funds by State Government to the
distribution companies. Under the Additional Central Assistance, funds
mandatorily pass through the State Government and on account of
delay in release to the implementing distribution companies funds were
not available in time for the project execution. In many instances, it
took even more than a year to release funds to the implementing
agency after release by the Central Government.

Under the Incentive Component, out of the proposals received from
various States, nine States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, West Bengal and
Punjab were found eligible, as per the guidelines of the programme,
for release of incentive under the programme. These States had
achieved cash loss reduction of Rs. 5254.60 crores and had become
eligible for incentive of Rs. 2627.30 crore. The Government has so far
released Rs. 1749.03 crore. The balance amount will be released during
the current financial year 2007-08.

[Ministry of Power’s F.No. 5/1/2007-APDRP Dated July 4, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 34—37 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI.No. 18, Para No. 2.11.8)

Scheme of research and development in the field of electric power
is implemented through CPRI. However, the R&D activities of CPRI
suffered during the 10th Plan as outlay Rs.90.00 crore could not be
fully utilized. One of the reasons given by the Government for this is
‘delay in approval of the project proposals in absence of a regular
Director General for first three years of the plan period’. The Committee
find it to their utter dismay that such an important organization
remained without any Head for three long years. The Committee feel
that this amply illustrates the casual approach of the Government

96


towards such a vital area which is so instrumental in the growth and
development of the power sector.

The Committee note that some research schemes on Power were
discontinued midway after a review of these schemes. The Committee
feel that a lot of precious Government money could have been saved
if these schemes were judiciously selected. The Committee feel that
the Ministry should ask various power utilities and CEA to prepare
the list of such areas based on their day to day work experience
which need further research to seek their solutions. This should be a
continuous process.

Reply of the Government

The Standing Committee on Energy has desired that Research
Schemes should be judiciously selected by various power utilities and
CEA,

The Ministry of Power had formed a Standing Committee on R&D
in February, 2001 for formulating perspective R&D plan for Indian
power sector for the next 15 years under the chairmanship of Chairman,
CEA and members drawn from various power utilities. The Committee
after 2 brain storming sessions held at New Delhi and Bangalore, had
identified R&D areas in Transmission, Distribution and Generation and
submitted its report in June, 2002. Currently, 5 R&D projects identified
under this plan are under implementation at various power utilities
like Electrical Research and Development Association (ERDA), Bharat
Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), National Metallurgical Laboratory
(NML), EMCO Limited. An amount of Rs. 11.55 crores is being kept
aside under National Perspective Plan during the 11th plan period.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 41/2/2007-T &R Dated 28.06.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.40 of Chapter-I of the Report)

97


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.9.12)

The Committee note that the Government of India had launched
a number of schemes/programmes for electrification of rural areas in
the country, Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) has
now been introduced by the Government in April, 2005 with an
objective of providing access to electricity to all rural households over
a period of 4 years. Rural Electrification Corporation is the nodal agency
for the programme. RGGVY proposed to electrify 40,000 villages during
2006-07 with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 3,000 crore. The Committee
note that till 9-2-2007, only 18,422 villages have been electrified and
4.87 lakhs connections have been released to BPL households. One of
the reasons given by the Government is that “lead time of 4-6 months
is required for pre-award activities.” The Committee feel that this
should have been preconceived of while setting the ambitious targets.
Another reason is “delay in issue of tenders by State power utilities
and State Government departments.” The reasons cited by the
Government for their poor performance only reflect poor planning
and lack of coordination. The Committee note that CPSUs like
POWERGRID, NTPC, NHPC, DVC & NEEPCO are providing their
services in the implementation of this scheme. Hence, any difficulties
being faced by State Governments in implementation of RGGVY should
have been removed/addressed in consultation with these organizations,
which does not seems to be the case.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that firstly targets should
be realistic and secondly, various PSUs and REC—which is the nodal
agency—in implementation of RGGVY should be asked to provide all
necessary technical and training support to State Governments in their
respective areas. The Committee further recommend that first a
thorough assessment be made about the targets to be achieved during
llth Plan and the funds required for the same. Then the sufficient
funds should be made available under the RGGVY in each of the five
years of 11th Plan to achieve the set target.

Reply of the Government

As the scheme aimed to electrify all villages in four years by 2009,
the action plan for village electrification had been prepared in a manner
such that it achieves the targets within the prescribed time limit. In
98


the year 2006-07, 28,706 villages were electrified, which is almost 75%
achievement. Besides electrification of 28,706 un-electrified villages
around 6.5 lakh Below Poverty Line (BPL) Households were electrified,
which cover not only un-electrified villages but also already electrified
villages for intensive electrification. The slippage of 25% in 2006-07
was due to factors which were beyond the control of executing agencies
like delay in approval by Ministry of Finance for enlarging the shelf
of projects from 125 to 235 projects for release of funds. Projects were
in abeyance for 2-3 months in the last quarter of the year. In the year
2006-07 funds were released only to 125 projects with an awarded cost
of Rs. 6032 crores covering 46,280 villages out of which 9819 villages
were already electrified in 2005-06. It was only after December, 2006
when the Ministry of Power took up the matter with Ministry of
Finance for increasing the shelf of projects that Ministry of Finance
increased the shelf to 235 projects covering 68,763 un-electrified villages
in February, 2007. Only one month was given for release of funds to
235 projects.

Till date only 235 projects are eligible for funds and accordingly
the implementing agencies can not go ahead with awarding of further
projects. As a result, till the CCEA Note is approved, the coverage of
un-electrified villages cannot be increased. It may also be noted that
project cycle is of 18 months from date of award. In view of this, it
will be extremely challenging to achieve the target of electrification of
40,000 villages. At present, for the year 2007-08 Ministry is left with
only 30,000 un-electrified villages for electrification which is not a
sufficient shelf of villages for achieving the target of 40,000 villages.

Secondly, as recommended by the Standing Committee, the Ministry
of Power has now written to REC, the Nodal Agency for
implementation of the scheme, to provide all necessary technical and
training support to State Governments in their respective areas.

Year-wise targets to be achieved within the prescribed time limit,
by 2009 have been assessed. It has been decided to electrify all un-
electrified villages included in the projects currently under
implementation in 2007-08 and 2008-09 subject to timely release of
adequate funds. The matter will be reviewed after obtaining fresh
CCEA approval to the programme.

[Ministry of Power’s U.O No. 44/3/2007-RE Dated 6.07.07]

New Dewi; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 22, 2007 Chairman,
Agrahayana 1, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

99


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE 3RD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON 22ND NOVEMBER, 2007 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailash Baitha

Prof. Chander Kumar

Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

. Shri M.K. Subba

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
. Shri Mohan Jena

. Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

PNA DN

Rajya Sabha

9. Shri Bimal Jalan

10. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

11. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

12. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Juby Amar = Under Secretary

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
Draft Twenty-third Report on Action Taken on the recommendations

100


contained in the 20th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2007-08.

2. The Committee adopted the draft Report with some
modifications.

3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Report and to present/lay the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

101


APPENDIX IL
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE

@

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

102

ON ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
SI.Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 19, and 20

Percentage

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to persue in view
of the Government's replies:

-Nil-

Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

SLNos. 2, 4, 7, 13, 15, 16 and 18

Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the final replies of the Government are
still awaited:

SLNo. 14

Percentage

20

Total : 12
60%

Total : Nil
Nil

Total : 7
35%

Total : 1
5%