STANDING COMMITTEE

2 8 ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2008-2009]

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)



Price : Rs. 55.00


ComPosiTiON OF THE COMMITTEE 2008-2009 ...

INTRODUCTION...

Cuarter I

Cuarter II

Cuaprer III

Cuaprer IV

CuaPTeR V

I.

CONTENTS

Report

Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Governments replies ......

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and require reiteration

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......

APPENDICES

. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on

27th January, 2009. .....

Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
26th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(14th Lok Sabha)......

PAGE
(ii)
(v)

16

36

37

45

46

48

()


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron
#+ 3. Smt. Susmita Bauri
4. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
5. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary
6. Shri Mohan Jena
7. Prof. Chander Kumar
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
9. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
10. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
11. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana
12. Shri Kiren Rijiju
13. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
14. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
15. Shri M.K. Subba
16. Shri E.G. Sugavanam.

*17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

* Nominated as Member of the Committee wef 18.12.2008.
* Renominated as Member of the Committee wef. 9.1.2009.

(ii)


18. Shri G. Venkatswamy
19. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
20. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

21. Vacant

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
23. Dr. Bimal Jalan
24. Shri Prakash Javadekar
25. Dr.K. Kasturirangan
* 26. Shri Anil H. Lad
27. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh

31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
३. Shri Manoj Pahuja — _ Sr. Exe. Assistant

“* Nominated wef, 15th January, 2009.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 28th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 26th Report of the
Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

2. The 26th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd April 2008. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
14th August, 2008.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted this
Report at their sitting held on 27th January, 2009.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 26th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.

New DEtHt; GURUDAS KAMAT,
27 January, 2009 Chairman,

7 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(vy)


CHAPTER I

REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 26th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

2. The 26th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.04.2008 and
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
35 Observations/Recommendations.

3. Action Taken notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:

(i)

Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:

Si. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16eizpa9jet22)
23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 Total - 26
Chapter - II

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. 4 Total - 01
Chapter - III

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 10, 11, 18, 20, 21, 24, 28 and 30 Total - 08
Chapter - IV
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final

replies of the Government are still awaited:

Sl. No. Nil Total - Nil
Chapter - V


4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given.
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In such cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported back to the Committee in time along
with reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

A. Renewable Energy Law
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)

6. Taking note of the fact that in our country, use of renewable
energy has been mandated through the Electricity Act, 2003 and so far
only 12 State Electricity Regulatory Commissions had notified Renewable
Energy Portfolio Standards to promote co-generation and generation
of electricity from renewable sources of energy—which vary from
2 per cent to 10 per cent, the Committee urged the Government to have
a separate Renewable Energy Law, as enacted by some of the countries
across the globe, mandating the exploitation and use of renewable energy.
The Committee had desired to be informed about the precise action taken
in this regard.

7. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

“The preparation of an Umbrella Renewable Energy Law to provide
a comprehensive legislative framework for all types of renewable
energy technologies and usage and promotion thereof that goes
beyond electricity has recently been approved by the Energy
Coordination Committee. Further necessary action has been initiated
for preparation of an initial draft, which when ready, will be
discussed with various stakeholders for finalization.”

8. As regards having a separate Renewable Energy Law to
provide a comprehensive legislative framework for renewable energy
sector, the Committee note that the Energy Co-ordination Committee
has recently approved preparation of the same. However, the Committee
are concerned to observe that no timeframe as yet has been fixed to
frame up the desired law after discussing the same with various
stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to take necessary steps to ensure that the desired law be enacted
expeditiously in a fixed timeframe for the optimal exploitation and use
of new and renewable energy sources.

2


B. Integrated Energy Policy
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)

9. Taking note of the vision and mandate of the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy, the Committee had placed on record the fact that
an uphill task was on the cards for the Ministry, for years to come. The
Committee pondered over a possible conceptional change in regard to
the ultimate use of energy drawn from renewable sources. While finding
that the trend so far has been to use renewable energy as a substitute
for conventional energy, the Committee opined that there was a need for
a new approach to consider renewable energy not only as a substitute
but as an additional and parallel but as a superior energy because the
same was in the national interest. The Committee had put it as a poser
to the Ministry and desired to await a response from the Government
as to how this could be translated into a policy change.

10. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:

“Tt is an action imperative for the country to pursue all energy
options—conventional, renewable and nuclear—to achieve its long
term goals of energy security and energy independence. The
Integrated Energy Policy Report of the Expert Committee constituted
by Planning Commission has attempted to lay down a road map
in this regard and the same is under consideration of the
Government. In so far as Renewable Energy is concerned, the
endeavour of the Ministry will continue towards lowering the costs
and improving the reliability of various renewable energy systems
through support to sustained R&D efforts. The Ministry will attempt
conceptual clarity in the framework document to be prepared for
the proposed Solar Mission.”

11, The Committee note that the Integrated Energy Policy Report
of the Expert Group constituted by the Planning Commission to lay
down a roadmap for the long-term energy security and energy
independence is presently under consideration of the Government. In
view the pressing need for having such a policy in place at the earliest
90 as to ensure a holistic energy sector approach where various types
of energy sources are integrated judiciously, the Committee desire the
Government to take an early decision in the matter so that a National
Integrated Energy Policy starts fructifying without any further precious
loss of time and economic resources. The Committee also take note of
the Ministry’s assurance about attempting conceptual clarity in the
framework document to be prepared for the proposed Solar Mission.
The Committee expect that the Ministry would embark on this

3


endeavour with all the seriousness it deserves and finalise the
framework document to this effect in a fixed time period after extensive
debate and interaction with the all stakeholders and experts in the
sector.

C. Wind Energy Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)

12. The Committee observed that in spite of mature and proven
technologies available for the generation of wind energy and active
involvement of private sector therein, against an estimated potential of
45,000 MW of wind power in the country, the present installed capacity
happened to be 7,938 MW as on January, 2008. The Committee were
dismayed to find that the Ministry also failed to achieve the envisaged
target during the year 2007-08 and the shortfall noted was to the extent
of 655 MW. Taking strong objection to the reasons adduced by the Ministry
in this regard, which were not only of a generalized nature but also
repetitive in character, the Committee recommended that progress on
projects and expenditure position needed to be improved in the current
period to achieve the target of 2,000 MW grid-interactive power capacity
addition from the wind power fixed for 2008-09.

13. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

“The actual expenditure under the wind power programme during
2007-08 has been Rs. 16.06 crore against the RE of Rs. 15.50 crore.
Further, against the planned target of 1500 MW for the year
2007-08, 1663 MW has been achieved.

The fiscal incentives available for wind sector have been continued
during the year 2008-09. The Ministry has recently proposed a pilot
scheme of 50 MW incentivised through Generation Based
Incentives (GBI) as against the accelerated depreciation route
currently available. There has been a good response to the proposal
as it opens up invesiment to independent power producers. The
Ministry is proposing to upscale this initiative so that the targets
for wind energy for the XIth Plan are met.”

14. The Committee note with satisfaction that the fiscal incentives
available for wind sector have been continued during the year 2008-09.
Further, the Ministry have recently proposed a pilot scheme of 50 MW
through Generation Based Incentives (GBI) as against the currently
available accelerated depreciation route. The Committee understand
that the Ministry are proposing to upscale this initiative so that the

4


targets for wind energy for the XIth Plan are met. While supporting
the 50 MW pilot scheme through GBI, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the current grid-active status of 7938 MW of installed
capacity of wind energy. The Committee would also like to be informed
of the steps taken to achieve the target of 2000 MW grid-interactive
power capacity addition, fixed for 2008-09 from the wind power.

D. R&D in the Wind Energy Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)

15. The Committee found that an allocation of only Rs. 1.00 crore
was made for Research & Development (R&D) during 2008-09 as against
an overall allocation of Rs. 190 crore for the wind energy sector during
11th Plan. According to the Ministry, R&D activities in wind energy sector
were carried out both by the Government and private sector wind turbine
manufacturers. The Government R&D reportedly focused on areas mainly
relating to design methodology for the wind turbine blades, grid related
studies, wind resource assessments, maintenance aspects of major
components of wind turbines, etc. The Committee were given to
understand that a consolidated R&D strategy was in the process of
finalisation before more funds be sought during the remaining plan period.
The Committee had desired to know the final R&D strategy proposed
to be brought into operation for the wind energy sector.

16. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

“The R&D Council of the Centre for Wind Energy Technology
decided to prepare a strategy paper on coordinated R&D
programme on the identified thrust areas in wind energy sector.
Inputs in this regard have been obtained from all major stakeholders
including industries, academic and research institutions, such as,
Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institute of Science, CSIR
Laboratories, Engineering Colleges etc. A stakeholders meeting to
finalize the strategy paper has been planned in the last week of
August 2008.”

17. The Committee note with appreciation that in pursuant to
their recommendation, the R&D Council of the Centre for Wind Energy
Technology has developed a strategy paper on coordinated R&D
programme on the identified thrust areas in the Wind Energy Sector.
The Ministry have also apprised the Committee that a strategy paper,
for which, inputs have been obtained from all the stakeholders
including industries, academic and research institutions, such as, Indian

5


Institutes of Technology, Indian Institute of Science, CSIR Laboratories,
Engineering Colleges etc. was planned to be finalized at a stakeholders’
meeting scheduled to be held in the last week of August, 2008. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken/proposed to
be taken by the Ministry as a follow up to the decisions/suggestions
emanating from the proposed meeting.

E. Preparation of Indian Wind Atlas
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)

18. The Committee observed that a Wind Atlas with fine resolution
is essential for a country for the identification of windy locations and
the development of wind energy. The Ministry had sanctioned a project
on preparation of Indian Wind Atlas to Centre for Wind Energy
Technology (C-WET), Chennai in association with RISO National
Laboratory, Denmark in November, 2006 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 2 crore. The project is expected to be completed by the end of
2008-09. The Committee desired to be apprised of the present status of
this project.

19. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:

“The preparation of Indian Wind Atlas in association with RISO
National Laboratory, Denmark is in the final stage. Three pilot
areas were selected covering different topography and climate
types. The wind monitoring data collected from these pilot areas
was used for validation exercise. In order to have preliminary idea
of the offshore wind resources, parts of the sea surrounding the
country are also included in the project. The pilot area model and
validation has been completed and the result is found to be
satisfactory for further proceeding of the project. Three scientists
of C-WET have undergone training in the numerical model. The
work under the project is in progress for completion of the Wind
Atlas by March 2009.”

20. The Committee find that the preparation of Indian Wind Atlas
in association with RISO National Laboratory, Denmark is in the final
stage and the Ministry had selected three pilot areas covering different
topography and climate types for the purpose. Although, the Committee
are satisfied to note that the work under the project is reported to be
in progress for completion of the Indian Wind Atlas by March 2009,
the Committee would urge the Government to ensure that the Indian
Wind Atlas be completed as scheduled and be also made available on
the website of the Ministry after its completion.

6


E Solar Energy Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)

21. The Committee appreciated the new initiative of the Ministry
to promote installation of mega-watt scale solar power generation plants
of a minimum capacity of 1 MW. The Ministry had earmarked Rs. 14 Crore
for 2008-09 for this programme to achieve capacity installation of 14 MW.
The Committee recommended that the cap set for the promotion of grid
interactive mega-watt scale solar power generation programme be suitably
reviewed to encourage the interested States like Rajasthan so that the
budgetary support of Rs. 14 Crore (BE) for 2008-09 be fully utilized. The
Committee also recommended that the Ministry might alternatively
explore possibility of sponsoring one of the mega-watt scale demonstration
project in the premises of Solar Energy Centre to get proper feedback/
evaluation of the programme.

22. The Ministry in their reply have, however, stated:

“The Ministry is of the view that the targets announced under the
demonstration programme may continue to be implemented and
initial performance data be collected on megawatt size grid
connected power plants. This may not be linked to review of the
scheme including removal of cap. The States, which have announced.
separate tariff for solar power, can implement solar power projects
outside the demonstration programme of the Ministry. There is no
restriction to take up projects by such States. A 2 MWp capacity
solar PV power plant is being set up in West Bengal. The other
States are also expected to clear projects for support under the
demonstration programme. The recommendation of the Committee
to set up one of the MW-scale solar power plants in the premises
of SEC for getting feedback/ evaluation of the programme has been
noted. Under the proposed Solar Mission, it is proposed to upscale
the quantum of solar generated electricity.”

23. The Committee note that a 2 MWp Solar PV Power Plant
is being set up in West Bengal and the Ministry expect the other
States to clear projects for support under the demonstration programme.
The Ministry also expect that the BE of Rs. 14.00 crore for 2008-09
on these activities will be fully utilized. The Committee, however,
observe that reply of the Ministry is silent about the other projects
which are proposed to be set up under the programme. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the specific projects identified and
approved by different States to be taken up under the programme for
the current year.


24. As regards the Committee’s recommendation about exploring
the possibility of setting up one of the MW scale demonstration project
in the premises of Solar Energy Centre to get proper feedback/evaluation
of the programme, the Ministry have merely stated that they have
noted the same. The Committee note that nothing concrete has been
stated as regards the implementation of recommendation of the
Committee. They would, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation.
that a MW scale demonstration project be set up in the Solar Energy
Centre, Gurgaon to get proper feedback/evaluation of the programme
and would like to be apprised of the concrete action taken by the
Government to implement the same.

G. Follow up and Maintenance Mechanism for Solar Devices
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)

25. The Committee had expressed deep concern over the absence
of proper follow-up and maintenance mechanism subsequent to
installation of various solar devices under the solar Photovoltaic
Programme of the Ministry. The Committee drew the attention of the
Ministry to the consequential difficulties faced by the consumers in the
event of failure of those devices - in the absence of a reliable and long-
term service back up. The Committee observed that in such a scenario,
the confidence level of users falls very low and functional reliability of
the various systems is in question. The Secretary, Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy had also assured the Committee that a maintenance
support mechanism would be built into the system for redressing the
post-installation problem faced by the users. The Committee had desired
to know the action taken in the matter.

26. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:

“The programmes of the Ministry have a provision of Annual
Maintenance Contract (AMC) for 5 years for the SPV systems,
including 2 years warranty on the complete systems. The State
agencies are expected to monitor the progress before they release
funds for AMC to system suppliers on annual basis. The agencies
will be requested to strengthen the existing after sales service
network through Akshaya Urja shops and the service centers set
up by the manufacturers which are involved in the supply of the
systems.”

27. The Committee are constrained to observe that though the
Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, having appreciated
the concern of the Committee during evidence about the absence of

8


proper follow up and maintenance mechanism for devices installed
under the SPV programme had assured them that a maintenance support
mechanism would be built into the system for redressing the post-
installation problem faced by the users, the Ministry, after a lapse of
more than four months have come up with only a half-hearted response
that the agencies will be requested to strengthen the existing after
sales service network through Akshaya Urja Shops and the service
centers set up by the manufacturers, which are involved in the supply
of systems. The Committee do not appreciate this kind of reply from
the Ministry. It would have been appreciated, if all the concerned were
instructed before the action taken was reported to the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire
that needful should be done without any further loss of time. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

H. R&D strategy for Solar Energy Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)

28. The Committee observed that against an allocation of
Rs. 17.5 crore for Research and Development (R&D) during past three
years for solar energy sector, only Rs. 1.44 crore could be expended in
this direction. Notwithstanding the reasons advanced for meagre spending
in this area, the Committee were of the firm view that the Ministry should
focus their attention in a big way on R&D investment in the solar energy
sector. The Committee emphasized that vision should be beyond the
photovoltaic technology to enhance efficiency and for that matter the
Ministry needed to venture technology collaboration with leading players
in the field across the globe. The Committee believed that breakthrough
in this field would support the Ministry in a big way in their pursuit
to bring down the cost of solar energy generation compared to that from
conventional sources.

29. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

’The global efforts in the solar power generation are to achieve
technological breakthroughs to significantly reduce the cost through
both solar photovoltaic and solar thermal routes. Several technology
options are emerging, however, no proven option is available to
give cost competitive and commercially viable solar energy
technologies. The focus of the R&D efforts during the 11th plan
is to support development of solar energy technologies, which could
lead to improvements in the performance and cost reduction. The
recently announced demonstration programme for grid interactive

9


solar power projects encourages project developers to use efficient
technologies that could be available nationally and globally to
achieve cost competitiveness of the projects, and thereby leading
to introduction of the advanced technologies in the country. Under
the Solar Mission, an R&D strategy will be proposed after
consultation with experts.”

30. The Committee have been given to understand that the global
efforts in the solar power generation are to achieve technological
breakthroughs to significantly reduce the cost through both solar
photovoltaic and solar thermal routes. According to the Ministry, the
focus of the R&D efforts during the 11th Plan is to support development
of solar energy technologies, which could lead to improvements in the
performance and cost reduction of solar devices. The Committee also
note that under the Solar Mission, an R&D strategy will be proposed
by the Ministry after consultation with experts. Taking note of the fact
that no concrete action so far has been taken by the Government to
finalise the R&D strategy for solar power programme, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the R&D strategy
in this regard should be finalized at the earliest in consultation
and collaboration with leading players in the field across the globe.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.

Ii SHP Development Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 24)

31. The Committee were concerned to find that in some States
only a very small quantum of identified SHP potential has been tapped
so far. A scrutiny of relevant data revealed that the ratio of installed
capacity of SHP projects to potential availability in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa and
Uttrakhand was very dismal. The Committee had desired to be apprised
of the reasons for such abysmal performance in respect of these States
and also about the measures taken to improve level of achievement. The
Committee were given to understand that the private developers for small
hydro projects were not facing any genuine problems in selling the power
generated from Small Hydro Projects (SHPs) as tariff has been fixed by
the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (50२05) for sale of electricity.
However, the Committee found that in some States, developers felt that
the purchase price of power from SHP is very low. The Committee
therefore, had recommended that Ministry, should take up the matter
with all States and Union Territory having potential for Small Hydro
Projects for fixing preferential tariff for hydro power as had been done

10


by SERCs in Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Chhattisgarh and Punjab for promotion / development of new SHP projects
and desired the Ministry to have better coordination with the States to
give a major fillip to this programme.

32. In their reply, the Ministry have stated the present position
with regard to SHP development in the cited States as under:

° In the State of Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttaranchal, SHP development is mainly through private
sector participation. In Chhattisgarh, 58 SHP projects
aggregating to 500 MW have been allotted to private
developers. These projects are likely to come up in next two
years.

. In Himachal Pradesh, 110 projects aggregating about 350 MW
have been allotted to the private developers, of which
18 projects have been commissioned and 20 more projects
are scheduled to be completed during 2008-09.

. In Uttaranchal, about 30 projects stand allotted, of which
6 projects have been completed. The State Government has
reportedly revised its policy recently and it is expected that
more projects would get commissioned in the State in next
2-3 years.

. The Ministry is paying special attention to tap the hydro
potential in Arunachal Pradesh. 72 SHP projects with a total
capacity of over 90 MW are under implementation in the
State. It may be mentioned that Hon’ble Prime Minister has
announced a special package of Rs. 550 crore for the
development of small hydro and installation of solar
photovoltaic systems for electrification/illumination of border
areas in Arunachal Pradesh. Recently, Arunachal Pradesh has
also announced a policy for inviting private sector to setup
SHP projects.

न Government of Orissa has announced policy for private sector
participation to develop SHP projects. The first private sector
Project of 20 MW capacity is likely to be commissioned by
September 2008.

न 8 SHP projects aggregating 34.85 MW are under construction
in the State of Jharkhand.

है With regard to low tariffs in some States, the Ministry has
been interacting with various SERCs for giving preferential
tariff to renewable energy based power projects including

11


small hydro. More recently, it is working with the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission for evolving specific
guidelines for the pricing of renewable power. The same when
announced would help in bringing uniformity in tariff fixation
across the States.”

33. The Committee note that several Small Hydro Projects are
presently in offing both in the State Sector and the private sector. The
Committee are not satisfied with the present level of implementation
of SHP in Himachal Pradesh wherein out of 110 projects aggregating
about 350 MW and allotted to the private developers, only 18 projects
have been commissioned and 20 more projects are scheduled to be
completed during 2008-09. Similarly, in Uttaranchal, about 30 projects
stand allotted, of which 6 projects have been completed. The State
Government of Uttaranchal has reportedly recently revised its policy to
this effect and it is expected that more projects would get commissioned
in the State in next 2-3 years. Keeping in view that the SHPs are low
investment, short gestation and less environment impacting entities,
the Committee feel that they should be accorded top priority for
execution so that they can play a major role in contributing to our
quest for self-reliance in the energy sector. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government
to boost implementation of SHPs in various States. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry should chalk out and put in
place a Centralized coordinated mechanism for monitoring the progress
of implementation of all these small hydro projects across the country.

34. The Committee have been informed that Hon’ble Prime
Minister has announced a special package of Rs. 550 crore for the
development of small hydro and installation of solar photovoltaic
systems for electrification/illumination of border areas in Arunachal
Pradesh. The Committee expect the Government to implement the above
referred special package for Arunachal Pradesh in a time bound manner
and recommend the Ministry to propose for similar packages for other
bordering States as well for developing and tapping various new and
renewable energy resources.

35. Amongst the various measures being taken by the Ministry
to encourage the setting up of SHPs, the Committee find that fixing
of preferential tariff for hydro power, is a forward looking initiative
which can give a tremendous boost to SHPs. The Committee are,
however, surprised to note that SERCs of only six States have till date
fixed preferential tariff for hydro power. Apart from interacting with
the SERCs on this matter, the Committee have been informed that the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is now working with the

12


Central Electricity Regulatory Commission for evolving specific
guidelines for the pricing of renewable power. Once in place, these
guidelines are expected to usher in the much needed support for the
power generated from renewables across the States. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry in tandem with the CERC should
expeditiously finalise the guidelines for pricing of renewable power
so that a uniform tariff structure is put in place across the country at
the earliest.

i Remote Village Electrification Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 28)

36. The Committee noted with concern the poor achievements
vis-a-vis the targets fixed for Remote Village Electrification Programme
(RVEP) during the 10th Plan period where as against the sanctioned
target of 5163 villages, only 2860 villages could be electrified and a sum
of Rs. 247.33 crore was utilized against an allocation of Rs. 735 crore.
For the 11th Plan, the Ministry have earmarked an outlay of Rs. 650 crore
to cover 9000 villages. However, the Committee observed that although
in the first year of the 11th Plan (2007-08), 2000 villages/hamlets were
targeted to be covered under the programme at a cost of Rs. 108 crore,
the allocation at RE stage was drastically pruned down to Rs. 75 crore.
Further, upto 31st January, 2008, i.e, ten months of the financial year,
only 453 villages had been reported to be electrified at the cost of
Rs. 45.60 crore. Pertinently, 25% of the targeted villages had been covered
while spending 60% of the allocated funds during 2007-08. In view of
the poor achievements for the programme during 10th Plan period and
during 2007-08, the Committee recommended that the Government should
take effective steps so that the targets for the Annual Plan 2008-09 to
electrify 1500 villages at the cost of Rs. 80 crore and total target to cover
9,000 villages during the 11th Plan at the cost of Rs. 650 crore could be
achieved.

37. The Ministry in their reply have stated the position with respect
to the target and achievements for the 10th Plan as follows:

Target for coverage of remote villages for the Plan period : 5000 villages

No. of villages for which support has been sanctioned : 5163 villages

No. of villages where work was completed by March, 07  : 2860 villages

No. of villages where work was ongoing as on 31-3-2007 : 2303 villages

No. of villages where work has been completed by __: 1280 villages
March, 08

13


Thus, it can be observed that the Ministry had over-achieved the
target for sanctioning of support for the Plan period. Further, the
implementation at the ground level is the responsibility of the state
implementing agencies, most of which are, unfortunately, highly
under-staffed. The Ministry has been persistently requesting the
States to strengthen their implementation machinery and a
substantial service charge is also being provided so that financial
constraints, if any, could be overcome.

During 2007-08, against a target of providing support for 2000
villages, the Ministry approved support for 1992 villages and
hamlets. Against a BE of Rs. 143 crores and a RE of Rs. 110.55 crore,
the actual expenditure was Rs. 133 crores. It may be mentioned that
the expenditure figures would have reached BE level but for
non-availability of funds due to cuts in the Ministry's budget.

The programme provisions are being reviewed for suitable
modifications for more effective implementation during the
remaining period of the 11th Plan.”

38. The Committee are concerned to note that although the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy had sanctioned support for
5163 villages for the Remote Village Electrification Programme as
against the target set at 5000 villages during the 10th Plan, the work
was reported to be complete only in 2860 villages by March, 2007.
Taking note of the fact that as on March, 2008, work in 4140 villages
was completed, the Committee would like to be apprised of the present
status of execution of works in the remaining villages for which works
were sanctioned during the 10th Plan. The Committee are, however,
dismayed to observe that the State implementing agencies, which
execute these projects at the ground level are reported to be highly
understaffed. The Committee recommend that the Government should
take up the matter with the respective State Governments and ensure
that the target set for the 11th Plan under RVEP should not be affected
due to the reasons like understaffing of implementing agencies.

K. District Advisory Committees
Recommendation (Serial No. 30)

39. The Committee observed that the idea of setting up of the
District Advisory Committees (DACs) was to strengthen efforts of the
Government in creating mass awareness and improve the existing delivery
system for the deployment of renewable energy systems/devices. In all,
560 DACs had so far been set up with the aforesaid objectives in mind.

14


The Committee were, however, constrained to find that the DACs in
most of the States are non-functional as regular meetings thereof were
not convened. Taking strong exception to this sordid state of affairs, the
Committee emphasized that urgent action be initiated by the Ministry
to ensure that DACs be made functional and carry out the assigned job
to achieve the desired objectives.

40. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:

“In order to motivate the States about organizing DACs meetings
regularly and effectively, the Orientation-cum-training programmes
for district authorities and DAC members have been organized in
eleven States namely, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Uttaranchal, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Kerala,
Sikkim and Rajasthan. Further, regular follow-ups have been carried
out with States and Districts for organizing the meetings of DACs
regularly. The reports of meetings of DACs have been received
from 181 districts. Further, to educate the DAC members with the
latest developments on renewable energy, their visits are also
organized at Solar Energy Centre of this Ministry as per request
of the States.”

41. The Committee find that in pursuance of their
recommendation about activating the 560 District Advisory Committees,
the Ministry have organized orientation-cum-training programmes for
the district authorities and District Advisory Committee members in
eleven States. Further, Reports of meetings of District Advisory
Committees in regard to 181 districts have been received so far. In
order to educate District Advisory Committee Members with the latest
development on renewable energy, their visits are also organized at
Solar Energy Centre of the Ministry on request from the States. The
Comunittee are, however, concerned to note that despite the renewed
efforts of the Ministry, hardly one-third of the States have so far been
covered for orientation-cum-training programme of the Ministry. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should strive hard to
ensure that all District Advisory Committees are fully functional and
able to carry out the activities assigned to them. The Committee expect
the Government to complete the training programme by covering all
District Advisory Committees in a fixed timeframe.


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Para No. 1)

The Committee note that the budget allocation of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 624.09 crore
wherein Revenue Section accounts for Rs. 593.89 crore and Capital Section
constitutes Rs. 30.20 crore. Against this, the Budget Estimates (BE) for
the year 2007-08 stood at Rs. 632.90 crore, which were subsequently
reduced to Rs. 489.82 crore at Revised Estimates (RE) stage i.e. a net
reduction of about Rs. 143.08 crore. The downward revision of BE was
attributed to a general cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance and a
lower level of expenditure during the first two quarters of the preceding
financial year. What is further disquieting to note is the fact that against
planned RE of Rs. 483 crore, actual expenditure upto February, 2008 was
only Rs. 357.12 crore. Although the financial prudence for expenditure
requires that in the last month of the financial year expenditure should
not exceed 15 per cent of BE, the Committee observe that the Ministry
have, however, been permitted to utilize the funds upto RE level during
the financial year due to required re-appropriation of funds in respect
of certain sanctioned and approved projects. A scrutiny of the quarterly
utilization of funds during 2007-08 reveals that while the Ministry could
spend only Rs. 63.45 crore and Rs. 47.90 crore respectively in the first
two quarters, the bulk of expenditure took place in the 3rd and 4th quarters
of the financial year.

Recommendation (Para No. 2)

In their earlier Report, the Committee were concerned to observe
that over the years, there had been persistent shortfall in utilization of
budgeted amount by the Ministry. As a matter of corrective steps taken
in this regard, the Committee were subsequently informed that various
measures were taken by the Ministry to ensure full utilization of budget
allocation during the financial year 2007-08. These broadly included,
streamlining of procedural framework, rationalisation and simplification
of ongoing Programmes/Schemes for 11th Plan, periodic interaction with
State-level Implementing Agencies, frequent in house review meetings

16


to closely monitor the pace of expenditure, etc. The Committee are,
however, constrained to observe that despite the corrective measures
claimed to have been taken, the Ministry once again failed to match
expenditure upto the desired level of budget allocation, thereby resulting
in sizeable cut of provision at RE stage. The Committee are somewhat
content to note that total expenditure in 2007-08 would at least be at the
highest level during the past six years. While acknowledging the fact that
annual plans and projections do keep changing as there is involvement
of various agencies at the Central and State level to implement Schemes/
Programmes of the Ministry, the Committee desire that the fluctuations
should be confined to such an extent that the financial utilization of the
approved outlays and physical achievement of targets depict a realistic
assessment. The Committee are fully aware of the fact that bulk of
allocation goes for rural village electrification, urban applications and
village energy security projects and for that matter the Ministry have to
work necessarily through the concerned State Governments. This, in turn,
calls for institution of a sound mechanism for effective coordination
between the Ministry and State Governments to help curb delays that
hamper implementation of Plan Projects. In the opinion of the Committee,
holding the State Governments entirely responsible for persistent shortfall
in utilization of funds will not help the Ministry in fulfilling their mandate.
What is, therefore, imperative on the part of the Ministry is to earnestly
pursue the corrective measures initiated by them for the effective
implementation of projects and obtaining desired results. The Committee
are inclined to share the positives in the wake of several additional
initiatives launched in 2007-08 by the Ministry and trust that the level
of expenditure would improve substantially to match the budget allocation
for the current financial year 2008-09.

Reply of the Government

The concern of the Committee has been noted. It may, however,
be mentioned that during 2007-08 against a RE of Rs. 483.00 crore the
total expenditure was Rs. 479.00 crore, which was over 99% of the RE.
The endeavour of the Ministry will be to improve the level of expenditure
during the current financial year as well as distribute it over the quarters.
There would be increased interaction with the States to ensure that this
is possible to be done.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3)

Another grey area, which demands reoriented approach on the
part of the Ministry relates to undesirable rush of expenditure towards

17


the close of the financial year. The Committee recommend that the trend
of expenditure within a given financial year needs to be rationalized in
terms of financial jurisprudence and thrust should be for a balanced and
reasonably uniform pattern of spending. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the prudent measures taken by the Ministry for advance
and realistic planning in the above context.

Reply of the Government

The recommendation has been noted for further compliance. During
2008-09 the Ministry is focusing on rigorous monitoring of the progress
under various programmes right from the beginning and holding periodic
review meetings with different State agencies/stakeholders to ensure a
uniform and maximum utilization of the funds by the third quarter for
avoiding undesirable rush of expenditure toward the close of financial year.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 5)

The Committee are, however, happy to find that during 10th Plan,
overall renewable power capacity addition was to the extent of 6795 MW,
estimated to be about 25% of the capacity addition from conventional
sources during the same period, against a set target of 10%. Taking into
account the percentage share of renewables to the total energy sector
outlay, which was only 2.51% during 10th Plan, capacity addition of this
magnitude, no doubt, is appreciable and provides an encouraging trend.
At the same time, what worries the Committee, in particular, relates to
financial performance, which was very mediocre and far from inspiring.
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to draw lessons from
the past experience, reorient their approach and take suitable measures
for creating a prudent and optimal expenditure regime during 11th Plan.

Reply of the Government

The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Stress is being
laid on better planning at Annual Plan formulation stage for more realistic
assessment of the budgetary requirements. The programmes have also
been rationalized and re-oriented/classified in to 5 broad areas i.e.,
Renewable Power, Renewable Energy for Urban Industrial & Commercial
Applications, Renewable Energy for Rural Applications, Research Design
& Development in Renewable Energy, and Support programmes, for
focused implementation, which should lead to better utilization of plan
funds. The Ministry also proposes to incentivise generation of power.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
18


Recommendation (Para No. 6)

The Committee find that the target for grid-interactive renewable
power capacity addition for the 11th Plan is estimated to be 14050 MW
and target envisaged for distributed Renewable Power System is
1000 MW. Against a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 8500 crore proposed by
the Ministry for the 11th Plan, a sum of Rs. 4,000 crore has been approved,
which is considered to be inadequate for achieving planned objectives.
According to the Ministry, Planning Commission, however, has assured
that a suitable increase in the allocation could be considered based on
the performance of the Ministry in the first two years of the Plan period.
While taking note of the average performance in the first year of the plan
period where budget allocation got slashed to a major extent, the
Committee desire that the approach of the Ministry be focused towards
achieving targets set in the current Plan Period with optimum utilization
of funds so as to secure the desired increase in allocation from the Planning
Commission for the remaining three years of the 11th Plan.

Reply of the Government

As desired by the Committee the Ministry will take all steps
including help of members of Standing Committee to focus on achieving
physical and financial targets during first two years of the 11th Plan so
as to secure enhanced allocation from the Planning Commission during
the remaining three years of the 11th Plan. The endeavour of the Ministry
will also be to attract maximum private investment in the Renewable
Energy sector with the available Gross Budgetary Support.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 7)

The Committee observe that the impetus given to the 11th Plan in
terms of rationalizing the ongoing programmes during 10th Plan is a
welcome step. The Committee hope that this restructuring of the existing
activities would give better focus to specific areas and in the process the
Ministry should be able to yield better results in the 11th Five Year Plan.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry is also hopeful that the restructured programmes will
lead to better physical and financial achievements under the on-going
restructured programmes. Suggestions of the Committee will be actively
pursued for their effective implementation.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
19


Recommendation (Para No. 8)

Regarding future policy of the Government to tap energy from
various renewable sources, the Committee take note of the projection
made in the Integrated Energy Policy Report which anticipated capacity
addition of 30,000 MW from wind, 50,000 MW from biomass and
10,000 MW from solar by 2032. Although renewables are likely to account
for only around 5-6 per cent of the primary commercial energy mix by
2032, it is an imperative of the development process that the share of
renewable energy in the fuel-mix should substantially increase in the
longer term. The Committee, would, therefore, stress that continuation
of support to new and renewable energy growth will be in the country’s
long-term interest. Although the development process may warrant
selection of leasi-cost energy options, strategic and environmental concerns
may, on the other hand, demand a greater share for new and renewable
energy even though in the medium-term this option might appear
somewhat costlier. Thus, the Committee endorse that a balanced approach
for new and renewable energy that factors in the need to develop
domestic and inexhaustible sources of energy has to be adopted. With
this long-term perspective in mind, the Committee expect that the
Ministry will try its level best to achieve optimal results both in physical
and financial terms.

Reply of the Government

The Observations of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
will strive to meet the Committee’s expectations for optimal development
of renewable energy sources in the country.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)

Taking note of the fact that in our country, use of renewable energy
has been mandated through the Electricity Act, 2003 and only 12 State
Electricity Regulatory Commissions have so far notified renewable energy
portfolio standards which vary from 2 per cent to 10 per cent, the
Committee urge the Government to have a separate Renewable Energy
Law, as enacted by some of the countries across the globe, mandating
the exploitation and use of renewable energy. The Committee would like
to be informed about the precise action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

The preparation of an Umbrella Renewable Energy Law to provide
a comprehensive legislative framework for all types of renewable energy

20


technologies and usage and promotion thereof that goes beyond electricity
has recently been approved by the Energy Coordination Committee.
Further necessary action has been initiated for preparation of an initial
draft, which when ready, will be discussed with various stakeholders for
finalization.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)

The Committee emphasize that extensive and active participation
of private sector is the key for augmenting wind power generation in
the country. It is understood that all the States having potential wind
power have announced policy for this sector including declaration of
tariff for purchase of electricity from wind power projects. The Committee
take note of the host of fiscal concessions extended to the private
developers along with introduction of generation based incentives and
appreciate the consequential overwhelming achievement in the past. They
fully support the Ministry on this count and desire that these concessions
and initiatives need to be continued in the long run besides striving for
a uniform buy-back tariff regime encouraging Independent Power
Producers.

Reply of the Government

The actual expenditure under the wind power programme during
2007-08 has been Rs. 16.06 crore against the RE of Rs. 15.50 crore. Further,
against the planned target of 1500 MW for the year 2007-08, 1663 MW
has been achieved.

The fiscal incentives available for wind sector have been continued
during the year 2008-09. The Ministry has recently proposed a pilot scheme
of 50 MW incentivised through GBI as against the accelerated depreciation
route currently available. There has been a good response to the proposal
as it opens up investment to independent power producers. The Ministry
is proposing to upscale this initiative so that the targets for wind energy
for the XIth Plan are met.

The subject of tariff fixation and related issues is of quasi-judicial
nature, in the implementation of which this Ministry has no direct role.

21


Even then this Ministry has been taking up such matters with the State
Governments from time to time depending upon the facts and
circumstances of the cases. However, there is no increase in tariff for
wind power generation.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 13)

The Committee find that an allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore has been
made for Research & Development (R&D) during 2008-09 as against an
overall allocation of Rs. 190 crore on wind energy sector during 11th Plan.
According to the Ministry, R&D activities in wind energy sector are carried
out both by private sector wind turbine manufacturers and Government.
The Government R&D reportedly focuses on areas mainly relating to
design methodology for wind turbine blades, grid related studies, wind
resource assessments, maintenance aspects of major components of wind
turbine etc. The Committee have been given to understand that a
consolidated R&D strategy is in the process of finalisation before more
funds are sought during the remaining plan period. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the final R&D strategy proposed to be brought into
operation in the wind sector.

Reply of the Government

The R&D Council of the Centre for Wind Energy Technology
decided to prepare a strategy paper on coordinated R&D programme on
the identified thrust areas in wind energy sector. Inputs in this regard
have been obtained from all major stakeholders including industries,
academic and research institutions, such as, Indian Institutes of Technology,
Indian Institute of Science, CSIR laboratories, Engineering Colleges etc.
A stakeholders meeting to finalize the strategy paper has been planned
in the last week of August 2008.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee observe that a Wind Atlas with fine resolution is
essential for a country for the identification of windy locations and
the development of wind energy. The Ministry had sanctioned a project

on preparation of Indian Wind Atlas to Centre for Wind Energy

22


Technology (C-WET), Chennai in association with RISO National
Laboratory, Denmark in November, 2006 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 2 crore. The project is expected to be completed by the end of
2008-09. The Committee may be apprised of the status of this project in
due course.

Reply of the Government

The preparation of Indian Wind Atlas in association with RISO
National Laboratory, Denmark is in the final stage. Three pilot areas were
selected covering different topography and climate types. The wind
monitoring data collected from these pilot areas was used for validation
exercise. In order to have preliminary idea of the offshore wind resources,
parts of the sea surrounding the country are also included in the project.
The pilot area model and validation has been completed and the result
is found to be satisfactory for further proceeding of the project. Three
scientists of C-WET have undergone training in the numerical model.
The work under the project is in progress for completion of the Wind
Atlas by March 2009.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)

The Committee observe that utilization of solar energy is basically
effected through Photovoltaic and thermal technologies. The Programme
of the Ministry primarily includes Research and Development,
demonstration, commercialization and utilization activities in respect of
solar energy technologies. These Programmes are being implemented
through the State Nodal Agencies, IREDA, R&D and industrial
organizations. In the current financial year, an allocation of Rs. 115.75 crore
has been made for the solar energy Programme. Against this, the budget
provision for 2007-08 was of the order of Rs. 131.00 crore, which was
reduced to Rs. 81.75 crore at RE Stage. The actual expenditure incurred
by the Ministry till January, 2008 amounted to only Rs. 46.45 crore.

Reply of the Government

The actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry on solar PV and
solar thermal programmes till 31st March 2008 was Rs. 77.93 crore. *

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

23


Recommendation (Para No. 16)

The Solar Photovoltaic Programme of the Ministry consists of three
major components, namely, (i) Solar Photovoltaic technology &
Demonstration, (ii) Solar Photovoltaic Water Pumping and (iii) Urban
applications of Solar Photovoltaic. The Committee reviewed the
performance of the SPV Programme during 10th Plan at some length and
the achievements in terms of physical parameters are found to be far
from satisfactory. This is evident from the fact that the achievement was
much lower compared to the envisaged targets in respect of major
components like Solar Home Lighting systems, Solar lanterns, and Solar
Pumps. What is further disturbing to note is the fact that similar trend
continued during the subsequent year of 10th Plan i.e. 2007-08 also where
achievements lagged far behind stipulated targets. The financial
performance depicts rather a gloomy picture where a sum of only
Rs 24.84 crore could be spent till January 2008 against an enhanced RE
of Rs. 49.75 crore for the year. Expressing displeasure over the sub-optimal
performance in this sector, the Committee desire that remedial steps be
taken along with promotion of ongoing incentives to ensure fulfillment
of stipulated objectives.

Reply of the Government

The details of the physical and financial performance of the SPV
programme during the 10th plan period and the first year of 11th Plan
i.e. 2007-08 are given in the Tables below. There was a slowdown during
2004-05 and during 2005-06 till December 2005, as the Ministry announced
no new programme. A new programme could be announced only in
January 2006; therefore, the achievements of the targets are spilled over
to the next financial year. Efforts are being made to avoid such trends.
It is proposed to upscale our efforts in remote villages. The Ministry is
taking pro-active steps in promoting these applications.

A. 10th Plan Period

(i) Physical Progress

Ttem/Year 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05" 2005-06 2006-07+ Total

T Al T A TI A T A T Al EY A

Solar Home [000 28430] 50000] 11870 eet =a ‘22000] 29632] 60000 Pee
Lighting (No)

Solar Lantem (Nej]40000] 13797] | __0| 15000| 21577|100000] 72259] 30000] 22887185000 130520
Power plants & | 275] 286) 450] 445} Bie 350/375) 400) 410) 1475] 1658.7
street lights (KWp)
Salar Pumgs (No) | 1200] 1073] 1600] sai] 0] 366] | 50 22| ॥0|_ ७| 3600 | 2508]

Grid power 750 | || 730 | 1 | 1 35 | ४] | ४
plant (000)

c
R
o
2

24


(i) Financial Progress (Rs. in crore)

Budget/Expenditure [29] 2003-04 [200405 | 2005-06 | 2006-07 Total
Budget Estimate | s2a0] 78.00 [3300] [3850] 39.70 287.20
Revised Estimate 80.00) 69.10 66.00 34.65 6245} 32.20
Actual Expenditure 74.30) 63.92 21.45 344d 62.30} 256.41

B, 11th Plan Period - Year 2007-08
(i) Physical Progress

PV Systems Allocations | Achievements reported
Solar Home Lights (Nos) 63,200 59282
Solar Lantems (Nos.) 30,000 22,878
Street Lights and stand alone PV plants (kWp) 1,000 [|

(ii) Financial Progress

Budget/Expenditure 2007-08
Budget Estimate 52.50
Revised Estimate 60.75
‘Actual Expenditure 55.47

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 17)

Thermal energy collected from the sun can be utilized for a variety
of purposes, which include water heating, cooking, air-heating and drying,
water distillation and power generation. These technologies are being
promoted by the Ministry through different schemes. The Committee
note that a total of 2.15 million square metre collector area has so far
been installed for solar water heating in the country. About 30 solar
steam generating systems and 50 solar air heating systems have also been
installed in various institutions and industries. The Committee’s
examination, however, reveals that the performance of the Ministry during
the year 2007-08 was very dismal in terms of achievement of targets. It
is appalling to note that against a planned target of 20,000 solar cookers,
only 213 could be provided. Against an installation target of 6.00 lakh
square metre collector area for water heating systems, only 2.50 lakh
square metre area was covered during the period. Moreover, there was
also a substantial shortfall in the actual expenditure against a reduced
RE for the year. In the opinion of the Committee, these figures clearly
demonstrate the abject failure on the part of the Ministry in harnessing
and promoting Solar Thermal Energy Programme.

25


Reply of the Government

Under the Solar Water Heating Programme, a target of 6 lakh sq.m.
collector area was set for 2007-08, against which a total of 4.50 lakh sq.m.
collector area was installed. The RE provision was fully utilized. In case
of Solar Cookers Programme, against a target of 20,000 solar cookers for
the year 2007-08, a total of 17713 solar cookers were sold according to
reports received from States till now (July 2008). Reports from some of
the States are still awaited. The Ministry is taking pro-active steps in
promoting these applications.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 19)

The Committee find that an interest subsidy scheme is under
implementation to promote the use of solar water heaters at large scale.
Capital subsidy equivalent to upfront interest subsidy is also available
to registered institutions and commercial establishments including hotels,
hospitals etc. that do not avail soft loans under the scheme. Further efforts
are being made by the Government to get the building byelaws amended
through Municipal Corporations and State Regulatory Commissions/
Utilities for announcing rebates in property tax and electricity tariff on
use of solar water heaters. As regards Solar Cookers, the Committee have
been informed that a scheme on solar steam generating systems is under
implementation which provides support up to 50% of the cost of the
systems installed in Community kitchens of institutions and up to 35%
of the cost of systems in commercial establishments. The Committee do
appreciate and commend the Ministry for taking all these policy initiatives
for promotion of usage of these solar thermal devices. They desire that
these measures should be earnestly pursued by the Ministry for effective
implementation and the Committee be apprised of the outcome in due
course.

Reply of the Government
The Observations of the Committee have been noted and the
suggestions will be actively pursued for effective implementation of the
programmes.
[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

Recommendation (Para No. 22)

The Committee observe that most of the urban and industrial wastes
find their way into land and water bodies without proper treatment,

26


leading to problems of environmental pollution with adverse effect on
public health. The Committee are happy to note that at last the Ministry
have in pursuance of their recommendations in successive reports gone
for an estimation of the energy generation potential of urban and industrial
wastes. The Committee note that as per the estimates, the potential for
power generation from solid and liquid wastes generated in 423
Class-I cities of the country is 2600 MWs and is expected to be 5200 MW
by 2017. The Committee are, however, distressed to observe that out of
this immense amount of power generation potential, till date a mere
19.5 MW from urban waste and 59.45 MW from project based on
industrial waste have been installed which is about 3 per cent of a very
important eco-friendly source of energy. The Committee are, therefore,
concerned over the lackadaisical attitude shown by the Ministry for
exploitation of this renewable energy source in the country. The views
of the Committee are further confirmed by the target of 15 MW set in
the financial year 2008-09. The Committee feel that in view of the high
cost and depleting reserves of fossil fuels, any delay in exploitation of
currently available renewable sources of energy like urban and industrial
wastes will cause dual damage - one to the environment from the
combustion of fossil fuels and second from the pollution caused by
discharge of urban wastes in water bodies and soil. The Committee cannot
but deplore the way the Ministry continue to work at a snail's pace on
this programme of immense national value. They therefore, desire
that the Ministry should adopt a multipronged approach to give a boost
to the programme with utmost priority so that urban and industrial
wastes could be utilized for generation of energy. The Committee also
recommend that a National Master Plan with a comprehensive roadmap
for generation of 5200 MW from Urban and Industrial Wastes by 2017
should be finalized.

Reply of the Government

In regard to Energy from Municipal Solid Wastes, the Ministry has
notified a scheme for setting up of five pilot projects in January 2008 in
accordance with the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court given during
a hearing on Public Interest Litigation in May 2007. The target of 15 MW
proposed for the year 2008-09 is against an overall target of 125 MW
proposed for the 11th Five Year Plan. With a view to enlarge the
Programme on energy recovery from other urban wastes, Ministry has
taken a few other initiatives as given below:

न Scheme for energy from urban wastes has been made more
broad based by including a component of energy recovery
through co-fermentation of mix of urban, industrial and
agricultural wastes.

27


है Research and Development projects have been taken up at
Indian Institutes of Technologies for purification of biogas
for producing Natural Gas quality fuel for improving the
financial viability of biogas based projects.

° A guidebook is being prepared for promotion of setting up
projects for power generation from biogas being generated
at Sewage Treatment Plants in various cities.

In regard to industrial wastes, Ministry had initiated a separate
accelerated programme on Energy Recovery from Industrial Wastes in
the year 2005-06. During last two years, projects with an aggregate capacity
of 33 MW have been installed whereas projects with a capacity of about
15 MW are under installation. The target proposed for the 11th Five Year
Plan is 200 MW.

A National Master Plan for exploiting the entire potential for energy
recovery from urban and industrial wastes has already been prepared.
Initially five pilot projects have to be taken up as directed by the Supreme
Court after which Government will take a view on implementation of
further projects.

In the meanwhile, the subject of Energy from Urban Wastes was
also discussed in the sitting of the Standing Committee on July 30, 2008.
As desired by the Committee, a separate Note regarding the need for
support of the Ministry of Urban Development for the programme on
Energy Recovery from Municipal Solid Wastes will be sent to the
Committee by the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 23)

The Committee observe that SHP is more reliable of all renewable
energy sources and can provide electricity for remote areas and hilly
terrains in a cost effective manner. The Committee find that against the
estimated potential of SHP projects (upto 25 MW) at 15,000 MW in the
country and identified 5,403 technically feasible potential sites with an
aggregate capacity of 14,294 MW, the installed capacity of small hydro
projects (upto 25 MW) as on 31.01.2008 is only 2061.61 MW. As against
estimated potential of about 1843 MW from canal based SHP projects,
an aggregate capacity of 590 MW has been commissioned and projects
with 208 MW capacity are under implementation. The Committee are
dismayed to note that against the installed capacity of 1439 MW of SHP
upto 9th Plan, the capacity addition during 10th Plan was only 567 MW.
Further, during 2007-08 against the target of 200 MW, the actual

28


achievement is 80 MW upto 31.01.2008. The Committee are perturbed
to find that despite providing incentives such as customs duty concessions
and income tax exemption on SHP Projects and announcement of
preferential capital subsidy in 2006, the State/Private Sector has not been
able to tap the desired target during 2007-08. Hence, the Government
may look into this aspect to identify problem areas and take corrective
steps to achieve the desired objectives. Considering the current rate of
increase in the prices of fossil fuels and the rate of depletion of fossil
fuel, the Committee are of the opinion that very low physical (1400 MW)
and financial targets (Rs. 700 crore) have been set up by the Ministry for
the promotion of small hydro projects during 11th Plan. The Committee
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may aim at higher targets and
increase budgetary support for the promotion of small hydro projects so
that the small hydro potential of the country is fully tapped.

Reply of the Government

There has been a consistent growth in the installed capacity of
Small Hydro Power (SHP) projects. The SHP capacity addition increased
from 269 MW during the 9th Plan to 567 MW during the 10th Plan,
which is more than double during the 9th Plan. During 2007-08, a capacity
addition of 204 MW was achieved against the target of 200 MW.

The Ministry has a limited role to play in the development of small
hydropower projects since it is not involved in the allocation of sites and
announcement of state-level policies. However, the Ministry regularly
interacts with the State Governments/SERCs to pursue them for faster
implementation and conducive policies for SHP development.

It is brought to the notice of the Committee that the benefits of
Customs Duty concessions and income tax exemption available to SHP
projects are the same as available to conventional power projects. The
subsidy given by the Ministry for SHP projects is acting as a catalyst in
the development of these projects and the present growth of about
200 MW per year is expected to go up by about 350 MW per year by
the end of 11th Plan.

The Ministry is in the process of getting various schemes under
SHP programme evaluated through an independent organization with a
view to suitably modify these to make them more effective. The evaluation
study would also suggest measures to achieve objectives and targets for
the 11th Plan. As suggested by the Committee, all efforts will be made
to achieve higher targets to tap the small hydro potential.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

29


Recommendation (Para No. 25)

The Committee observe that due to the difficulties faced by the
Ministry in implementing the ‘interest subsidy scheme’, the utilization
of funds suffered from 2004 to 2007. The Committee, however, are
dismayed to note that the position has not improved with the introduction
of ‘capital subsidy scheme’, which has replaced the cumbersome ‘interest
subsidy scheme’ in December, 2006. The very fact that BE (2007-08) had
to be reduced by more than 25% from Rs. 40.00 crore to Rs. 29.00 crore
and the actual expenditure of a mere Rs. 10.85 crore could be made out
of the already scaled down RE in the first ten months of the current
financial year only confirms the lackadaisical approach of the Government
in the matter of giving a fillip to the programme which has an estimated
potential of 15,000 MW. In the opinion of the Committee, an element of
professionalism needs to be built into the system for effective
implementation of the Schemes. In view of the fact that the replacement
of the old ‘interest subsidy scheme’ with a new ‘capital subsidy scheme’
has done precious little in the direction of optimal utilization of funds,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should conduct a thorough
review of the scheme in all its ramifications and rectify all the problems
related to releasing of the Capital Subsidy so that the finances allocated
for BE 2008-09 are optimally and judiciously utilized and the targets
projected for the year are fully achieved. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

Financial year 2007-08 was the first year of implementation of the
new capital subsidy scheme. As per the scheme, the capital subsidy is
to be released after completion of the project and subsequent independent
evaluation of each project by a designated organization in terms of the
continuous performance as per DPR parameters for a period of 90 days.
The required system was put in position during 2007-08 for meeting the
requirements for releasing the capital subsidy for completed projects and
for the ongoing bagasse co-generation projects in cooperative sector sugar
mills. As the same terms and conditions of the scheme are continued
during 2008-09 for release of subsidy, the funds allocated for the scheme
would be utilized in full during 2008-09.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 26)

The Committee further observe that by the end of 2005-06, interest
subsidy could not be released for several matured biomass power/
co-generation projects due to cancellation of Power Purchase Agreement

30


(PPAs) as the matter was referred to the Regulators. In view of the fact
that no much headway in harnessing the huge potential of biomass has
been achieved in the country and the completed projects were not
provided with their eligible subsidy, the Committee are of the view that
a wrong signal has been conveyed to the project promoters. While
expecting that the Government might have gone into the details of the
reasons for cancellation of PPAs signed by the State Government, the
Committee recommend that such cancellation of PPAs should not be
repeated and elaborate steps be taken in advance by the Government to
prevent such eventualities. The Committee further recommend that all
potential States should also be requested to issue attractive preferential
tariff for wheeling and third party sale from Biomass Power/Cogeneration
Projects.

Reply of the Government

The matter related to cancellation of PPAs for biomass power
projects by KPTCL has been resolved and interest subsidy released to
the eligible projects during 2006-07.

The subject of issuing attractive preferential tariff, wheeling and
related issues is of quasi-judicial nature in the implementation of which
this Ministry has no direct role. Even then this Ministry has been taking
up such matters with the State Government from time to time depending
upon the facts and circumstances of the cases. 13 major States, which
have potential for generating power from biomass have already announced
conducive policy for procurement of electricity from biomass projects.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 27)

The Committee observe that the R&D expenditure during the entire
10th Plan period has been a paltry Rs. 7.56 crore and during the last three
years of the Plan period, the expenditure has gone down drastically.
While the first two years of the Plan registered R&D expenditure of
Rs. 4.96 crore, the last three years resulted in a cumulative expenditure
of Rs. 2.60 crore only. As the R&D activities hold the key to solving
operational and technical problems associated with the programme and
ushering in new and better technologies, the Committee are distressed
to point out that the expenditure on R&D for the Biomass Power/
Cogeneration Programme during the 10th Plan has been rather negligible.
The Committee, therefore, desire that utmost importance should be
attached to the R&D activities for Biomass Power/Cogeneration
Programme and expect that the amount of Rs. 4 crore which has been
allocated for the year 2008-09 for R&D support on Biomass Power/

31


Co-generation and gasification would be fully expended. The Committee
further recommend that suitable incentives should be given to the scientists
who make significant breakthroughs which would not only motivate the
scientists to work more diligently but also give a boost to the R&D
Programme.

Reply of the Government

An action plan for incurring the entire allocated amount of
Rs. 4 crore for R&D during 2008-09 has been drawn up, discussed and
reviewed in the Ministry. As many as 14 new R&D projects have been
recommended and are at various stages of sanction/implementation. Most
of these projects are being taken up with financial participation from the
associated industries and institutions. The scientists working on these
R&D projects are encouraged to obtain patents on the outcome of the
projects and transfer technologies to the interested parties.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 29)

The Committee observe that the RVEP of the Ministry aims at
providing basic lighting/electricity facilities through renewable sources
in those un-electrified remote villages and hamlets where grid connectivity
is either not feasible or not cost effective. The Ministry are implementing
the programme in all those villages which are identified by Rural
Electrification Corporation (REC) as remote and for which proposals are
submitted by the State implementing agencies. The Committee find that
one of the major problem areas for implementation is that States change
their plans, even after confirmation regarding remoteness of a village by
REC and take up for grid electrification. This is attributed to the fact that
normally grid connectivity is preferred over energy from renewable
programmes. While observing that the REC figures of 3113 and 520 remote
villages in Jharkhand and Orissa were subsequently slashed down to 520
and 20 villages, the Committee feel that the system of identification of
remote villages being followed now has inherent contradictory problems
and requires a more practical and realistic approach to succeed. The
Committee have been given to understand that REC does not have the
tequisite machinery to physically verify whether any village can be
electrified or not by providing grid connectivity and is solely dependent
on the Project Reports being submitted under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana. Since, RVEP is exclusively funded through the MNRE
budget, it is the onerous responsibility of the Administrative Ministry
to ensure that the programme implementation does not suffer on account
of these procedural bottlenecks. It is high time for the Ministry to address

32


the issue and find a lasting solution. One possible course of action could
be to obtain list of villages directly from the concerned State Governments
without involving REC in the identification process. The Committee
recommend the Ministry to consider the issue from all angles and adopt
a pragmatic procedure immune from existing drawback. The precise action
taken in the matter be intimated to the Committee.

Reply of the Government

The procedure being followed for identification of remote villages
through REC is only with a view to avoid duplicity of funding for the
same villages under the two different Central Government programmes:
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and Remote Village
Electrification Programme.

It is true that the above procedure adds to some delay in receipt
of proposals. However, the Ministry has actively coordinated the matter
with the REC to streamline the procedure and minimize the delays. The
Ministry sanctioned all the proposals received from States during
2007-08 by 31.3.2008 and no proposals were kept pending.

The slashing down of the number of remote villages by the States
for adding to the coverage under RGGVY does lead to reduced
achievements under the RVE programme. However, the overall goal of
the Government of providing electricity/lighting to all villages does not
suffer much as the villages get covered under at least one of the
programmes. Nonetheless, the Ministry has been requesting the State
Governments repeatedly to finalize the list of remote villages in one go
rather than in piece-meal manner. The same will help to hasten the
programme implementation.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 31)

The Committee find that the Ministry have put forth several
proposals for rationalization/reduction/abolition of taxes/duties being
levied on various equipment and materials used in the renewable energy
sector. In this regard, the Committee feel that exemption of 4 per cent
Additional Counter Vailing Duty (ACVD) on import of raw material,
component and parts for manufacturing of wind electricity generators
should be allowed as all other industries are allowed to set off the
4 per cent ACVD. Further, to give a level playing field to all wind energy
manufacturers, the Committee feel that exemption of Excise Duty/CVD
as presently given for epoxy resins should also be given to polyester
resin for manufacture of rotor blades.

33


Reply of the Government

These proposals, which formed part of the Ministry’s annual budget
proposals for 2008-09, did not then get accepted in the Ministry of Finance.
These will be reiterated in the budget proposals for 2009-10.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 32)

The Ministry have proposed inclusion of ‘permanent magnets’ for
manufacture of permanent magnets synchronous generators of high
generation power capacities above 500 KW for use in wind electricity
generators, in the list of parts of WEGs attracting a concessional customs
duty of 5%. The Committee understand that as of now these magnets
are not available in India and are imported. The Committee are of the
opinion that such a concession will go a long way in promoting indigenous
production of permanent magnets synchronous generators for use in wind
turbines for induction of latest advanced technology in the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should give a serious
thought to this proposal.

Reply of the Government

The proposal will be reiterated in the Ministry’s budget proposals
for 2009-10.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 33)

The Committee also endorse the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy’s proposal that small biomass power projects such as those taken
up in distributed generation mode for electrification of villages should
also be given concessions in Custom and Excise Duties which at present
are available to those power projects used for selling electricity to grid.
Further, to encourage production and use of ethanol for reducing
dependence on import of crude oil for meeting the energy requirements,
the Committee feel that existing duty on ethanol of 16% may be reasonably
brought down to bring domestically procured ethanol at least on par
with the imported ethanol.

Reply of the Government

Both these proposals will be reiterated in the Ministry’s budget
proposals for 2009-10.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
34


Recommendation (Para No. 34)

The Committee observe that the anomalies existing in duty structure
on Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) Sector are even more glaring. The Committee
find that the present duty structure is totally loaded against indigenous
manufacture of SPV modules. A complete SPV module when imported
invites no duty, whereas when components of SPV module are separately
imported by indigenous manufacturers, an import duty of 16% is imposed
making the locally manufactured SPV module totally incompetitive
vis-a-vis the imported ones. The Committee would like the Government
to consider immediate relief measures in the interest of local industry.

Reply of the Government

The proposal will be reiterated to the Ministry of Finance in the
budget proposals for 2009-10.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 35)

The Committee also find the proposal of the Ministry for income
tax rebate on domestic installation of Solar Water Heaters worth
considering. This one time rebate of Rs. 20,000 in computation of Income
‘Tax in the year of purchase of Solar Water Heater will be a very welcome
step in promoting solar energy appliances in the country. It is, therefore,
but imperative that the Government give a positive consideration to this
proposal in the long term perspective of energy conservation and use of
cleaner energy. The Committee would like to be apprised of the decision
on all these proposals at the earliest.

Reply of the Government
The proposal, which formed part of the Ministry's annual budget
proposals for 2008-09, did not then get accepted in the Ministry of Finance.
It will be reiterated in the budget proposals for 2009-10.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

35


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (Para No. 4)

The Committee note that the approved Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) for the 10th Plan (2002-03 to 2006-07) was to the tune of Rs. 4000
crore including a provision of Rs. 400 crore for North-East Region.
The consolidated BE for the five plan periods stood at Rs. 3046.25 crore
and the RE for the same period was of the order of Rs. 1988.44 crore.
It is a matter of concern that against a downsized RE of Rs. 1988.44 crore,
the actual expenditure during the period amounted to only
Rs. 1717.51 crore, which obviously is indicative of sub-optimal utilization
of approved allocation. A review of physical performance during the
period reveals that while the Ministry have done exceedingly well in
sectors like Wind Power, Small Hydro and Biomass Power/Cogeneration,
the performance in areas of Solar Photovoltaic and Solar Thermal Energy
Programmes woefully lagged behind.

Reply of the Government

The performance in the area of the Solar energy covering Solar
Photovoltaic and Solar Thermal has lagged behind mainly because of the
relatively higher cost and poorer techno-economic viability of solar power
generation technologies compared to wind power, small hydro power
and biomass power/cogeneration given the current state of development
of these technologies.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

36


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (Para No. 10)

Taking note of the vision and mandate of the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy, the Committee place on record the fact that an uphill
task is on the cards for years to come. In this context, the Committee
pondered over a possible conceptional change in regard to the ultimate
use of energy drawn from renewable sources. The Committee find that
approach so far has been to use renewable energy as a substitute for
conventional energy, which sooner or later would face a consumer
resistarice primarily on economic grounds. There is no denial of the fact
that conventional energy is preferred to renewable energy. In this scenario,
the Committee opine that there need to be a new approach to consider
renewable energy not as a substitute but as an additional, as a parallel,
as a stop gap and as a superior energy because it is in the national
interest. At this stage, the Committee put it as a poser and certainly
would await a response from the Government as to how this can be
translated into a policy change.

Reply of the Government

It is an action imperative for the country to pursue all energy
options— conventional, renewable and nuclear— to achieve its long term
goals of energy security and energy independence. The Integrated Energy
Policy Report of the Expert Committee constituted by Planning
Commission has attempted to lay down a road map in this regard and
the same is under consideration of the Government. In so far as Renewable
Energy is concerned, the endeavor of the Ministry will continue towards
lowering the costs and improving the reliability of various renewable
energy systems through support to sustained R&D efforts. The Ministry
will attempt conceptual clarity in the framework document to be prepared
for the proposed Solar Mission.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

37


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)

The Committee observe that in spite of mature and proven
technology available for wind energy and active involvement of private
sector, against an estimated potential of 45,000 MW of wind power in
the country, the present installed capacity is only 7,938 MW as of January,
2008. A scrutiny of relevant data reveal that the original allocation of
Rs. 21.00 Crore for wind energy programme was revised to Rs. 15.50 Crore
at the RE stage during the year 2007-08. Further, against the reduced
allocation, the expenditure incurred upto January, 2008 was only
Rs. 5.40 Crore. The Committee are dismayed to find that the Ministry
also failed to achieve the envisaged target and the shortfall was to the
extent of 655 MW. The Committee take strong objection to the reasons
adduced by the Ministry in this regard, which are not only of a generalized
nature but also repetitive in character. In the aforesaid background, the
Ministry certainly need to focus their attention on this grey area and take
remedial steps to reverse the undesirable trend. In the opinion of the
Committee, lack of initiative and zeal in implementing and monitoring
projects and resolving unanticipated problems, lowering of allocation at
RE stage coupled with subsequent shortfall in utilization of funds are
apparent factors for non-achievement of the planned targets. The
Committee recommend that progress on projects and expenditure position
need to be improved in the current period to achieve the target of
2,000 MW grid-interactive power capacity addition from Wind Power
fixed for 2008-09.

Reply of the Government
A combined reply is given under Question No. 12.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee appreciate the new initiative of the Ministry to
promote installation of mega-watt scale solar power generation plants of
a minimum capacity of 1 MW. The Ministry has earmarked Rs. 14 Crore

for 2008-09 for this programme to achieve capacity installation of 14 MW.

38


In this backdrop, the Committee recommend that the cap set for the
promotion of grid interactive mega-watt scale solar power generation
programme be suitably reviewed to encourage interested States like
Rajasthan so that the Budgetary support of Rs. 14 crores (BE) for
2008-09 is fully utilized. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry
may alternatively explore possibility of sponsoring one of the mega-watt
scale demonstration project in the premises of Solar Energy Centre to
get proper feedback/evaluation of the programme.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry is of the view that the targets announced under the
demonstration programme may continue to be implemented and initial
performance data be collected on megawatt size grid connected power
plants. This may not be linked to review of the scheme including removal
of cap. The States, which have announced separate tariff for solar power,
can implement solar power projects outside the demonstration programme
of the Ministry. There is no restriction to take up projects by such States.
A 2 MWp capacity solar PV power plant is being set up in West Bengal.
The other States are also expected to clear projects for support under the
demonstration programme. The recommendation of the Committee to set
up one of the MW-scale solar power plants in the premises of SEC for
getting feedback/evaluation of the programme has been noted. Under the
proposed Solar Mission, it is proposed to upscale the quantum of solar
generated electricity.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 23 & 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)

The Committee had expressed deep concern during evidence over
the absence of proper follow-up and maintenance mechanism subsequent
to installation of various solar devices under the solar Photovoltaic
Programmes of the Ministry. The Committee drew the attention of the
Ministry to the consequential difficulties faced by the consumers in the
event of failure of the devices, in the absence of a reliable and long-term
service back up. The Committee observe that in such a scenario, the
confidence level of users is very low and functional reliability of the
various systems is in question. In this context, the Secretary, MNRE assured
the Committee that a maintenance support mechanism will be built into
the system for redressing the post-installation problems faced by the
users. The Committee would like to be informed of the precise action
taken in the matter.

39


Reply of the Government

The programmes of the Ministry have a provision of Annual
Maintenance Contract for 5 years for the SPV systems, including 2 years
warranty on the complete systems. The State agencies are expected to
monitor the progress before they release funds for AMC to system
suppliers on annual basis. The agencies will be requested to strengthen
the existing after sales service network through Akshaya Urja shops and
the service centers set up by the manufacturers which are involved in
the supply of the systems.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)

The Committee observe that against an allocation of Rs. 17.5 crore
for Research and Development (R&D) during past three years for solar
energy sector, only Rs. 1.44 crore could be expended in this direction.
Notwithstanding the reasons advanced for meagre spending in this area,
the Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry should focus their
attention in a big way on R&D investment in solar energy. The Committee
emphasize that vision should be beyond the photovoltaic technology to
enhance efficiency and for that matter the Ministry need to venture
technology collaboration with leading players in the field across the globe.
The basic idea is that the Ministry should make intensive efforts to adopt
the mature and proven technology globally available for solar energy to
make solar power cost-competitive and commercially viable. The
Committee believe that breakthrough in this field would support the
Ministry in a big way in their pursuit to bring down the cost of solar
energy generation compared to that from conventional sources.

Reply of the Government

The global efforts in the solar power generation are to achieve
technological breakthroughs to significantly reduce the cost through both
solar photovoltaic and solar thermal routes. Several technology options
are emerging, however, no proven option is available to give cost
competitive and commercially viable solar energy technologies. The focus
of the R&D efforts during the 11th plan is to support development of
solar energy technologies, which could lead to improvements in the
performance and cost reduction. The recently announced demonstration
programme for grid interactive solar power projects encourages project

40


developers to use efficient technologies that could be available nationally
and globally to achieve cost competitiveness of the projects, and thereby
leading to introduction of the advanced technologies in the country. Under
the Solar Mission, an R&D strategy will be proposed after consultation
with experts.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 24)

The Committee are concerned to find that in some States only a
very small quantum of identified SHP potential has been tapped so far.
A scrutiny of relevant data reveals that the ratio of installed capacity of
SHP projects to potential availability in the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttrakhand is
very dismal. The committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for
such abysmal performance in respect of these States and measures taken
to improve level of achievement. The Committee are given to understand
that the private developers for small hydro projects are not facing any
genuine problem in selling power generated from small hydel projects
as tariff has been fixed by the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(SERCs) for sale of electricity. However, the Committee find that in some
States, developers feel that the purchase price is very low. The Committee
therefore, recommend that Ministry, should take up the matter with all
States and Union Territory having potential for SHP projects for fixing
preferential tariff for hydro power as have been done by SERCs in
Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh
and Punjab for promotion/development of new SHP projects. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should have better coordination with
the States to give a major fillip to this programme.

Reply of the Government

The present position w.r.t. SHP development in the cited States is
as under:—

. In the State of Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttaranchal, SHP development is mainly through private
sector participation. In Chhattisgarh, 58 SHP projects
aggregating to 500 MW have been allotted to private
developers. These projects are likely to come up in next two
years.

4


. In Himachal Pradesh, 110 projects aggregating about 350 MW
have been allotted to the private developers, of which 18
projects have been commissioned and 20 more projects are
scheduled to be completed during 2008-09.

¢ In Uttaranchal, about 30 projects stand allotted, of which 6
projects have been completed. The State Government has
recently revised its policy and it is expected that more projects
would get commissioned in the State in next 2-3 years.

° The Ministry is paying special attention to tap the hydro
potential in Arunachal Pradesh. 72 SHP projects with a total
capacity of over 90 MW are under implementation in the
State. It may be mentioned that Hon’ble Prime Minister has
announced a special package of Rs. 550 crore for the
development of small hydro and installation of solar
photovoltaic systems for electrification/illumination of border
areas in Arunachal Pradesh. Recently, Arunachal Pradesh has
also announced a policy for inviting private sector to setup
SHP projects.

* Government of Orissa has announced policy for private sector
participation to develop SHP projects. The first private sector
project of 20 MW capacity is likely to be commissioned by
September 2008.

e 8 SHP projects aggregating 34.85 MW are under construction
in the State of Jharkhand.

With regard to low tariffs in some States, the Ministry has been
interacting with various SERCs for giving preferential tariff to renewable
energy based power projects including small hydro. More recently, it is
working with the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission for evolving
specific guidelines for the pricing of renewable power. The same when
announced would help in bringing uniformity in tariff fixation across the
States.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21-07-2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 33, 34 & 35 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 28)

The Committee note with concern the poor achievements vis-a-vis
the targets fixed for Remote Village Electrification Programme (RVEP)
during the 10th Plan period where against a sanctioned target of

42


5163 villages, only 2860 villages could be electrified and a sum of Rs. 247.33 crore
was utilized against an allocation of Rs. 735 crore. For the 11th Plan,
the Ministry have earmarked an outlay of Rs. 650 crore to cover
9000 villages. However, the Committee observe that although in the first year
of the 11th Plan (2007-08), 2000 villages/hamlets were targeted to be
covered under the programme at a cost of Rs. 108 crore, the allocation
at RE stage was drastically pruned down to Rs. 75 crore. Further, upto
31st January, 2008, i.c., ten months of the financial year, only 453 villages
have been reported to be electrified at the cost of Rs. 45.60 crore.
Pertinently, 25% of the targeted villages have been covered while spending
60% of the allocated funds during 2007-08. In view of the poor
achievements for the programme during 10th Plan period and during
2007-08, the Committee recommend that the Government should take
effective steps so that the targets for the Annual Plan 2008-09 to electrify
1500 villages at the cost of Rs. 80 crore and total target to cover
9,000 villages during the 11th Plan at the cost of Rs. 650 crore would be achieved.

Reply of the Government

The position with respect to the target and achievements for the
10th Plan is as follows:

Target for coverage of remote villages for the Plan period : 5000 villages
No. of villages for which support has been sanctioned : 5163 villages

No. of villages where work was completed by March, 2007 : 2860 villages

No. of villages where work was ongoing as on 31.3.2007 : 2303 villages

No. of villages where work has been completed by _: 1280 villages
March, 2008

Thus, it can be observed that the Ministry had over-achieved the
target for sanctioning of support for the Plan period. Further, the
implementation at the ground level is the responsibility of the State
implementing agencies, most of which are, unfortunately, highly under-
staffed. The Ministry has been persistently requesting the States to
strengthen their implementation machinery and a substantial service
charge is also being provided so that financial constraints, if any, could
be overcome.

During 2007-08, against a target of providing support for
2000 villages, the Ministry approved support for 1992 villages and hamlets.
Against a BE of Rs. 143 crores and a RE of Rs. 110.55 crore, the actual
expenditure was Rs. 133 crores. It may be mentioned that the expenditure
figures would have reached BE level but for non-availability of funds due
to cuts in the Ministry's budget.

43


The programme provisions are being reviewed for suitable
modifications for more effective implementation during the remaining
period of the 11th Plan.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21.07.2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 30)

The Committee observe that the idea of setting up of the District
Advisory Committees (DACs) was to strengthen efforts of the Government
in creating mass awareness and improve the existing delivery system for
deployment of renewable energy systems/devices. In all, 560 DACs have
been set up so far with the above objectives in mind. The Committee are,
however, constrained to find that the DACs in most of the States are non-
functional as regular meetings thereof are not convened. Taking strong
exception to this sordid state of affairs, the Committee emphasize that
urgent action be initiated by the Ministry to ensure that DACs are made
functional and carry out the assigned job to fulfil the desired objectives.
The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this
regard and the performance status of these DACs.

Reply of the Government

In order to motivate the States about organizing DACs meetings
regularly and effectively, the Orientiation-cum-training programmes for
district authorities and DAC members have been organized in eleven
States namely, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Haryana, Uttaranchal, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Kerala, Sikkim and
Rajasthan. Further, regular follow-ups have been carried out with States
and Districts for organizing the meetings of DACs regularly. The reports
of meetings of DACs have been received from 181 districts. Further, to
educate the DAC members with the latest developments on renewable
energy, their visits are also organized at Solar Energy Centre of this
Ministry as per request of the States.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2008-P&C, dated 21.07.2008]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 41 of Chapter-I of the Report)

44


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL,

AWAITED

— NIL -
New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
27 January, 2009 Chairman,
7 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON
27TH JANUARY, 2009 IN COMMITTE
ROOM ‘C’, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1150 hrs.

PRESENT

Shri Jesudasu Seelam — In the Chair

Menoers
Lok Sabha
Smt. Susmita Bauri
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

छ छा की. ७ ७

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Rajya Sabha
Dr. Bimal Jalan
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha
10. Shri Shivpratap Singh
11. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary-Il


2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Jesudasu Seelam, a Member of the Committee, under Rule 258(3)
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, to act as
Chairman for the sitting. The acting Chairman welcomed the Members
of the Committee to the sitting. The Committee then took up for
consideration/adoption the following draft Reports and adopted the same
without any amendment/modifications:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Draft Report on the subject “Role of CERC and SERCs in the
Protection of Interests of Consumers”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on recommendations contained
in the 22nd Report of the Committee on the subject “Ultra
Mega Power Projects”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 25th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-09.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for
the year 2008-09.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

47


0)
Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

APPENDIX II

(Vide introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)
Total number of Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:

SI. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19,
22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35

Total :

Percentage :

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies:

SI. No. 4

Total :
Percentage

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:

SI. Nos. 10, 11, 18, 20, 21,24, 28 and 30

Total :
Percentage

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
final replies of the Government are still awaited:

Total :

Percentage

35

26
74.29%

01
2.86%

08
22.85%

00
00


‘All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above.”