STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2004-2005)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

THIRD REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


THIRD REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2004-2005)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS

(2004-2005)

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on...¥. 9..MA\ ४0

Laid in Rajya Sabha on ’

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


C.E. No. 148

Price : Rs. 36.00

© 2005 sy Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Pace
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iii)
INTRODUCTION .... (v)
Carter I 1
Carter II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government 24
Cuarrer IIT Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies 31
Carrer IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee 54
(शायर V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited 67
-ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the eighth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Energy (2004-05) held on 28.1.2005...... श्र 81

IL Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the First Report
of the Standing Committee on Energy (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) aan

83



COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

- Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

13. Shri Khiren Rijiju

14. Shri Nandkumar Sai

15. Shri M. Shivanna

16. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

17. Shri M.K. Subba

18. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

19. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

20. Shri G. Venkataswamy

21. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

OPN A छा के ७ pi

pik आल
BES

Rajya Sabha

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
26. Shri Bimal Jalan

(iii)


27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

(iv)

Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Anand 8. Kulkami — Joint Secretary
3. Shri PK. Bhandari — Director

4. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Assistant Director


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 1st Report
of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Power.

2, The First Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 19th August 2004. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 17th January, 2005.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 28th January, 2005.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the First Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-IL.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deu; GURUDAS KAMAT,
February 10, 2005 __ Chairman,

Magha 21, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


a al | s gf oF uF

हि |_|
obeFl = wor fee ।

all
- =e

Fie "31" oA i hi
४ ele et ah ft


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 1st Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Power which was
presented to the Lok Sabha on 19th August, 2004.

2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 24 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

Sl. Nos. 4, 20 and 21

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to persue in view of the Government's replies:

SL Nos. 5, 6, 12, 14, 18, 19 and 22

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:

Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 7, 9, 10 and 11

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

81. Nos. 3, 8, 13 15, 16, 17, 23 and 24

3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of
recommendation for which only interim reply have been given by the
Government should be furnished at the earliest.

4. The Committee also desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, where at is not possible for the Government to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported to the Commiittee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.


5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/ observations.

A. Under-Utilization of Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (51, Nos. 1 & 2, Para Nos. 2.10 & 2.11)

6. The Committee were perturbed to note that the Ministry of
Power had projected higher plan outlays during the years 2002-03 and
2003-04 which were drastically reduced at RE stage and ultimately
they had failed to utilise the reduced amount also. The Ministry of
Power had used only 8649.22 crore during 2002-03 against the Budget
Estimates of 13483 crore and Revised Estimates of 11268.36 crore only
and surrendered an amount of Rs. 4833.78 crore. Similarly the Plan
Outlays of the Ministry for 2003-04 were Rs. 14667.61 crore which
were reduced to Rs. 12037.77 crore at RE stage. The actual utilization
of funds during 2003-04 was Rs. 10741.00 and the Ministry of Power
had surrendered an amount of Rs. 3927.00 as compared to BE for the
year. The Committee were not satisfied with the reasons furnished by
the Government for non-utilisation of the amount. The Committee did
not approve the practice being followed by the Ministry of Power
which had been asking for higher allocations year after year, but the
implementation of plans and policies were poor as ground realities
were not taken into account while formulating and implementing the
plans. The Committee were pained to note that although they had
repeatedly recommended for formulation of realistic plans but no action
had been taken by the Government on those recommendations. The
Committee had, however, expected that intensified monitoring
mechanism which was being put in place by the Ministry of Power
would ensure that budgeted amounts earmarked at the BE stage are
fully utilised during 2004-05. At the same time the Committee had
desired that the Government should review all the on-going schemes
in the month of July-August and if required, re-allocate the funds
budgeted amounts during the financial year.

7. While observing the quarterly utilisation of funds by the Ministry
of Power during 2003-04 the Committee had noted that the quarterly
comparison with preceding year indicated that expenditure during first
three quarters of the financial year was very low and it was only in
the last quarter, the percentage utilization of funds was above the
normal. They had viewed that unhealthy trend of not spending any
amount during first quarter of the financial year and rushing to major
expenditure in the last quarter, especially in the month of February
and March against the financial norms and treated that as a system


failure on large scale. The Committee had, therefore, strongly
recommended that a meaningful and relevant programmes and policies
be formulated for regular infusion of funds in various projects /schemes
in all quarters of the financial year and the total utilization plan outlays.
The Committee liked to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

8. In their reply, the Ministry of Power has submitted the following
explanation in this regard:—

“Tn this connection it is mentioned that out of the BE or Rs. 3600.00
crore an amount of Rs. 2760.00 crore is provided for on-going
projects or projects likely to be approved i.e. on-going projects of
NHPC, two projects of NEEPCO are likely to be approved by the
Cabinet, Tehri-project for which the approval for RCE is at an
advanced stage and for AGSP and Rural Electrification Programme.
It is, therefore, every possibility that the budgeted amount for the
year 2004-05 would be fully utilized. As regard monitoring
mechanism it is mentioned that Ministry of Power has taken the
corrective measures to ensure that the budgeted amounts earmarked
at the BE stage is fully utilized during 2004-05. An intensified
monitoring mechanism has been put in place as indicated herewith:—

(i) Weekly review by Secretary (Power) of the status of
investment approval new of projects. Constant follow-up
with Finance Ministry and Planning Commission is taken
up to expedite the same so as to ensure approval of the
Competent Authority and thereby utilization of budgeted
expenditure.

(ii) Monthly review by Chairman, CEA of all projects.
(iii) Three stage approval process for Hydro Projects to ensure
adequacy of Survey & Investigation, creation of all essential

infrastructure required for commencement of construction
before accord of final approval by the CCEA.

(iv) Comprehensive quarterly review by Secretary (Power) of
status of all ongoing and new projects.

(v) Representatives from Planning Commission and Programme
Implementation.

(vi) Periodical review with States on Capacity addition/APDRP/
Village Electrification.


(vii) Periodical reviews with States on Capacity meetings with
M/o P&NG; M/o Coal; M/o E&F; M/o WR for expositions
clearances for the projects.

(viii) Periodic reviews with Private Projects developers.

(ix) Periodic visits to States-Comprehensive individual review
with the State Governments.

(x) Periodic project visit.

As regard review of the project, it is mentioned that while
preparation of the RE for 2004-05, the complete review of all
ongoing projects/plans would be done. A circular has already been
issued to all concerned in this regard.”

9. About the regular utilisation of funds in all quarters of the
financial year, the Ministry of Power has stated as under:—

“Tt is mentioned that in a meeting taken by Finance Minister with
FAs on 23.7.2004, it is also desired that the existing instructions
about 33% utilisation of the budget during the last quarter should
be strictly followed. Accordingly, a circular has already been issued
to all concerned for compliance of the instructions of Ministry of
Finance as well as observations of the Audit/Standing Committee.”

10. The Committee are concerned to note the under-utilisation of
budgeted amount over the years. The Committee are surprised to
note that without learning anything from the past, the Ministry of
Power is still following the same approach and by the end of third
quarter, most of the Projects/Schemes are at approval stage only. The
Ministry has not obtained the Review Reports from the PSUs about
the performance of their schemes. Moreover, they have issued
instructions to the PSUs to restrict their utilisation of Budget upto
33% during the last quarter of the year. Under these circumstances,
the Committee do not find any convincing reason to believe the tall
claim of the Ministry of Power hoping full utilisation of allocation
during the current Financial year. The Committee, therefore, do not
agree with the present approach of the Government and desire that
the Ministry of Power should take all corrective measures for
maximum utilisation of budgeted amount during 2004-05 after
obtaining the Project Review Reports from all the Undertakings on
priority basis. The Committee expect that by proper and timely
implementation of monitoring mechanism, the Ministry of Power
would ensure better utilisation of funds during the remaining months
of current Financial year.


B. Enhanced Delegation of Financial Powers for Clearance of Projects
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.12)

11, The Committee had found that budget utilisation was linked
to the investment approval by the competent authority for each new
project. The Committee had referred their observations made in their
40th Report (13th Lok Sabha) about the procedure being followed for
approval of thermal and hydel projects and the suggestion made by
the Ministry of Power that the existing procedures for obtaining
approval of projects needed to be streamlined in order to step up the
utilisation of funds. Taking note of the proposal of the Ministry of
Power to enhance the delegation of powers for implementation of
power projects for the consideration of the Cabinet, the Committee
had found that the existing ceiling of 100 crore prescribed for CCEA
approval was too meagre. The Committee had, therefore, reiterated
their earlier recommendation made in their 40th Report (13th Lok
Sabha) to enhance delegation of powers to the Ministry and its PSUs.
The Comunittee had felt that there was a need of thorough analysis of
the reasons for delay which could be related to environment/ forests,
land acquisition, law and order problems, tying up of financial
resources, selling and power purchase agreements, etc. At the same
time the Committee had favoured suggestion of the Ministry of Power
regarding creation of Power Investment Commission for all projects in
power sector on the lines of Telecom Commission or the National
Highway Authority of India (NHAI) whereby PIB/CCEA clearance
could be obtained for 5 years plan target irrespective of taking clearance
for individual projects. The Committee had desired that the Ministry
of Power should immediately take up this matter with the Government
at appropriate level and apprise the Committee of the resultant
outcome.

12. On the issue of the proposal of enhanced delegation of financial
powers, the Ministry of Power has submitted following reply:—

“The Ministry of Power has taken the issue of enhanced delegation
of financial powers with the Ministry of Finance. The proposal
mooted by this Ministry seeks to streamline the appraisal as well
as the approved process for power projects. While at present, the
projects for Government approval have to undergo multiple
appraisals by same agencies, it has been proposed that the appraisal
may be restricted only at one level with greater and more effective
scrutiny. After such appraisal, the level of approval has also been
proposed to be delegated with higher financial autonomy.


The matter was discussed in a meeting of the Committee of
Secretaries who have recommended enhanced delegation of
financial power upto Rs. 1500 crore to the Ministry of Power. A
draft cabinet note on the basis of the above recommendation has
been circulated for the same”.

13. The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Power has
taken the issue of enhanced delegation of financial powers with
Ministry of Finance and the matter has been discussed in a meeting
of the Committee of Secretaries and draft Cabinet note has been
circulated for the same. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry of Power should continue their sincere efforts at this stage
at the highest level so that the final decision in this regard is taken
in the shortest possible time. Simultaneously, the Ministry should
undertake a thorough analysis of the reasons for delay which can be
related to environment, forests, land acquisition, law and order
problem, tying up of financial sources selling and power purchase
agreements etc. with a view to find solutions for such delays in
implementation of projects. The Committee are surprised to note
that the Ministry has not taken any initiative in the direction of
establishing power Investment Commission for all projects in power
sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that Ministry should also
pursue their suggestion regarding creation of power Investment
Commission for all projects in power sector vigorously and apprise
the Committee about the outcome of the efforts made by them in
these areas.

C. Capacity Addition Targets
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.22)

14. The Committee had observed that capacity addition programme
of the Government during 9th Plan was not better than 8th Plan
achievements. Against a target capacity addition of 40245.2 MW set
for the 9th Plan, the actuals were only 19015 MW. The Committee had
noted that both Central and Private sectors had lagged behind the
targets set during 9th Plan in both thermal and hydel sectors. The
Committee therefore, had come to an irresistible conclusion that over-
optimistic and unachievable targets were set by the Government which
they had never come close to achievement during the last two Plan
periods. In spite of Committee’s earlier recommendations to project
realistic and achievable targets, the matter had not been seriously
considered. The hydel Sector had failed to materialize its targets,
consequently leading to adverse hydel thermal mix. Over-dependence
and a total reliance on private sector had failed to show any positive
results so far. In the same context, the Committee had reiterated their


earlier recommendation that it might not be desirable for the
Government to diminish their role or withdraw themselves from the
power sector lest private sector should fail again (29th Report of
13th Lok Sabha). The Committee were of the opinion that power sector
should be rejuvenated and restructured. There was a need to extend
adequate Budgetary support to hydel sector, so that optimal 60:40
hydel-thermal ratio mix be attained. The Planning Commission
estimated a feasible capacity addition of 47,000 MW during the 10th
Plan. Considering the 8th & 9th Plans performance, the Committee
treated this target a difficult one to achieve. The Committee opined
that the Government did not take any corrective action to check those
reasons which resulted in failure of 9th Plan targets. The Committee
had, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation, that only
achievable and realistic targets with firm details of the source of
funding for capacity generation programme. The Committee had
desired that somewhere accountability should be fixed for projecting
unrealistic targets and failure to achieve the targets fixed. The
Committee had urged that the Government should, at least now, ensure
that the projected 10th Plan targets were achieved. The Committee
liked to be apprised of the follow-up corrective action taken by the
Government.

15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Power has
submitted the following details about the 10th Plan targets:—

“Taking note of the experience in the 8th and 9th Plan periods,
the 10th Plan capacity addition target has consciously provided a
more modest role for the private sector projects. The Central Power
Sector Undertakings have a major share of the target for capacity
addition in the 10th Plan.

A capacity addition target of 41,110 MW has been set for the 10th
Plan. Out of this, the share of Central Sector is 22832 MW and.
that of the Private Sector is 7121 MW. The State Sector has a share
of 11157 MW. The 10th Plan target details are summarized in the
table presented below:

(in MW)
Source Central State Private Total
Hydro 8742 4481 1170 14393
Thermal 12790 6676 5951 25417
Nuclear 1300 — = 1300

Total 22832 11157 7121 41110



16. About the efforts being made to achieve the targets, the Ministry
of Power have stated as under:—

“Capacity addition realization was less than 50% of the targets in
VIII and IX Five Year Plans and it was imperative to have alternate
strategy in place. The following efforts are being made for
realization of targets:—

The 10th Plan capacity addition targets were finalized in
consultation with the States and on the basis of identification
of individual projects.

The monitoring mechanism has been strengthened. The CEA
has a nodal officer for each project, both at the conception
stage as well as during execution. In addition, regular review
meetings are being organized in the Ministry of Power.

The experience of earlier Plans’ capacity addition programme
suggest that number of power projects could not take off
within the plan period in want of necessary clearances from
various Organizations/Ministries and other project related
issues. To overcome this deficiency, during X Plan, back up
projects totalling 10,873 MW, comprising of 10643 MW in
thermal and 230 MW in hydro, have been identified for
being taken up in case originally targeted power projects
could not take off due to various reasons.

The role of REC has been expanded to cover financing of
generation projects. This would enable REC to supplement
the efforts of PFC in financing generation projects. These
two organizations have mobilized themselves adequately to
see that the execution of a good project is not hampered
due to lack of funds.

Procedure for getting clearances has been simplified. As per
the Electricity Act, 2003, the requirement of according
Techno-economic clearance by CEA has been dispensed with
for thermal generation. However, any generating company
intending to set up a hydro generating station shall prepare
and submit to the Authority for its concurrence a scheme
estimated to involve a capital expenditure exceeding such
sum, as may be fixed by the Central Government from time
to time, by Notification. Planning Commission has delegated
full powers to State Governments for approval of power
projects without any ceiling. Clearance from Planning
Commission is to be restricted only to those hydro-electric
Projects where inter-State issues are involved.


The Central Plan outlay has been increased by more than three
times in the 10th Plan in comparison to 9th Plan. The Planning
Commission has allocated an outlay of Rs. 1,43,399 crore for the
Ministry of Power for the 10th Plan. This includes a budgetary support
of Rs. 25,000 crore. The corresponding figures for the 9th Plan were
Rs. 45591 crore and Rs. 14943 crore respectively. To promote hydro
power development in the country, Planning Commission had provided
adequate budgetary support to the extent of Rs. 17,000 crore exclusively
for Central Hydro Power Corporations out of the total budgetary
support of Rs. 25,000 crore for Ministry of Power during the Tenth
Plan period. This works out to 68% budgetary support exclusively for
hydro power projects in the Central Sector.

17. About the achievements in 10th Plan the Ministry have stated
as under:—

“The status of the 10th Plan projects is presented in the table
given below:—

Total Central State Private Total
(Thermal+Hydro+Nuclear)

Target 22832 1157 ग्रा 41110
A. Already commissioned 5580 290 648 8518
A as % of Target 24.4% 205% 9.1% 20.7%
B. Under Construction 12517 9939 4406 26862
B as % of Target 54.8% 89.1% 62% 65.3%,
A + B as % of Target 92% 109.6% 71% 86%

As presented in table above, 20.7% of the target has been
commissioned, 65.3% of the target is under execution and the
remaining is under award stage. With this picture, it is expected
that achievement of 10th Plan will be very close to the target. In
any case, actual achievement during the X Plan is likely to be
more than achievement of VIII and IX Plans put together.”

18. The Committee note that during the first three years of 10th
Plan, only 20.7% power projects have been commissioned, 65.3% are
under construction and remaining 14% are still under award stage.
This data shows a slight improvement over the performances during
the 8th and 9th Plan periods but not up to mark. The Committee do


10

not find any satisfactory answer that how many projects will be
commissioned actually by the end of Tenth Five Year Plan? The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should continue
their sincere efforts to ensure that all the power projects under the
construction are completed by the end of 10th Five Year Plan. They
must also take every possible initiative to expedite the approval
process of remaining projects relating to capacity addition so that an
early work may start on these projects. The Government should also
pursue the State Governments and private sector operators with a
view to ensure their significant role in achieving the targets. The
Committee feel that still there is a need to take fresh initiatives by
the Government for achieving the targets set for capacity addition
during the 10th Plan period in the remaining period of current Plan
especially for completion of 65.3% projects which are under
implementation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken in the matter.

D. Energy Conservation Schemes
Recommendation (51. No. 7, Para No. 2.36)

19. The Committee had felt that conservation and efficient use of
energy should be treated as one of the major thrust areas to bridge
the gap between the demand and supply. The Committee had also
observed that of power. Only one energy conservation activity each in
the year 2002-03 and 2003-04 was completed by agencies other than
BEE. The Committee were constrained to note that although the
Government on the one hand were claiming high that a large number
of schemes/activities had been initiated to promote the energy efficiency
and savings had accrued, but the Government had failed to enthuse
conservation and energy efficiency agencies for undertaking such
schemes. The Committee had, therefore, reiterated their earlier
recommendation that there was a greater need to bring about public
awareness regarding energy efficiency measures of the Government
and the Government should set the targets to be achieved for energy
savings during a particular year. The Committee had, therefore, desired
that short-term as well as long-term action plans should be formulated
and the Committee should be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in that regard.

20. The Ministry of Power has submitted following reply in this
regard:—

“The Government has decided to launch an inclusive and extensive
awareness campaign on energy efficiency and its conservation


i

whereby all sections of the population would be brought together,
but children would be specifically focused. In pursuance of the
chalked out National Campaign on Energy Conservation, a Postage
Stamp on Energy Conservation has been released by the Hon'ble
Prime Minister of India on 14th December, 2004—the National
Energy Conservatary on the same day, the Hon’ble Prime Minister
of India has also launched the ‘National Campaign on Energy
Conservation 2005’. The National Campaign has been planned to
focus on the creation of public awareness and understanding the
significance of energy conservation drive by optimizing the use of
energy and making energy saving a habit. The national campaign
targets the following sectors:—

(i) Domestic Sector;
(ii) Commercial Sector;
(iii) Agricultural Sector;
(iv) Industrial Sector;
(v) Government Buildings and,
(vi) Public Sector Units, Educational Institutions.

21. The Committee strongly criticize the lackadaisical approach
of the Government in undertaking the energy conservation schemes.
They are moving without any specific targets and objectives. The
Committee are anguished to note that even after repeated
recommendations of the Committee, the Government have not come
out with any specific targets to be achieved during a particular
period, The Committee express their serious concern and reiterate
that the Government should formulate short-term and long-term plans
on energy efficiency and its conservation with specific targets and
should proceed further in that direction as per those targets. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard within the shortest possible time.

E. Renovation and Modernization of Power Plants
Recommendation (51. No. 9, Para No. 2.54)
22. The Committee had observed that power continued to grow at
a rapid rate outstripping the availability for the same. But, the

Committee were constrained to note the slow pace of completion of
well-proven and cost-effective R&M activities, as out of a total of


12

636 activities identified for R&M work in thermal power units, only
95 were completed during 2002-2003. The Committee had observed
that against 92 thermal units that are targeted for major refurbishment
during 10th Plan (2002-2003 to 2006-07), RLA studies on 48 units only
had reported to be completed so far. The Committee were further
distressed to note that out of 60 units which would need R&M works
to improve/sustain the performance, work on 25 units had been started
during the first two years of 10th Plan. With only 13 schemes
programmed for completion during 2004-2005, out of a total of
74 hydro schemes, only 33 were likely to be implemented/completed
during the first three years of the 10th Plan. Although, the Ministry of
Power had informed the Committee that adequate funds were available
for life extension and R&M of thermal power station under AG&SP at
concessional rates, the Committee had observed that against the
estimated fund requirements of Rs. 8700 crore and Rs. 1100 crore for
Life Extension Programme (LEP) and Renovation and Modernization
(R&M) works; the expenditure incurred during 2002-2003 were only
Rs. 33 crore and Rs. 30 crore respectively. Observing the low infusion
of funds against the total funds requirements for the R&M projects,
the Committee had come to the conclusion that there was not enough
interest on the part of the Government in pursuing R&M work for
power projects vigorously. The Committee had, therefore, recommended
that R&M of all the identified potential units should be undertaken in
a fixed time frame and CEA should monitor the work. The Committee
had also recommended that private sector should also be involved in
implementation of R&M schemes to ensure the speedily achievement
of targets. The Committee also noted that the Government had not
given enough attention to the R&M of Transmission Lines and sub-
stations, etc. set up by Power grid. The Committee had asked
Government to draw up a programme for R&M of these assets and
inform the Committee within 3 months of the presentation of the
Report.

23. About the status of R&M projects, the Ministry of Power has
submitted the following reply:—

“The 636 R&M activities were programmed to be completed during
whole span of 9th Plan. Out of this, only 434 activities were
completed during 9th Plan and balance were carried over to 10th
Plan. Out of balance 95 numbers could be completed in the year
2002-03. Earlier the exact scope of R&M works was decided on
the basis of Residual Life Assessment (RLA) Studies for which
separate shut down of plant was needed. To expedite the Life
Extension (LE) works, it was decided by the Task Force for R&M/
Life Extension that the basic scope of works could be decided


13

based on the condition of the units may be carried out during
shut down for carrying out Life Extension Works. As such, RLA
is not being now carried out prior to LE works.

At present, R&M works have started on 36 units. For the remaining
units, the R&M proposals have been finalized/approved and the
orders are being placed for the R&M activities. R&M works on all
the units is likely to be completed by the end of 10th Plan.”

24. About the Life Extension works, the Ministry have submitted
following:—

“The LE works involve the activities of finalisation of feasibility
report, placement of order, manufacturing & supply of material
and the execution of works, which are spanned over 30-36 months.
The major portion of expenditure is done during the supply of
materials & execution, which start after almost 2 years. The
expenditure incurred against LEP and R&M works till now
Rs. 605 crore and Rs. 143 crore respectively.

The present status of LE works is as under:

(i) No. of units on which LE works has been completed—6
Nos,

(ii) No. of units on which LE works are in progress—5 Nos.

(iii) No. of units of which orders for LE works have been
placed—6 Nos.

(iv) No. of units on where feasibility study reports completed—
38 Nos.

The above-mentioned progress is slow. Despite of the well-known
fact that the R&M/LE Programme rapidly improve performance of
the units, some of the utilities have shown the casual approach to
such an important programme.

The reason for delays by such utilities are as under:
(i) Procedural delays in placement of orders

(ii) Delay/indecision by State Government in finalization of
placement of orders. Some of the examples are given

below:—

Obra TPS (UP) 3x100 MW
Obra TPS (UP) 5x200 MW
Panipat TPS (Haryana) 3x110 MW

Chandrapura TPS (DVC) 3x120 MW”


14

25. About the delays in implementation of R&M/LE Projects the
Ministry of Power has given following explanation:—

“Ministry of Power and CEA are vigorously following up with the
utilities for expediting the R&M/LE works in following ways:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(व)

(९)

(f)

(g)

Frequent meetings in CEA
Frequent site visits by CEA/NTPC/BHEL engineers
Technology inputs by CEA/NTPC

Guaranteed funds at concessional rates of interest are
available through PFC.

Compensation (to a limited extent) for generation loss during
shut down for LE works are being offered from Central
pool.

Vigorous follow up is done through meetings and
correspondence at the levels of Member, CEA, Chairman,
CEA and Secretary (Power), Government of India.

Guidelines have been issued by the Ministry of Power for
speedy implementation of the R&M/LE works.

It is well known that there has been tremendous improvement in
the performance of the thermal units where LE works have been
completed. It is disappointing that the stations which are running
with poor performance are also slow in implementation of R&M/
LE works despite of vigorous follow up by CEA and the Ministry
of Power.

Private sector is already involved in LE works at various thermal
power stations.”

26. The Committee are not convinced with the justification given
by the Ministry about the delays in Renovation and Modernization
Schemes and Life Extension Schemes of Power Plants. It is
disappointing to note that despite the availability of adequate funds
for Life Extension and Renovation & Modernization Schemes at
concessional rates and regular follow up by CEA and the Ministry
of Power, the Government have failed to achieve the targets. This
shows the weaknesses of implementation and monitoring system.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government should
change their present approach and prepare a time-bound programme


15

for R&M and Life Extension Schemes of all the identified potential
units and vigorously pursue the concerned utilities to follow those
schedules strictly so that the targets fixed for the 10th Five Year
Plan are achieved. The Committee strongly criticize the Government
for not paying attention towards the Renovation and Modernization
of transmission lines and sub-stations, etc. and desire that the
Government should prepare a time-bound programme for R&M of
these assets also without any further delay.

E Implementation of APDRP in States
Recommendation (51, No. 10, Para No. 2.66)

27. The Committee had observed that the Government of India
had approved APDRP scheme as an intervention strategy with a focus
on distribution reforms with an objective to reduce AT&C losses, bring
about commercial viability in the power sector, reduce outages &
interruptions, and increase consumer satisfaction. The outlay of
Rs. 40,000 crore as additional Central Plan assistance to State
Governments during 10th Five Year Plan was expected. The Committee
were dismayed to note that as per the conditions decided for availing
APDRP funds all States had signed MoU, MoA, Tripartite Agreements
and 21 States had constituted SERCs and 17 SERCs had issued tariff
orders, only 10 States had unbundled/corporatized their SEBs and
two States viz. Delhi & Orissa had privatized their SEBs so far. Further,
100% feeder metering had been completed in 16 States only and two
States had reported to achieve more than 90% metering. The Committee
were constrained to note that 100% consumer metering which was to
be done on priority basis was reported to be completed only in 3
States so far. The Committee had desired that the Government should
take elaborate steps to speed up these schemes.

28. The Ministry of Power has submitted the following reply in
response to the observations made by the Committee:—

“Under distribution reforms, there is an emphasis on achieving
100% consumer metering. The Ministry of Power is regularly
monitoring the progress achieved by the States. Further, assistance
under APDRP shall be provided to the State based on progress
made against various parameters, which include progress on
consumer metering also.”

29. The Committee find that the objectives of APDRP include
the reduction in AT&C losses, improvement in commercial viability


16

of power sector, reduction in outages and interruption and increasing
the consumers’ satisfaction. For this purpose, specific distribution
sector reforms are to be undertaken by the State Governments on
priority basis. The Committee are not satisfied with the progress
made so far in the States particularly regarding the un-bundling of
State Electricity Boards, feeder metering and consumer metering. The
Committee understand that States have to complete these reforms
on priority basis for getting loans and grants under APDRP. The
Committee also want to remind that for successful implementation
of the Electricity Act, 2003, to bring commercial viability in power
sector and for achieving the national targets in power sector, these
schemes are to be completed urgently. The Committee are not
satisfied with the present status of these schemes in the States. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Central Government should
ensure a speedy implementation of these schemes in States through
their active participation and inform the Committee about the
elaborate steps taken by them and the outcome thereof.

G. Complaints after Privatization of Electricity Distributions
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.67)

30. The Committee had taken a serious note of the fact that in
cities where distribution of electricity had been privatized there had
been a sudden rise in complaints from consumers regarding sharp
increase in their electricity bills. The Committee had felt that the issue
should be enquired into detail and the Committee should be apprised
of the action taken for quick redressal of consumers’ grievances. At
the same time, the Committee had strongly recommended the
Government to ensure that Grievance Redressal Forum and
Ombudsman should be set up in all the States within three months.

31. In their reply, the Ministry of Power has submitted the following
status report:—

“The sudden rise in complaints regarding electricity bills has been
observed in States where the distribution has been privatized. States
have been asked to submit their comments. As per the provisions
of the Electricity Act, 2003, every distribution licensee shall, within
six months from the appointed date or date of grant of license
whichever is earlier, establish a forum for redressal of grievances
of the consumers in accordance with the guidelines as may be
specified by the State Commission. All the States are being asked
to form redressal forums and appoint Ombudsman in the
distribution companies in accordance with the Electricity Act, 2003.”


17

32. The Committee are surprised to note that inspite of specific
provisions in the Electricity Act, 2003 in Section 42(5) and (6) to
form Redressal Forums and appoint Ombudsman, distribution
Companies/State Commissions have not done much in most of the
States. As these Forums are to be established under the guidelines
of the respective State Commissions, the Committee feel that the
Ministry of Power may direct the State Governments to impress
upon the State Commissions to ensure the appointments of
Ombudsman and Redressal Forums by the distribution Companies.
Such distribution Companies which fail to appoint Redressal Forum
should not be allowed any hike in tariff till they meet this condition.
The Committee feel where these appointments have been made, these
should be given wide publicity in local Newspapers. The Committee
regret the delays in ensuring appointments of Redresssal Forum and
Ombudsman and also for not furnishing details of implementation
in States, although the Committee had desired these details within
three months i.e. by November, 2004. The Committee now desire
that these appointments should be made immediately and Committee
may be kept informed of the action taken by the Ministry in the
matter.

H. Village Electrification According to new Definition
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.84)

33. The Committee were happy to note that after their repeated
recommendations to redefine the existing definition of village
electrification, the Government had accepted the same and a new
definition of village electrification had been notified. While welcoming
the change in definition, the Committee had felt that urgent steps
should be taken to ensure that at least 50% of the total village
households be electrified in the next five years. The Committee had
also felt that under the ambit of new definition the number of non-
electrified villages, which stood at 92,849 should go up and the number
of remote villages might also change based on more accurate survey.
The Committee had, therefore, urged that new definition should be
practiced uniformly and adopted by all the arms of the Government,
including the Ministry of Power. At the same time, the Committee,
had desired that the Ministry of Power should impress upon the State
to update their statistics based on the new definition and carry out
fresh survey for identifying the non-electrified villages on priority basis.
The Committee had desired to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.


18

34. The Ministry of Power has submitted the following status report
in this regard:—

“Ministry of Power has directed all States/UTs authorities for
compilation of rural electrification statistics as per new definition
in the prescribed format, and forward the same by 15.12.2004 for
this year and subsequently by 15th May every year. We have
received information from Government of Rajasthan. The same is
awaited from other States.”

35. The Committee are anguished to note that by the schedule
date, only one State has provided that rural electrification statistics
as per the new definition. This shows the non-seriousness of States
in the rural electrification schemes. The Committee are surprised to
note that the States are undertaking their rural electrification schemes
without updating their statistics in the light of new definition. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take a serious
note of it and ask all the State Governments to submit the latest
information about rural electrification based on the new definition
and modify their rural schemes accordingly. The Committee would
like to know the latest statistical details relating to rural electrification
and the steps taken by 01९ Government to modify the rural
electrification schemes in the light of updated statistics. The
Committee would also like to draw the attention of the Ministry
towards the goal set under the Common Minimum Programme of
the present Government to complete the Rural Household
electrification in next five years and desire that all out efforts to
complete the gigantic task of household electrification in a time-
bound manner should be made.

I. National Electricity Policy
Recommendation (51, No. 17, Para No. 2.94)

36. The Committee were constrained to note that the State
Governments had failed to respond on the report of Task Force on
National Electricity Policy, Policies for Rural Areas and Tariff Policy,
which was sent by the Ministry of Power for their comments. The
Committee had, therefore, stressed that the Government should take
all desired steps to frame and notify the new Electricity policy at the
earliest. The Committee had also desired that the task of framing
policies for Rural Areas and Tariff Policy should be also be completed
in a time-bound manner.

37. In their reply the Ministry of Power submitted the following
details:—

“Soon after the Electricity Act was brought into effect, Ministry of
Power initiated the exercise for formulation of this policy in July,


19

2003. The State Governments were requested to give their views
and the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) was
also requested to send its advice. Regional meetings with the State
Governments and with the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
were organized for discussion and to ascertain their views. A Task
Force on ‘Power Sector Investments and Reforms’ was constituted
in August, 2003 the Chairmanship of Member (Energy), Planning
Commission. The Task Force had in its terms of reference, inter
alia, recommending National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy. It
held consultations with all stakeholders. The report of the Task
Force with the draft National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy
was sent to the State Governments for their views.

On assumption of the office by the new Government, a fresh draft
of the National Electricity Policy was formulated in June, 2004
based on comments received from the States on the previous draft
and the objectives of the National Common Minimum Programme.
The views received from other stakeholders were also taken into
account. The revised draft National Electricity Policy was forwarded
to the State Governments. The Minister of Power wrote to all the
Chief Ministers on 28th June, 2003 for views of the State
Governments on the National Electricity Policy, Tariff Policy and
Rural Policies envisaged in the Act. Ministry of Power also
organized region-wise meetings with the State Governments in
July/August 2004 for discussion and to ascertain their views on
the draft National Electricity Policy.

The draft of the National Policy has been finalized after considering
the views received from the State Governments, discussions held
with the State Governments in region-wise meetings, advise of
CERC and the comments of CEA and the draft Cabinet Note is
presently under inter Ministerial consultation.

Tariff Policy and Rural Policies would be taken up for finalization
on the basis of National Electricity Policy after due consultation
with the State Governments”.

38. The Committee are happy to note that the Government have
notified the National Electricity Policy in compliance with Section 3
of Electricity Act, 2003. This policy aims at achieving certain
objectives to address various issues relating to power sector. Since
Government have already taken enough time in finalising the
National Electricity Policy, the Committee desire that the Government
should, now, prepare long term and short term perspective plans


20

and start their implementation in a time-bound manner. The
Committee also desire that the Government should also take
initiatives to frame policies for rural areas and Tariff on priority
basis in a time-bound manner.

J. Fund Utilization for on-going Projects/R&M/Life Extension Schemes
of DVC during 10th Plan

Recommendation (51, Nos. 23 & 24, Para Nos. 2.126 and 2.127)

39. The Committee were constrained to note that during 2003-04
against BE of Rs. 1450.00 crore and RE Rs. 600.00 crore, the actual
fund utilization by Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) were only
Rs. 317.00 crore. The reasons adduced by DVC on each of the schemes
where investments could not be utilized during the year resulting in
surrendering the plan outlays were not convincing and only indicated
the casual manner in which project/plans were framed and executed.
Taking a strong note of the under-utilization of funds by DVC, the
Committee had deplored the way, the unrealistic plan outlays were
being proposed by DVC management for different projects/schemes.
The Committee were dismayed to note that where as an average
Rs. 1000.00 crore was to be infused in the 3 ongoing projects of DVC
during 10th Plan to augment 1210 MW of additional capacity, only
Rs. 536.00 crore had been invested during the first two years of the
Plan. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Government
should review the existing system of budget formulation by DVC and
all necessary steps be taken to improve budget formulation of plan
outlays at the budget stage itself so that realistic targets could be set
for generation, transmission & distribution and renovation &
modernization activities proposed by the DVC during 10th Plan.

40. The Committee were also unhappy to note that the meager
amount was earmarked for R&M works which needed a much bigger
allocation. The Committee had recommended that DVC should carry
out R&M related works in a time-bound manner and the Committee
should be informed of the schedule chalked out for the purpose.

41. In regard to the utilization of Plan outlay by DVC, the Ministry
of Power submitted the following reply:—

“The projected Plan Capital Expenditure in Revised Estimates (RE)
2003-04 was estimated at Rs. 599.26 crore as against Rs. 1450.00
crore in Budget Estimates (BE) 2003-04, based on the actual
expenditure incurred against various projects till September, 2003


21

and the anticipated progress to be achieved till the end of the
year 2003-04. The actual fund that could, however, be utilized
during 2003-04 was Rs. 437.89 crore (73% utilization) due to the
following major constraints encountered by the Corporation.

(i) Power Projects

The entire amount of Rs. 170.00 crore kept in RE 2003-04, for
making advance payment to the EPC Contractor of Mejia TPS
Extn. Unit # 5&6 project remained un-utilized on account of delay
in finalizing the contract price, acceptable both to DVC and BHEL
through several rounds of negotiation. Further, the provision kept
in RE 2003-04 for equity contribution to Maithon Power Limited
(MPL) for development of Maithon Right Bank Thermal Power
Project also could not be utilized fully due to the unforeseen next
exit of erstwhile Joint Venture M/s. BSES Limited from MPL
leading to slow progress of land acquisition and other preliminary
activities.

The Engineering Project Contract (EPC) for the two projects viz.
Mejia TPS Extn. Unit # 5 & 6 (2x250 MW) and Chandrapura TPS
Extn. Unit # 7&8 (2x250 MW) have since been awarded in June,
2004 with commissioning targets in 2006-07 and hence, most of
the estimated project cost is anticipated to be spent during the
remaining years of 10th Plan commencing 2004-05. In order to
ensure timely completion of the on-going projects taken up by
DVC. Government has approved Rs. 2373.51 crore budget
allocations at BE stage for the year 2005-06.

(ii) Transmission and associated Communication Projects

Against projection of Rs. 49.47 crore in RE 2003-04, an expenditure
of Rs. 63.71 crore has been booked in the year in respect of entire
T&D works. The upward variation in actual expenditure over
budgetary allocation resulted because of higher achievement in
some on-going project as compared to what was justified because
and the same could not be restricted within the limit. However,
some works still remain pending due to non-receipt of land and
forest clearances. An expenditure of Rs. 15.83 crore has been
incurred up to September, 2004 and it is expected to cover up the
whole RE 2004-05 projection of Rs. 72 crore for the remaining
period of the year, considering present status of the work.


22

In the case of communication schemes, the expenditure allocated
in RE 2003-04 could not be utilized fully on account of deferred
procurement schedule of PLCC equipment so as to match with the
HV line schedule, re-scheduling of commissioning of ULDC project,
etc. Consequently, the expenditure requirements have been shifted
to the remaining years of the 10th Plan.

All endeavours is being made to achieve most of the plan targets
in the remaining period subject to early resolution of land
acquisition, forest clearance and ROW problems.”

42. About the implementation of R&M/Life Extension Schemes in
DVC, the Ministry of Power has submitted the following details:—

“Provision of comparatively lower amounts during the first 3 years
of 10th Plan against R&M work was against due to slow progress
of preparatory work towards finalization of scope, cost, etc.,
resulting delay in finalization of technical specifications and bid
documents. Even today the fate of R&M for Chandrapura TPS
Units 4, 5 & 6 is undecided in view of non-availability of any
specific engineering solution to the generic problems of the boilers
of these units. The matter is, however, under review by CEA and
some decision is expected by the end of 2004.

In view of non-plan expenditure of the R&M/LE jobs are expected
to be placed during the later part of 2004-05 and early 2005-06
and allocations to the tune of Rs. 202.38 crore has been approved
at BE stage for R&M schemes for the year 2005-06.

Variation of non-plan expenditure occurred mainly due to revised
procurement programme in respect of Power House Plant &
Machinery like HT Motors, Generator Rotor, Excitation
Transformers, etc. followed by deferment of civil works in four
major thermal power plants. The replacement of various plant &
machinery proposed under non-plan capital expenditure has been
shifted to R&M package under plan outlay, resulting in variance.
Efforts are being made to stream line the formulation of non-plan
outlays so as to minimize the variance.

DVC has taken note of the observations of the Standing Committee
on Energy and would strive to formulate the future plan & non-
plan outlays with realistic targets to the extent practicable, however,
this is to emphasize that certain uncertainties viz. land acquisition,
physical possession of land, receipt of statutory clearance, etc. are


23

beyond the control of the Corporation. The Corporation is reviewing
physical and financial progress of Plan and Non-Plan schemes on
monthly basis and the areas of constraints/issues requiring attention
are being following up for achieving the set targets.

43, The Committee note that in most of the cases where’ DVC
could not utilize the allocated funds, the reasons are administrative
in nature like delay in finalising the contract price in case of Mejia
TPS Ext. and exit of Joint Venture partner M/s BSES from Maithon
Power Limited. Similarly, in case of R&M work, failure was due to
slow progress of preparatory work towards finalisation of scope and
cost etc. The Committee take a serious note of these delays and
desire that the Ministry of Power should review each and every
project of DVC and take corrective actions. Suitable action may also
be taken against concerned officers responsible for such slackness.


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.22)

The Committee observe that capacity addition programme of the
Government during 9th Plan was not better than 8th Plan achievements.
Against a target capacity addition of 40245.2 MW set for the 9th Plan,
the actuals were only 19015 MW. The Committee note that both Central
and Private sectors have lagged behind the targets set during 9th Plan
in both thermal and hydel Sectors. As against the targets set for 7574
MW for Central Sector (Thermal), achievement were only 3084 MW
and the actuals were only 540 MW for hydro power against the targets
of 3455 MW. Similarly, Private Sector achieved capacity addition of
4975 MW of thermal power and 86 MW of hydro power generation
against the targeted 17038.5 MW and 550 MW of thermal and hydro
power respectively. The Committee, therefore, have come to an
irresistible conclusion that over-optimistic and unachievable targets are
set by the government which they have never come close to
achievement during the last 2 Plan periods. In spite of Committee's
carlier recommendations to project realistic and achievable targets, the
matter has not been seriously considered. The Hydel Sector has failed
to materialize its targets, consequently leading to adverse hydel thermal
mix. Over-dependence and a total reliance on private sector have failed
to show any positive results so far. It is in this context, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation that it may not be desirable for
the Government to diminish their role or withdraw themselves from
the power sector lest private sector should fail again (29th Report of
13th Lok Sabha). The Committee are of the opinion that power sector
should be rejuvenated and restructured. There is a need to extend
adequate Budgetary support to hydel sector, so that optimal 60:40
hydel-thermal ratio mix be attained. The Planning Commission
estimated a feasible capacity addition of 47,000 MW during the 10th
Plan. Considering the 8th & 9th Plans performance, the Committee
observe that this target seems to be difficult to achieve. The
Committee’s close scrutiny has revealed that lack of investment
decision in thermal PSUs, delay in receipt of foreign assistance,
submissions of DPRs, are some of the reasons under Central Thermal
Sector, for projects being slipped from 9th Plan. The projects under

24


25

private sector slipped on account of failure to achieve Financial Closure,
litigation etc. Funds constraints, land acquisition/R&R problem, adverse
law & order, contractual problems were some of the reasons attributed
for slippage of hydel Projects. A close look at these reasons indicate
that these are not the new reasons and it was precisely because of
these reasons the targets could not be achieved during the 8th Plan.
But, the government did not take any corrective action to check those
reasons which resulted in failure of 9th Plan. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their source of funding for capacity generation programme.
The Committee desire that somewhere accountability should be fixed
for projecting unrealistic targets and failure to achieve the targets fixed.
The Committee urge that the Government should, at least now, ensure
that the projected 10th Plan targets are achieved. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the follow-up corrective action taken
by the Government.

Reply of the Government

1, Taking note of the experience in the 8th and 9th Plan periods,
the 10th Plan capacity addition targets has consciously provided a
more modest role for the private sector projects. The Central Power
Sector Undertakings have a major share of the target for capacity
addition in the 10th Plan.

2. A capacity addition target of 41,110 MW has been set for the
10th Plan. Out of this, the share of Central Sector is 22832 MW and
that of the Private Sector is 7121 MW. The State Sector has a share of
11157 MW. The 10th Plan target details are summarized in the table
presented below:

(in MW)
Source Central State Private Total
Hydro 8742 4481 1170 14393
Thermal 12790 6676 5951 25417
Nuclear 1300 _ = 1300
Total 22832 11157 7121 41110

3. Capacity addition realization was less than 50% of the targets in
VIII and IX Five Year Plan and it was imperative to have alternate


26

strategy in place. The following efforts are being made for realization
of targets:—

The 10th Plan capacity addition targets were finalized in
consultation with the States and on the basis of identification of
individual projects.

The monitoring mechanism has been strengthened. The CEA has
a nodal officer for each project, both at the conception stage as
well as during execution. In addition, regular review meetings are
being organized in the Ministry of Power.

The experience of earlier Plans’ capacity addition programme
suggest that number of power projects could not take off within
the plan period in want of necessary clearances from various
Organizations/Ministries and other project related issues. To
overcome its deficiency, during X Plan, back up projects totaling
10,873 MW, comprising of 10643 MW in thermal and 230 MW in
hydro, have been identified for being taken up in case originally
targeted power projects could not take off due to various reasons.

The role of REC has been expanded to cover financing of generation
projects. This would enable REC to supplement the efforts of PFC
in financing generation projects. These two organizations have
mobilized themselves adequately to see that the execution of a
good project is not hampered due to lack of funds.

Procedure for getting clearances has been simplified. As per the
Electricity Act, 2003, the requirement of according Techno-economic
clearance by CEA has been dispensed with for thermal generation.
However, any generating company intending to set up a hydro
generating station shall prepare and submit to the Authority for
its concurrence a scheme estimated to involve a capital expenditure
exceeding such sum, as may be fixed by the Central Government
from time to time, by Notification. Planning Commission has
delegated full powers to State Governments for approval of power
projects without any ceiling. Clearance from Planning Commission
is to be restricted only to those hydro-electric projects where inter-
State issues are involved.

4. The Central Plan outlay has been increased by more than three
times in the 10th Plan in comparison to 9th Plan. The Planning
Commission has allocated an outlay of Rs. 1,43,399 crore for the
Ministry of Power for the 10th Plan. This includes a budgetary support
of Rs. 25,000 crore. The corresponding figures for the 9th Plan were
Rs. 45591 crore and Rs. 14943 crore respectively. To promote hydro


27

power development in the country, Planning Commission had provided
adequate budgetary support to the extent of Rs. 17,000 crore exclusively
for Central Hydro Power Corporations out of the total budgetary
support of Rs. 25,000 crore for Ministry of Power during the Tenth
Plan period. This works out to 68% budgetary support exclusively for
hydro power projects in the Central Sector.

Achievements in 10th Plan

5. The status of the 10th Plan projects is presented in the table
given below:—

Total Central State Private Total
(Thermal+Hydro+Nuclear)

Target 22832 11157 ग़ा 41110

A. Already commissioned 5705 2290 648 8643
A as % of Target 25% 205% 9.1% 21%
B. Under Construction 12392 9939 4406 26637
B as % of Target 54.2% 89.1% 62% 65%
A +B as % of Target 79.2% 109.6% 71.1% 86%

As presented in table above, 20.7% of the target has been commissioned,
65.3% of the target is under execution and the remaining is under
award stage. With this picture, it is expected that achievement of 10th
Plan will be very close to the target. In any case, actual achievement
during the X Plan is likely to be more than achievement of VIII and
IX Plans put together.

[Ministry of Power No. 2/23/2004-P&P dated 17.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (51, No. 20, Para No. 2.117)

The Committee observe that POWERGRID is executing ambitious
plan for development of National POWERGRID by 2012 and is
targeting to complete it ahead by 3 years i.e. 2009. For development
of National G.id which can support additional capacity addition of
1,00,000 MW in 10th & 11th Plans (by 2012), POWERGRID has
envisaged an investment of about Rs. 70,000.00 crore. Out of this,
Rs. 50,000.00 crore is planned to be invested by POWERGRID and


28

balance Rs. 20,000.00 crore is proposed to be mobilized from private
sector. According to the Ministry of Power, POWERGRID plans to
invest Rs. 21,370.00 crore in 10th Plan and Rs. 28,258 crore in 11th
Plan for Central Transmission Sector. Such a network would be capable
of carrying 60% power generated in the country. Taking note of the
Present infusion of investments and completion of projects ahead of
their targeted schedules, the Committee hope and trust that the
POWERGRID would be able to set up the National POWERGRID three
years in advance i.e. by 2009. The Committee desire that the
Government/POWERGRID should take elaborate steps and redraw the
completion of remaining phases for developing National Powergrid by
2009,

Reply of the Government

Integration of Regional Grids for development of a robust National
Power Grid is a continuous process. The present scheme for National
Power Grid, with inter-regional power transfer capacity of 30,000 MW
by the year 2011-12, has been planned envisaging high capacity inter-
regional transmission highways for transfer of power from resource
rich Eastern and North-Eastern Region to the power deficit Northern,
Western and Southern Regions. During X & XI five year plan periods,
transmission projects costing about Rs. 71,000 Crore are to be
implemented under Central Transmission Sector. The existing plan to
achieve a target of inter-regional power transfer capacity of 30,000
MW by the year 2011-12 has been drawn having record to the power
generation projects envisaged to be commissioned during the
corresponding period. Different transmission schemes are to be taken
up progressively matching with the schedule of generation addition
and requirements of strengthening/interconnecting the grid. For
example, transmission system associated with Kahalgaon-lI (1500 MW)
has been approved and transmission systems associated with new
generation projects like, Barh (1980 MW), North Karanpura (1980 MW),
Teesta (500 MW), Parbati (1300 MW) etc. are at various stages of
approval/finalization, which contain the elements of National Power
Grid. Regular co-ordination is being undertaken by Power Grid
Corporation of India Ltd. with all the agencies like CEA, generation
companies and beneficiaries to ensure establishment of required
transmission system in the country. Acceleration of the pace of
implementation of the National Grid and achieving the target of inter-
regional power transmission capacity of 30,000 MW before 2011-12
would largely depend upon the implementation of the associated
generation projects.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 9/1/2004-PG December, 2004]


29

Recommendation (SI. No. 21, Para No. 2.118)

The Committee are, however, constrained to note that the
transmission and distribution of electricity is not given the desired
attention as the present level of investments in T&D sector is only
28% against the 50% actually required. The absence of Power evacuation
facilities have resulted in accumulation and wastage of power
generation. Although, the Government have stated that infusion of
investment by Union Government through PSUs has helped to achieve
the requisite level of development in regional grid system, the
Committee find that investment in inter-state transmission system had
been on lower side. Due to financial constraints, the State utilities, by
and large, have been concentrating on developing the basic State Grid
Systems, but have been compromising on required margins and
reliability. Further, the picture on investment in sub-transmission and
distribution has been dismal. The Committee, thus, strongly urge the
Government to vigorously speed up the implementation of APDRP
scheme to help investments in the T&D Sector at the desired level.
The Committee are of the opinion that with the financial support for
APDRP for strengthening sub-transmission and distribution network,
the T&D losses will be minimized.

Reply of the Government

With a view to reduce the transmission, distribution and commercial
losses, the Ministry is implementing Accelerated Power Development
and Reforms Programme (APDRP). Funds are released as Additional
Central Plan Assistance to State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities for
Upgradation and strengthening of the Sub-Transmission, and
Distribution system in the country with the objective of reducing
Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses, improving quality
of supply of power, increasing revenue collection and improving
consumer satisfaction.

Since the year 2002-03 the Government has sanctioned Projects
amounting to Rs. 17619.07 crore under APDRP out of which APDRP
component is Rs. 10096.11 crores. So, far 499 projects have been
sanctioned in 29 states amounting to Rs. 17619.07 crores during the
year 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The disbursement for the year
2002-03 was Rs. 1755.51 crores and for 2003-04 was Rs. 2356.51 crores.
Ministry is pursuing all the states to implement the APDRP
expeditiously to achieve the objective of the programme to bring
commercial viability to the sector.


30

The Government has allocated Rs. 3500 crores for Accelerated
Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) for the year
2004-05 1.९. Rs. 1750 crores under investment component and Rs. 1750
crores under incentive component.

Under incentive component of APDRP, funds are released to the
SEBs for actual cash loss reduction, for every Rs. 2 of cash loss
reduction Rs. 1 is given as grant. The cash losses are calculated net of
subsidy and receivables. The year 2000-01 has been adopted as the
base year.

The details of incentives given are as under:—

(Rs. in Crores)

SNo. Name of State Reduction in cash loss —_ Incentive Released
1. Maharashtra 275.78 137.89
= S Gujarat 472.76 236.38
3. Haryana 210.98 105.49
4. Rajasthan 275.42 137.71
8: Andhra Pradesh 530.22 265.11
6. West Bengal 146.00 73.00

Total 1911.16 955.58

The grant under incentive component is also to be utilized in
improvement of power sector only.

[Ministry of Power F.No. No. 5/1/2004-APDRP Dated 7.12.2004]


CHAPTER If

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.34)

The Committee observe that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
is presently in the initial phase of establishing the institutional,
promotional and regulatory arrangements and the corresponding
expenditure incurred is reportedly being met from the interest earned
on the corpus fund of Rs. 50.00 crore which is placed with NTPC in
long-term (20-years) Secured Non-Convertible, Cumulative Redeemable
Taxable NTPC Bonds of Rs. 10.00 lakh each (Series SVII) at an interest
rate of (8.75%) per annum, payable on quarterly basis and annually
BEE is earning about Rs. 4 to 4.5 crore from the investment so made.
Taking note of various energy conservation/efficiency activities
undertaken by BEE, the Committee feel that the amount of Rs. 4 to
4.5 crore is too meager for the BEE to execute and supervise all its
proposed activities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should provide adequate budgetary support as well as
take elaborate steps to ensure that agencies carrying out energy
conservation activities should get enough and timely financial assistance
through the Power Finance Corporation or other financial institutions.
At the same time the Committee expect that the payment and security
mechanism worked out by BEE for Energy Service Companies for
their investment in energy conservation activities with designated
consumers would be rational. The Committee would like to know the
present status of different energy efficiencies schemes which have not
been taken up due to fund constraints and desire that the Government
should ensure that no energy conservation scheme be held-up due to
lack of funds. The Committee would like to know the action taken by
the Government in this regard.

Reply of the Ministry of Power

The Government has established Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
under the provisions of Energy Conservation Act, 2001 w.e.f. Ist March,
2002. A one-time corpus Fund of Rs. 50 crores has been provided to
BEE with the authorization to invest in manner to earn the best possible

31


32

return. This Corpus has been fetching enough returns to BEE during
the last two years so as to enable it to execute and supervise all its
existing programmes and activities. During the year 2002-03, after
utilizing Rs. 92.66 lakhs for its programmes, there were a surplus of
Rs. 112.38 lakhs left with BEE. Similarly, in the next year, the balance
surplus available with BEE rose to Rs. 690.51 lakhs after meeting out
Rs. 230.37 lakhs for various expenditure. Therefore, there is no
constraint of funds with BEE for its various on-going programmes.
However, in order to ensure that funds do not become a constraint,
Government of India has provided a token provision in the demands
for grants of Ministry of Power for any additionality required to meet
its energy conservation schemes over and above the cash surplus
available with BEE. So far there has been no requirement over and
above this cash surplus. Hence, the question of any energy conservation
scheme suffering due to lack of funds does not arise at this juncture.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 14/3/2004-EM,
dated December, 28, 2004]

Recommendation (51, No. 6, Para No. 2.35)

The Committee note that various projects/schemes such as National
Energy Conservation Award Scheme, execution of the Energy
Conservation act, 2001 and the Bureau of Energy Efficiency’s Action
Plan which include Indian Industry Programme for energy conservation,
demand side management, standard labelling programme, energy
efficiency in buildings, development of energy performance code,
research programme, school education, etc. The Committee further
observe that BEE has already taken various steps such as energy audit
in Central Government buildings, testing facilities for standard and
labelling, guidelines for building codes, pilot project for school
education, etc. Although, the Committee appreciate the various steps
taken by BEE for various energy conservation activities resulting in a
total saving of Rs. 2291.00 crore for the period 1999 to 2003 in 17 sub-
sectors of industries, resulting in savings of avoided capacity generation
(460 MW) against the investment on energy conservation devises to
the tune of Rs. 3991.00 crore made in these industries. The Committee
note that the Government have not furnished the recurring benefits of
the investments made in various industries as the proportion of
investments did not indicate the desired monetary gains by the
industry. In this context, the Committee would like to be apprised of
the recurring benefits which should accrue to the industries on account
of one time investments on energy conservation devices.


33

Reply of the Government

Energy savings accrued and investment made on energy efficiency
improvement projects, which have been presented to the Standing
Committee, pertain to the reference year in which Projects were
commissioned by the industry. The savings presented in each year
reflect only the first year energy savings and these savings have not
been included in the subsequent years as recurring energy savings.

In industry, energy. saving for the second and subsequent year for
each of the projects tends to decline over the years due to wear and
tear of the energy savings equipment and host of other operational
and maintenance practices of such equipments. Therefore, to avoid
complexity or to introduce simplicity in presenting data, recurring
energy savings or benefits have not been considered. However,
assuming 20% deterioration of energy savings in each subsequent year,
the energy saving achievements in monetary term work out to be
Rs. 4810 crore for the Award scheme (1999-2003), which is presented below:

Summary of energy saving achieved by industrial units during the
Award scheme (1999-2003) taking into account recurring benefits.

Year First Year “Recurring Commulative Investment
Savings in benefits of the savings (Rs, Crores)
Rs. Crores previous years (Rs. Crores)
(Rs. Crores)
2003 539 1122 1661 1071
2002 594 809 1403 691
2001 587 424 1011 659
2000 366 164 530 630
1999 205 पे 205 940
Total 4810 3991

“Note: A factor of 20% deterioration has been assumed while working out the recurring
monetary benefits.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 14/3/2004-EM,
dated December, 28, 2004]


34

Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.68)

The Committee further observed that APDRP has two components.
The investment component is meant for projects to strengthen and
upgrade ST&D network and these are sanctioned for reduction in losses
& outages and better reliability & increased customer satisfaction. Under
this scheme, Government of India provides additional central assistance
of 50% of the project cost in the ratio of grant and loan as 1:1. Utilities
have to arrange remaining 50% from financial institutions. Special
categories States are entitled for 100% assistance in the ratio of grant
and loan as 9:1 (NE States, J&K, H.P., Uttaranchal and Sikkim). The
Committee are constrained to note that although an investment target
of Rs. 16610.19 crore has been laid, the funds released during 2002-03
and 2003-04 are Rs. 1755.51 crore and Rs. 2356.51 crore respectively.
As regard to the incentive component of APDRP, the Committee
observe that funds are provided to SEBs/utilities for actual loss
reduction by way of one for two matching grants. Although, the scheme
started from the financial year 2000-01 as base year with a provision
of Rs, 20,000 crore grant, the total Incentive amount released to the
State of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra and Rajasthan
during 2002-03 and 2003-04 are Rs. 379.27 crore and Rs. 503.30 crore
respectively. The Committee observe that the funds under APDRP are
released based on financial progress of implementation of the projects
sanctioned, as per scheme guidelines. Further funds are released to
the State Government based on the utilization of funds both APDRP
and counterpart by the State Government. As and when States/Utilities
fulfils the above conditions, the recommendations of release of funds
are made to the Ministry of Finance for release of funds against
sanctioned projects. The Secretary, Ministry of Power was candid
enough to admit before the Committee that Government of Maharashtra
was pursued by the Ministry of Power to invest the matching amount,
as the grants sanctioned under the scheme were not utilized even
after expiry of 9 months. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Government should take elaborate steps to ensure that matching
funds are made available by the respective State Governments. The
Committee expect the Ministry of Power to ensure that each State
enthusiastically participate in the scheme so as to make APDRP scheme
a success.

Reply of the Government

Govt. of India has asked Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) to provide matching fund and


35

Rs, 6233.92 crore have been already sanctioned against total requirement
of Rs. 7522.98 crore. As per the terms and conditions of release of
APDRP funds, Govt. of India releases fund in three instalments. The
first instalment of 25% is released upfront on sanction of the project.
Next instalment is released only after utilisation of Government of
India fund along with equal amount of matching fund.

Ministry is pursuing all the States to implement the APDRP
expeditiously to achieve the objective of the programme to bring
commercial viability to the sector.

[Ministry of Power FNo. No. 5/1/2004-APDRP dated 7.12.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 14, Para No. 2.83)

The Committee are further constrained to note that although funds
for rural electrification are made available to SEBs/implementation
agencies through various Ministries including Rural Electrification
Corporation, the actual utilization/disbursements are very low as
compared to the sanctioned funds. The Committee observe that during
the year 2002-03, against sanctioned funds of Rs. 12125 crore, the
disbursements were only Rs. 6607 crore. Similarly, for the year
2003-04, against Rs. 15,976 crore, the disbursement made by REC were
only Rs. 6017 crore. The Committee take a strong note of the fact that
in spite of their repeated recommendations for disbursement of funds
for rural electrification schemes as sanctioned, the funds released by
REC since 1996-97 for different schemes were much below the
sanctioned funds. In the absence of any explanations, the Committee
failed to understand why the sanctioned funds could not be disbursed
during a particular year. The Committee would like to know the status
of implementation of all Rural Electrification Schemes, including Kutir
Jyoti Programme, during 2003-04. In view of the low disbursement of
funds, the Committee recommend that the Government/REC should
take necessary steps so that the schemes planned in any particular
year for which funds have been earmarked should be implemented
and funds disbursed thereon. The Committee would like to know the
action taken by the Government/REC in this regard.

Reply of the Government

Disbursement is lower than sanctioned funds due to various factors
such as:

After appropriate documentation (which depends on the borrower),
funds are released in tranches in accordance with the sanctions.

Releases are linked to the physical progress of the scheme. As
very few schemes have a completion schedule of less than one year,
there will always be a gap between sanctions and disbursement, even
when schemes progress on schedule.



36

Slow implementation of schemes,
Non-fulfilment of legal and other requisite formalities,

Withdrawal of schemes by some SEBs/State Power Utilities after
sanctioning of the schemes etc.

With specific reference to the observations of the Committee that
during the year 2002-03, against the sanctioned funds of Rs. 12125
crores, the disbursements made were only Rs. 6607 crore; and for the
year 2003-04 against sanctioned amount of Rs. 15,976 crores, the
disbursements made were Rs. 6017 crores, R.E.C. has clarified that the
above sanctioned amounts include, for the first time, sanctions for
major generation projects also, amounting to Rs. 736 crores and
Rs. 8034 crores respectively for the above two years. The huge step-
up in such sanctions is in view of the recent change in the mandate
of REC, whereby new generation projects are also being financed by
REC. As generation projects are capital intensive and the securitization/
documentation of such loans takes considerable time, there is invariably
a time lag of about six months to a year before disbursements against
such projects pick up. Also generation projects have an implementation
period of 4-5 years and therefore, the disbursements are spread over
a number of years depending upon the progress of work. Obviously,
in such cases, disbursements would be less than the sanctioned amount
in the year of sanction.

The status of progress (financial) of REC schemes for the year
2003-2004 is given below:

S.No. Category of schemes Loan amount disbursed
(Rs. Crore)
1. Village Electrification 27
2 Dalit Basti Electrification 74
3. Hamlet Electrification 132
4. Intensive Electrification 297
5. Pumpset Energisation 275
6. System Improvement 2058
he APDRP 736
8. Generation 260
9. Other schemes 2097

Total 5956



37

Apart from the above, Kutir Jyoti grant of Rs. 60.44 crore was
drawn by the power utilities and they have released 5.09 lakh
connections during the year 2003-04.

[Ministry of Power ENo. No. 44/137/2004-REC dated 17.01.2005]
Recommendation (51. No. 18, Para No. 2.95)

The Committee have observed that recently a number of States
have announced free power to various consumers particularly to
farmers. While examining the Electricity Bill, 2001, the Committee have
commented upon at Para No. 10.67 (31st Report, 13th Lok Sabha) that
in guise of free power to agriculture sector, subsidy to farm sector is
being misused/misappropriated, thus defeating the very purpose of
introducing of such a system for farm sector. The Committee had
observed that such subsidy was cornered by persons other than for
whom it was intended. The Committee per-se were not against the
concept for subsidy to farm sector, but stressed that it needs to be
regulated. It is in this context, the Committee had desired that electricity
supply to agriculture should be compulsory metered and duly reflected
in the monthly Bill raised for the purpose. It would also help in
checking the theft of electricity by non-agricultural sector as at present
SEBs are showing all their losses against agricultural sector because it
is not metered. The State Governments concerned can decide as to
how much free power is to be given to a beneficiary and for how
much power he has to pay. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation on free power to consumers and desire that it should
compulsorily be metered so that the State Governments concerned can
decided as to how much free power is to be given to a beneficiary
and for how much power he has to pay. Taking note of the
Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission’s orders directing
Tamil Nadu Government to pay Rs. 196.00 crore for full year towards
subsidy for execution of free supply of power to agriculture and the
Andhra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission order asking
Andhra Pradesh Government to pay an amount of Rs. 380.45 crore
from 15.5.2004 to 31.3.2005 towards subsidy for extension of free power,
the Committee find that the Government have not clarified about the
present policy guidelines to ensure that subsidy amount is either paid
by the State Government in advance to the distribution licensee or
these be released by the State Government in equal quarterly
instalments subject to final adjustment at the end of the year. The
Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the present guidelines
issued by the Government in this regard.


38

Reply of the Government

1. Section 65 of the Electricity Act which relates to the provision
of subsidy by the State Government reads as follows:

“If the State Government requires the grant of any subsidy to any
consumer or class of consumers in the tariff determined by the
State Commission under section 62, the State Government shall,
notwithstanding any direction which-may be given under
section 108, pay, in advance and in such manner as may be
specified, the amount to compensate the person affected by the
grant subsidy in the manner the State Commission may direct, as
a condition for the licence or any other person concerned to
implement the subsidy provided for by the State Government.

Provided that no such direction of the State Government shall be
operative if the payment is not made in accordance with the
Provisions contained in this section and the tariff fixed by the
State Commission shall be applicable from the date of issue of
orders by the Commission in this regard.”

It is evident from the above provision that the subsidy is to be
paid by the State Government in accordance with the directions of the
State Electricity Regulatory Commission.

2. Section 55(1) of the Electricity Act mandates supply of electricity
through meter. This sections reads as follows:

No licensee shall supply electricity, after the expiry of two years from
the appointed date, except through installation of a correct meter in accordance
with the regulations to be made in this behalf by the Authority:

Provided that the licensee may require the consumer to give him security
for the price of a meter and enter into an agreement for the hire thereof,
unless the consumer elects to purchase a meter:

Provided further that the State Commission may, by notification, extend
the said period of two years for a class or classes of person or for such area
as may be specified in that notification.

3. All the State Governments have committed for metering of
consumers in the MOA/MOU signed with the Central Government. A
statement indicating the State-wise position of consumer metering is
enclosed.


a

39

Overall Status of Reforms and Restructuring of
States in Distribution

States TIKV feeder metering Consumer metering
1 2 3
Delhi 96% 100%
Haryana v 100%
Himachal Pradesh 93% 100%
Jammu & Kashmir 40% 40%
Punjab Vv 100%
Rajasthan v 94%
Uttar Pradesh v 91%
Uttaranchal v 87%
Chhattisgarh 70% 72%
Gujarat Vv 93%
Goa v 95%
Madhya Pradesh v 63%
Maharashtra 97% 88%
Andhra Pradesh v 91%
Karnataka Vv 80%
Kerala V 100%
Tamil Nadu Vv 81%
Bihar 41% 50%
Jharkhand 86% 62%
Orissa 46% 83%
West Bengal 98% 98%
Assam 62% 90%

Meghalaya 24% 44%


1 2 3
Arunachal Pradesh 0% 46%
Mizoram 52% 52%
Manipur 21% 82%
Nagaland 19% 61%
Tripura v 81%
Sikkim 49% 62%
Total 94% 86%
४ = 100%

[Ministry of Power R.No. 27/7/2004 (R&R) (Pt.) dated 17.12.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 19, Para No. 2.102)

The Committee observe that the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission have issued instructions to all the Ministries / Departments
for allocation of 10% of their Plan Budget for the projects in the North
Eastern Region including Sikkim. Accordingly, Ministry of Power is
providing not only 10% of its Plan Budget but in excess of the 10%
of the Plan Budget to the North-Eastern Region including Sikkim.
Taking note of the low % utilization which varies from 9% to 36% of
the total outlays with respect to North-Eastern Region and Sikkim
during the last 3 years, the Committee feel that the very purpose of
providing 10% of the total outlays of the Ministry of North-Eastern
Region gets defeated. The Committee are further perturbed to note
that though the Planning Commission conducts Quarterly Performance
Review (QPR) on a regular basis for each State including the States of
the North-Eastern Region which inter-alia also covers the power sector
and in the said QPR both physical and financial progress in NE States
are reviewed, it appear to the Committee that no corrective actions to
expedite the timely completion of the projects have been taken. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to take all
desired steps to ensure that funds earmarked for North-Eastern Region
which are meant for overall development of the region must be utilized
and projects/schemes should be completed as targeted. The Committee
are constrained to note the low utilisation of Budget outlays by
NEEPCO which is undertaking power generation projects in
North-Eastern Region. During the previous years as against BE of


41

Rs. 414 crore during 2003-04, the actuals were only Rs. 61 crore. It
appears that in spite of Committee’s earlier recommendations that
NEEPCO should set achievable targets and IEBR projections, the
Government/NEEPCO had done noting to implement these suggestions.
Although, a number of projects like Tipaimukh gas based power Project
(280 MW), Tipaimukh Hydro-electric Project (1500 MW), Turial Hydro-
electric Project (60 MW), Tuivai Hydroelectric Project, (x70 MW) etc.
are being executed by NEEPCO, the Committee are at a loss to observe
the downward revision of Budget Estimates during 2003-04. The
Committee feel that the Government/NEEPCO will at least now ensure
the utilisation of the plan outlays fully which are targeted for the
2004-05. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
to fully utilize the Budget Estimates of Rs. 482 crore from 2004-05
with 217 crore Gross Budgetary Support for the year. Since the funds
for North-Eastern region get accredited to a non-lapsable fund every

* year, the Government should think of utilising these funds for creation

of basic infrastructure in the region which in term would help in
reducing the cost of various projects in the region. The Government
may also analysis the possibility of utilising this fund to meet the
expenditure on security activities at various projects sites to ensure
proper law and order situation to avoid loading the cost on the project.
The Committee also suggest that part of the unutilised amounts of the

* Ministry could be transferred to the non-lapsable fund. The Committee

may be informed of the action take in the matter.
Reply of the Government

In this connection it is mentioned that M/o Finance/Planning
Commission have issued instructions for providing of 10% of the Plan
budget of the Ministries/Departments for the development of the North
Eastern Region including Sikkim. Based on the instructions M/o Power
is providing budget to North Eastern Region separately which is more
than the stipulated limit of the M/o Finance/Planning Commission,
as most of the NHPC’s projects and NEEPCO in particular are located
in North Eastern Region.

As regards under utilization of during 2003-04 in North Eastern
Region (NEEPCO), it is mentioned that saving of Rs. 195.23 crore in
case of NEEPCO is due to non approval of their new schemes i.e.
Tipaimukh, Tripura Gas and Kameng. Increase of cost of Tipaimukh
due to security concern and commercial unviability of tariff was the
reason for non approval of Tripura Gas project had to be reconfigured


42

to 280 MW in light of less availability of gas, while Kameng HEP was
not fully prepared for grant of approval.

As regard the possibility of utilization of budget during 2004-05
provided to NEEPCO, it is mentioned that against the BE of Rs. 482
crore comprising of Rs. 217 crore of Gross Budgetary Support, NEEPCO
will be able to utilize atleast 200 crore during the current financial
year as their two schemes have recently been approved by the CCEA.

As regard transfer of the fund by the Ministry to Non-lapsable
pool, it is mentioned that M/o Power is incurring more than 10%
budget of the M/o Power Plan Fund. The question of transferring of
plan fund to non-lapsable pool does not arise as per M/o Finance/
Planning Commission instructions. The details showing the available
budget of M/o Power and the actual utilization in North Eastern
Region during the last 3 years are given an Annexure-I, II and III
respectively.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 20020/6/2004-Budget,
dated 17.12.2004]


ANNEXURE 1

STATEMENT SHOWING EXPENDITURE ATTRIBUTED TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTH EASTERN REGION & SIKKIM

Proposed
SLNo. BE 2004-05 RE 2004-05
1 2. 3.
1... Total GBS of Ministry of Power: 3600.00 3267.25
10% of Gross Budgetary Support: 360.00 326.73
North Eastern Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Kopili Stage-II 17 1.00
(ii) Tipaimukh 9.00 100
(ii) Tuivai HEP 0.00 0.00
(iv) Lower Kipili HEP 5.00 0.00
(0 Kameng HEP 140.23 145.00
(vi) Ranganadi Stage-I 5.00 1.00
(vii) Tripura Gas Based Power Project 50.00 50.00
(viii) Dikrong, Papumpan & Pakke HE Projects 5.00 100
(ix) Survey & investigation 100 100
Total : NEBPCO 217.00 200.00
2. National Hydro Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Subansiri Lower 389.23, 480.00
(ii) Loktak Down Stream 6.00 0.00
(ii) Testa V. 12672 148.49
(iv) Siang Lower n91 0.00
(¥) Siang Middle 75.00 0.00

43


2 3

(vi) Siang Upper 6.84 0.00
(vii) Subansisi Upper 2039 0.00
(viii) Subansiri Middle 198 0.00
(ix) Divang 10 0.00

Total : NHPC 662.07 628.49
Total Provision under MH-4552 (NHPC&NEEPCO) 879.07 828.49
Kutir Jyoti Programme 50.00 50.00
Total Provision under MH-2552 50.00 50.00
Power Grid-Grant-ULDC (NER) 2.00 2.00
Grand Total 931.07 880.49
Percentage earmarked for NE 5.8% 26.9%



2003-04

ANNEXURE II

STATEMENT SHOWING EXPENDITURE ATTRIBUTED TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTH EASTERN REGION & SIKKIM

(Rs. in Crore)
9190. BE 2003-04 Actual 2003-04
1 Zs 3 4
1. Total GBS of Ministry of Power: 3500.00 1846.46
10% of Gross Budgetary Support: 350,00 184.64
North Eastern Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Kopili Stage-Il 21.49 0.00
(ii) Tipaimukh 40.00 0.00
(iii) Tuivai HEP 15.00 0.00
(iv) Kameng HEP 70.00 21.26
(v) Ranganadi Stage-II 20.00 0.00
(vi) Tripura Gas Based Power Project 50.00 0.00
Total : NEEPCO 216.49 21.26
2. National Hydro Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Subansiri Lower 300.00 320.81
(ii) Loktak Down Stream 22.35 000
(iii) Testa V 275.00 275.00
(iv) Siang Lower 9.24 0.00
(v) Siang Middle 25.00 0.00
(vi) Siang Upper 10.00 0.00

45


2 3 4

(vii) Subansiri Upper 25.00 0.00
(viii) Subansiri Middle 50.00 0.00

Total ; NHPC 716.59 595.81
Total Provision under MH-4552 933.08 617.07
REC-Kutir Jyoti Programme 10.00 10.00
Total Provision under MH-2552 10.00 10.00
Provision for other scheme made for NER
Power Grid—Grant-ULDC (NER) 80.00 50.18
Grand Total 1023.08 677.25
Percentage earmarked for NE: 29.2% 36.6%



2002-03

STATEMENT SHOWING EXPENDITURE ATTRIBUTED TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTH-EASTERN REGION & SIKKIM

(Rs. in Crore)
Sl. No. Item Description of Plan Scheme BE 2002-08 Actuals 2002-03
1 2 3 4
Total GBS of Ministry of Power: 3300.00 1830.46
10% of Gross Budgetary Support: 330.00 183.05
h: North Eastern Electric Power Corpn.
() Kopili tages 12.0 23
(ii) Tipaimukh 1500 0.00
(iii) Tuirial HEP 500 0.00
(iv) Tuivai HEP 41.00 0.00
(v) Lower Kopili HEP 10.00 0.00
(vi) Kameng HEP 40.38 17.00
(vii) Ranganadi Stage-II 20.00 0.00
(viii) Tripura Gas Based Power Project 47.10 0.00
(ix) Dikrong, Papumpam & Pakke HE Projects 100 2.0284
Total : NEEPCO 20048 49.2584
2 National Hydro Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Subansiri Lower 200.00 2099
(ii) Loktak Down Stream 10.00 4.08
(iii) Teesta V 20253 2841
(iv) Siang Lower un 10



2 3 4

(९) Siang Middle 833 3.60
(vi) Siang Upper 524 479
(vii) Subansiti Upper 10.00 382
(viii) Subansiri Middle 1037 3.86
(x) Rangit 000
Total : NHPC 458.19 33782
REC-Kutir Jyoti Programme 100 500
PGCIL-ULDC-NER 40.00 0.00
Grand Total 70867 392.
Percentage earmarked for NE 214% 24%



STATEMENT SHOWING EXPENDITURE ATTRIBUTED TO THE

DEVELOPMENT OF THE NORTH EASTERN REGION & SIKKIM

(Rs. in Crore)
SLNo. Item Description of Plan Scheme BE 2001-02 Actuals 2001-02
1 3 3 4
Total GBS of Ministry of Power: 3288.00 3089.12
10% of Gross Budgetary Support: 282.00 308.91
1. North Basten Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Kopili Stage-II 15.24 0.00
(i) Tipaimukh 20.00 0.00
(iii) Tuirial HEP 1024 0.00
(iv) Tuivai HEP 4.0 0.00
(0 Lower Kopilii HEP 10.00 0.00
(vi) Kameng HEP 2.% 41.28
(vii) Ranganadi Stage-Il 5.00 0.00
(viii) Tripura Gas Based Power Project 9.00 0.00
(x) Diktong, Papumpam & Pakke HE Projects 11.56 0.00
Total : NEEPCO 125.00 41.28
2. National Hydro Electric Power Corpn.
(i) Subansiri Lower 40.00 54
(ii) Lokiak Down Stream. 20.00 0.00
(iii) Testa V 189.00 207.18
(iv) Siang Lower 2500 0.00
(v) Siang Middle 12.00 0.00

49


2 3 4
(vi) Siang Upper 18.00 0.00
(vii) Subansiri Upper 1500 0.00
(viii) Subansiri Middle 15.00 0.00
Total : NHPC 334.90 232.62
Inter State Transmission Line
(i) Marani-Mokokchung 1% 085
(ii) Umiam-Umtru StagelV 3.4 101
Total : छा. 4.80 1.86
REC-Kutir Jyoti Programme 7.0 7.0
Grand Total 471.70 282.76
Percentage earmarked for NE 143% 9.12%


ANNEXURE III
NORTH EASTERN ELECTRIC POWER CORPORATION LTD.

DETAILS OF REVISED ESTIMATE 2004-05 &
BUDGET ESTIMATE 2005-2006

(Rs. in Crores)
Uae Eine 0042005 Revised sina 204-2005 Asewed RE 2004205
8 Name of Spity छा Tend RE ( छा Toa RE GS छा Toul RE
Ne Prost कक — 2४७6 — OHS
Exay beach
A. Central Sector
1. Tirunal Hydro Electric Project 0.00 115.00 11500 00 5000 5000 00 500 5000
(60 MW) Mizoram
2. Kopili-2nd Stage HLE. Project 177 000 177 1679 000 16799 10 000 10
(5 MW) Assam
3. Kameng Hydro Blectric Project ‘45.00 000 145.00 14500 0.00 145.00 14500 0.00 145.00
(60 MW) Ar. Pradesh
4. Survey & Investigation 1000 00 1000 1800 000 1800 10 000 10
5... Tipaimukh Hydro Electric Project 50 00 50 500 000 500 100 000 1.0
(1500 MW) Manipur
6. Tripura Gas Based Power Project 4000 19000 190.00 15000 40.00 190.00 50.00 40.00 90.00
(280 MW) Tripura
7... Tuivai Hydro Electric Project 00. 00. 00 00 00 00 00 00 0०
(210 MW) Mizoram
8. Ranganadi Stagell HE. Project 50 00 50 36 00 36 100 00 10
(30 MW) Arunachal Pradesh
9. Lower Kopili Hydro Electric Project 2B 00 23 00 00 00 00 00 0७
(190 MW) Assam
10... Dikrong H.E. Project 800 00. 800 340 00 34 100 00 10
(110 MW) Arunachal Pradesh

Total 217.00 265.00 48200 आ 90.00 431.84 200.00 9000 29000

51


52

Recommendation (SI. No. 22, Para No. 2.119)

The Committee observe that POWERGRID has diversified into
telecom sector also and investments to the tune of about Rs. 650.00 crore
has been made by the POWERGRID in telecom sector. The Committee
find that as orly few links were under commercial operation,
POWERGRID earned revenue of Rs. 18.00 crore during the last two
years. Further, till 15th July, 2004, orders were about Rs. 23.00 crore
have been reported to be secured by the POWERGRID from the various
customers. With the expected returns to increase only after 7-8 years,
the Committee are at a loss to observe that had the Committee's earlier
recommendation Para No. 2.112, 16th Report, 13th Lok Sabha been
implemented; the Government/POWERGRID should have been able
to plough the investments of Rs. 650.00 crores in the transmission
sector. The Committee, therefore, again recommend that the
Government analyze the present investments made in the telecom sector
vis-a-vis profit to be accrued which could be well ploughed back in
the transmission sector for which the POWERGRID has been mandated.
The Committee would like to know the details of such analysis carried
out by the Government/POWERGRID.

Reply of the Government

The proposal for establishment of backbone telecom network by
Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) was approved in March,
2003 at an estimated cost of Rs. 934.23 Crore.

The International Consultants advising on telecom project based
upon assessment of market conditions, competition, financial risks etc.
had estimated that the revenue from the project would grow from
Rs, 2 crore in the initial years to about Rs. 556 crore by the 10th year.
It was also estimated that the project would be earning profits of
about Rs. 19 crore from 5th year (i.e. 2005-06) onwards from the
commencement of the project and would grow to about Rs. 275 crore
by the 10th year. The consultants recommended that the project IRR
is expected to be 25.43% based on World Bank funding and the project
would turn cash positive in the 6th year with Pay back period of
8 years after completion of the project. In line with consultants’
recommendations, PGCIL obtained Infrastructure Provider-II (IP-II)
license from Department of Telecommunications in January, 2001 and
later ISP Category ‘A’ from DoT in May, 2003 to pursue telecom
business.


53

Revised Financial Analysis

After the investment approval was accorded in March, 2003,
majority of the network connecting various metro and other major
cities like Chennai, Bangalore, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Cochin, cities in
North-Eastern States, Jammu, etc. have been connected between
September-December, 2004. Based on the market analysis, competition,
prevailing tariffs, ete, PGCIL expects that the targeted market share
would be achieved by the year 2008-09 and it would stabilize thereafter.
According to estimates of PGCIL, the revenue would grow from about
Rs. 2 crore in the initial years to approx. Rs. 556 crore by the 10th
year. The project would start earning profits of about Rs. 84 crore
from 7th year (i.e. from 2007-08 which is 2 years beyond the initial
estimated year of 2005-06) onwards from the commencement of the
project and shall grow to about Rs. 275 crore by the 10th year (2009-
2010). The projected IRR shall be 21.23% based on World Bank funding
and the project is expected to be cash positive by the year 2007-08
and payback by 10th year (i.e. 2010).

As telecom sector as a whole keeps on undergoing changes in
accordance with Government's liberalization policy and further opening
of the sector, the returns expected on the project are subject to
regulatory environment, competition, pricing strategies, changing
customer needs, new services to be offered, new marketing strategies
to be adopted etc. This shall necessitate appointment of Consultant
who will recommended strategies to be adopted by PGCIL to offer
other Value Added Services to maintain utilization of its network and
further increasing the profitability.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 9/1/2004-PG,
dated: 17th December, 2004]


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No. 2.10)

The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry of Power
projected higher Plan outlays during the years 2002-03 and 2003-04
which were drastically reduced at RE stage. From the plan outlays of
the Ministry of Power, the Committee observe that for the year
2002-03, these were reduced from Rs. 13483.00 crore at B.E. stage to
Rs. 11268.36 crore at RE stage. The Ministry could not utilize this
reduced amount and the actuals were Rs. 8649.22 crore only. This, the
Ministry of Power surrendered and amount of Rs. 4833.78 crore during
2002-03 against the budgeted outlays. Further, the Plan Outlays of the
Ministry for 2003-04 were Rs. 14667.61 crore comprising of Rs. 3500.00 crore
as GBS and Rs. 11167.61 crore as IEBR. This was reduced to
Rs. 12037.77 crore at RE stage comprising of Rs. 1850 crore as GBS
and Rs. 10187.77 crore as IEBR. The actual utilization of funds during
2003-04 was Rs. 10741.00 and the Ministry of Power surrendered an
amount of Rs. 3927.00 crore as compared to BE for the year. Thus in
both the last two financial years, the Ministry failed to utilise the
budgeted amount. The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons
furnished by the Government for non-utilisation of amount. The scheme
of NERLDC by Power Grid is said to have been completed at lesser
cost and resulted in saving of Rs. 29.87 crore. Better and advance
budgeting would have ensured that the surrendered amount could
have been utilised for other schemes. Similarly, the Committee are
dismayed to note that in case of NHPC (2002-03) an amount of
Rs. 742.72 crore was surrendered due to non-approval of Purulia Pump
Storage, Kirshnaganga, Parbati-III, Chamera III capitalization of IDC,
etc. The National Power Training Institute (NPTI) and Central Power
Research Institute (CPRI) surrendered an amount of Rs. 19.5 crore and
23.52 crore respectively out of a total outlays of Rs. 24.60 crore and
Rs, 25.00 crore due to non-approval of new schemes and slow progress
of ongoing schemes during 2002-03. The Committee find that new
schemes of the Ministry of Power for which funds to the tune of
Rs. 20.00 crore were provided, could not get approved and the full
amount for the purpose was surrendered during 2002-03. Further, due

54


55

to non-approval of the revised cost estimates of the Tehri Stage-I by
the competent authority and reluctance of the Northern Region
constituents to source Power from Tehri Project, an amount of
Rs. 391.56 crore was surrendered against the total outlays of
Rs. 467.31 crore. Thus, it would be seen that a large number of schemes
planned by the Ministry could not get even initial approval to start.
This shows that those schemes were not planned by the Ministry
perfectly and for which the scarce resources of the Government were
blocked. The Committee do not approve the present practice being
followed by the Ministry of Power which have been asking for higher
allocations year after year, but the implementation of plans and policies
are poor as ground realities are not taken into account while
formulating and implementing the plans. The Committee feel that with
such a state of affairs, the scarce resources remain locked in
unproductive returns at the cost of other needy sectors of the economy.
The Committee are pained to note although they have repeatedly
recommended for formulation of realistic plans but no action seems to
has been taken by the Government on these recommendations. The
Committee, however, expect that intensified monitoring mechanism
which is being put in place by the Ministry of Power will ensure that
budgeted amounts earmarked at the BE stage is fully utilised during
2004-05. At the same time, the Committee desire that the Government
should review all the on-going schemes in the month of July-August
and if required, re-allocate the funds so that the budgeted amounts is
utilised fully during the financial year.

Reply of the Government

In this connection it is mentioned that out of the BE of
Rs. 3600.00 crore an amount of Rs. 2760.00 crore is provided for on-
going projects or projects likely to be approved i.e. on-going projects
of NHPC, two projects of NEEPCO are likely to be approved by the
Cabinet, Tehri-I project for which the approval for RCE is at an
advanced stage and for AGSP and Rural Electrification programme. It
is, therefore, every possibility that the budgeted amount for the year
2004-05 would be fully utilized.

As regards monitoring mechanism it is mentioned that Ministry of
Power has taken the corrective measures to ensure that the budgeted
amounts earmarked at the BE Stage is fully utilized during 2004-05.
An intensified monitoring mechanism has been put in place as indicated
hereunder:-

i. Weekly review by Secretary (Power) of the status of
investment approval new of projects. Constant follow-up


ii.

iii.

iv.

vi.

vii.

viii.

x.

56

with Finance Ministry and Planning Commission is taken
up to expedite the same so as to ensure approval of the
Competent Authority and thereby utilization of budgeted
expenditure:-

Monthly review by Chairman, CEA of all Projects.

Three stage approval process for Hydro Projects to ensure
adequacy of Survey & Investigation, creation of all essential
infrastructure required for commencement of construction
before accord of final approval by the CCEA.

Comprehensive quarterly review by Secretary (Power) of
status of all ongoing and new projects.

Representatives from Planning Commission and Programme
Implementation.

Periodical review with States on Capacity addition/ APDRP/
Village Electrification.

Periodic Inter-ministerial Coordination meetings with M/o
P&NG; M/o Coal; M/o E&F; M/o WR for expositional
clearances for the projects.

Periodic reviews with Private Projects developers.

Periodic visits to States-Comprehensive individual review
with the State Governments.

Periodic project visits.

As regard review of the project, it is mentioned that while
preparation of the RE for 2004-05, the complete review of all ongoing
projects/plans would be done. A circular has already been issued to
all concerned in this regard (copy enclosed).

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 20020/6/2004-Budget dated 3.09.2004]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)


ANNEXURE-I

ENo. 20020/3/2004-Budget
Government of India
Ministry of Power

New Delhi
dated 27.8.2004

Sub: Standing Committee of Energy—Consideration of the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2004-05.

The undersigned is directed to say that while considering the
Demand for Grants of the Ministry of Power for 2004-05, the Standing
Committee in its first report (14th Lok Sabha) observed as under:-

“The Committee desire that the Government should review all the
on-going schemes in the month of July-August and if required re-
allocate the funds so that the budgeted amount is utilized fully
during the financial year.”

You are therefore, requested to review your all on-going schemes/
projects/plans and if necessary propose for reallocation of the funds
so as to ensure that surrender of fund at the end of the financial year
may be avoided.

Sd-
(Saurabh Kumar)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
To

1. CMDs of all PSUs/Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies
2. All Desks/Sections, Ministry of Power, New Delhi

57


58

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.11)

The Committee further observe the quarterly utilization of funds
by the Ministry of Power against the GBS of Rs. 3500 crore and IEBR
of Rs. 11167.61 crore during 2003-04. The quarterly comparison with
preceding year indicate that expenditure during first 3 quarters of the
financial year are very low and it is only in the last quarter, the
percentage utilization of funds is above the normal. Taking note of
various ongoing projects/schemes of the Ministry of Power which are
completed in a time span of three to ten years, the Committee fail to
understand as to why there is rush for utilization of funds in the last
quarter of the financial year. The Committee are of the view that this
unhealthy trend of not spending any amount during first quarter of
the financial year and rushing to major expenditure in the last quarter,
especially in the month of February and March is against the financial
norms. The Committee are of the concerned opinion that there has
been system failure on large-scale in such cases. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend the Government that a meaningful and
relevant programmes and policies be formulated so that there should
be regular infusion of funds in various projects/schemes in all quarters
of the financial year and the total plan outlays are fully utilized. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government

It is mentioned that in a meeting taken by Finance Minister with
FAs on 23.7.2004, it is also desired that the existing instructions about
33% utilisation of the budget during the last quarter should be strictly
followed. Accordingly, a circular has already been issued to all
concerned for compliance of the instructions of Ministry of Finance as
well as observations of the Audit/: Standing Committee (copy enclosed).

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 20020/6/2004-Budget, dated 3.9.2004]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)


ANNEXURE-I

ENo. 20020/3/2004-Budget
Government of India
Ministry of Power

New Delhi
dated 31.8.2004

OFFICE MEMORANDUM

As per the existing instructions of Ministry of Finance not more
than 33% of the budgeted amount should be incurred by the Ministry/
Department in the last quarter of the financial year.

In the recent meeting taken by Finance Minister with all the
Financial Advisors on 23.7.2004 it is desired that the existing instructions
for incurring of expenditure should be strictly followed.

You are, therefore, advised to structure the programmes so that
the expenditure to be incurred on the projects/plans should not exceed
33% during the last quarter of the financial year.

-Sd-
(Saurabh Kumar)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
To
1. CMDs of all PSUs/Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies
2. All Desks/Sections, Ministry of Power, New Delhi

59


60

Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No. 2.36)

The Committee feel that conservation and efficient use of energy
should be treated as one of the major thrust areas to bridge the gap
between the demand and supply of power. Although, measures to
Promote conservation of energy has been taken, the Committee are
unhappy to note that energy audit in distribution systems in Kerala,
West Bengal which were targeted to be completed in 1999-2000 by the
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) were delayed and completed
only in 2000-01. The Committee are further dismayed to note that
3000 Amorphous Core Transformers which were to be introduced in
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan by REC by 1999-2000,
were delayed and the scheme was completed in 2003-04. The
Committee observe similar fate of other schemes implemented by
agencies the Punjab State Electricity Board, HVPNL, TERI, etc. The
Committee also observe that only one energy conservation activity
each in the year 2002-03 and 2003-04 was completed by agencies other
than BEE. The Committee are constrained to note that although the
Government on the one hand are claiming high that a large number
of schemes/activities have been initiated to promote the energy
efficiency and savings have accrued, it seems that the Government
have failed to enthuse conservation and energy efficiency agencies for
undertaking such schemes. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation that there is a greater need to bring about
public awareness regarding energy efficiency measures of the
Government and the Government should set the targets to be achieved
for energy savings during a particular year. The Committee desire that
short-term as well as long-term action plans be formulated and the
Committee be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this
regard.

Reply of the Government

The Government has decided to launch an inclusive and extensive
awareness campaign on energy efficiency and its conservation whereby
all sections of the population would be brought together, but children
would be specifically focused. In pursuance of the chalked out National
Campaign on Energy Conservation, a Postage Stamp on Energy
Conservation has been released by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India
on 14th December, 2004—the National Energy Conservation Day.

On the same day, the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India has also
launched the ‘National Campaign on Energy Conservation 2005’. The


61

National Campaign has been planned to focus on the creation of public
awareness and understanding the significance of energy conservation
and to urge people of the country to be part of the energy conservation
drive by optimizing the use of energy and making energy saving a
habit. The national campaign targets the following sectors:—

Domestic Sector;

Commercial Sector;

Agricultural Sector;

Industrial Sector;

Government Buildings and,

Public Sector Units, Educational Institutions.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 14/3/2004-EM,
dated December, 28, 2004]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.54)

The Committee observe that the demands for electric power
continues to grows at a rapid rate outstripping the availability for the
same. In the prevailing scenario of shortage of adequate resources to
build up new capacity on one hand and stringent environmental
requirements on the other. Renovation and Modernisation (R&M) and
Life Extension (LE) of power plants have been recognized as a well-
proven cost effective techniques the world over for improving the
performance/efficiency of older power plants and thereby adding
additional generation of power at a much lesser cost. The Committee
are of the opinion that plants performance can be increased by R&M
and the power plants yield benefits in shorter span with infusion of
renewable funds. However, the Committee are constrained to note the
slow pace of completion of R&M activities as out of a total of
636 activities identified for R&M work in thermal power units, only
95 were completed during 2002-2003. The Committee observe that
against 92 thermal units that are targeted for major refurbishment
during 10th Plan (2002-2003 to 2006-07), RLA studies on 48 units only
have reported to be completed so far. The Committee are further
distressed to note that out of 60 units which will need R&M works to
improve/sustain the performance, work on 25 units has been started


62

during the first two years of 10th Plan. With only 13 schemes
programmed for completion during 2004-2005, out of a total of
74 hydro schemes, only 33 are likely to implemented/completed during
the first three years of the 10th Plan. Although, the Ministry of Power
have informed the Committee that adequate funds are available for
life extension and R&M of thermal power station under AG&SP at
concession! rates, the Committee observe that against the estimated
fund requirements of Rs. 8700 crore and Rs. 1100 crore for Life
Extension Programme (LEP) and Renovation and Modernization (R&M)
works; the expenditure incurred during 2002-2003 were only
Rs. 33 crore and Rs. 30 crore respectively. Observing the low infusion
of funds against the total funds requirements for the R&M projects,
the Committee have come to the conclusion that there is not enough
interest on the part of the Government in pursuing R&M work for
power projects vigorously. Although, the Committee have been
informed of the perspective plan that has been drawn for undertaking
R&M works during the 10th Plan and beyond, unfortunately the
infusion of desired funds and lack of pace of completion of R&M
activities both for thermal & hydel plants indicate to the contrary. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that R&M of all the identified
potential units should be undertaken in a fixed time frame and CEA
should monitor the work. The Committee also recommend that private
sector should also be involved in implementation of R&M schemes to
ensure the speedily achievement of targets. The Committee also note
that the Government have not given enough attention to the R&M of
transmission lines and sub-stations, etc. set up by Powergrid. The
Committee would like the Government to draw up a programme for
R&M of these assets and inform the Committee within 3 months of
the presentation of the Report.

Reply of the Government

The 636 R&M activities were programmed to be completed during
whole span of 9th Plan. Out of this, only 434 activities were completed
during IX Plan and balance were carried over to X Plan. Out of balance
activities, 95 nos. could be completed in the year 2002-03.

Earlier the exact scope of R&M works was decided on the basis
of Residual Life Assessment (RLA) Studies for which separate shut
down of plant was needed. To expedite the Life Extension (LE) works,
it was decided by the Task Force for R&M/Life Extension that the
basic scope of works could be decided based on the condition of the
units and experience of station engineers and the RLA of the Units
may be carried out during shut down for carrying out Life Extension
Works, As such, RLA is not being now carried out prior to LE works.


63

At present, R&M works have started on 36 units. For the remaining
units, the R&M proposal have been finalized/approved and the orders
are being placed for the R&M activities. R&M works on all the units
are likely to be completed by the end of 10th Plan.

The LE works involve the activities of finalisation of feasibility
report, placement of order, manufacturing & supply of material and
the execution of works which are spanned over 30-36 months. The
major portion of expenditure is done during the supply of materials
& execution, which start after almost 2 years. The expenditure incurred
against Life Extension Programme (LEP) and Renovation and
Modernisation R&M works till now Rs. 605 crores and Rs. 143 crores
respectively.

The present status of LE works are as under:

(i) No. of units on which LE works has been completed—
6 Nos.

(1) No. of units on which LE works are in progress—5 Nos.

(iii) No. of units on which orders for LE works have been
placed—6 Nos.

(iv) No. of units where feasibility study reports completed—
38 Nos.

The abovementioned progress is slow. Despite of the well known
fact that the R&M/LE Programmes rapidly improve the performance
of the units, some of the utilities have shown the casual approach to
such an important programme.

The reasons for delay by such utilities are as under:

(i) Procedural delays in placement of orders

(ii) Delay/indecision by State Government in finalization of
placement of orders. Some of the examples are given below:—

Obra TPS (UP) — 3x100 MW
Obra TPS (UP) — 5x200 MW
Panipat TPS (Haryana) — 3x1l10 MW
Chandrapura TPS (DVC) — 3x120 MW

Ministry of Power and CEA are vigorously following up with the
utilities for expediting the R&M/LE works in following ways:

(a) Frequent meetings in CEA


64

(b) Frequent site visits by CEA/NTPC/BHEL engineers
(©) Technology inputs by CEA/NTPC

(d) Guaranteed funds at concessional rates of interest are
available through PFC.

(e) Compensation (to a limited extent) for generation loss during
shut down for LE works are being offered from Central
pool

(f) Vigorous follow up is done through meetings and
correspondence at the levels of Member, CEA, Chairman,
CEA and Secretary (Power), Government of India

(g) Guidelines have been issued by the Ministry of Power for
speedy implementation of the R&M/LE works

It is well know that there has been tremendous improvement in
the performance of the thermal units where Life Extension works have
been completed. It is disappointing that the stations which are running
which are running with poor performance are also slow in
implementation of R&M/LE works despite of vigorous follow up by
CEA and the Ministry of Power.

Private sector is already involved in LE works at various thermal
power stations.

[Ministry of Power U.No. 12/3/2004-Th. 3 dated 17.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 2.66)

The Committee observe that the Government of India have
approved APDRP scheme as an intervention strategy with a focus on
distribution reforms with an objective to reduce AT&C losses, bring
about commercial viability in the power sector, reduce outages &
interruptions, and increase consumer satisfaction. The outlay of
Rs. 40,000 crore as additional Central Plan assistance to State
Governments during 10th Five Year Plan are expected. The Government
have informed the Committee that for availing APDRP funds, the States
have to sign MoU with Ministry of Power which covers establishment
of SERC, restructuring of SEBs etc., The States also have to sign


65

tripartite agreement in respect of dues of CPSUs and SEB utility, sign
the MoA with Ministry of Power which covers 100% consumer
metering, energy accounting, gap reduction between cost of supply &
revenue realization, reduction of T&D losses, and reduction of financial
losses etc. by way of committed benchmark parameters. The Committee
are, however, dismayed to note that although all states have signed
MoU, MoA, Tripartite Agreements and 21 States have constituted SERCs
and 17 SERCs have issued tariff orders, only 10 States have unbundled/
corporatized their SEBs and two States viz. Delhi & Orissa have
privatized their SEBs so far. Further, 100% feeder metering have been
completed in 16 states only and two States have reported to achieve
more than 90% metering. The Committee are constrained to note that
100% consumer metering which should have been done on priority
basis is reported to be completed only in 3 States so far. The Committee
desire that the Government should take elaborate steps to speed up
these schemes.

Reply of the Government

Under distribution reforms, there is an emphasis on achieving 100%
consumer metering. The Ministry of Power is regularly monitoring the
progress achieved by the States. Further, assistance under APDRP shall
be provided to the State based on progress made against various
parameters, which include progress on consumer metering also.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 5/1/2004-APDRP, dated 7.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.67)

The Committee have taken a serious note of the fact that in cities
where distribution of electricity has been privatised there has been a
sudden rise in complaints from Consumers regarding sharp increase
in their electricity bills. The Committee feel that this issue should be
enquired into detail and the Committee should be apprised of the
action taken for quick redressal of consumers’ grievances. At the same
time, the committee strongly recommended the Government to ensure
that Grievance Redressal Forum and Ombudsman should be set up in
all the States within three months.


66

Reply of the Government

The sudden rise in complaints regarding electricity bills has been
observed in states where the distribution has been privatized. States
have been asked to submit their comments.

As per the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, every distribution
licensee shall, within six months from the appointed date or date of
grant of license whichever is earlier, establish a forum of redressal of
grievances of the consumers in accordance with the guidelines as may
be specified by the State Commission. All States are being asked to
form redressal forums and appoint Ombudsman in the distribution
companies in accordance with the Electricity act, 2003.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 5/1/2004-APDRP, dated 7.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.12)

The Committee find that budget utilisation is linked to the
investment approval by the competent authority for each new project.
The Committee in their 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha) had observed
that as the existing procedure in vogue, each thermal project costing
more than Rs. 2500.00 crore is appraised by the Central Electricity
Authority. Similarly, the limit for hydro project is Rs. 250 crore. Further,
all hydro projects involving rivers flowing through more than one
State require CEA clearance. BY implication, this means that all the
hydro projects irrespective of capacity coast would need CEA nod for
execution, The Committee had further observed that power project
costing more than Rs. 100.00 crore needs clearance from Cabinet
committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). In order to step up the
utilization of funds, the Ministry of Power had suggested that the
existing procedures for obtaining approval of projects need to be
streamlined. The Ministry of Finance had then responded that enhanced
delegation had been permitted to various Central Ministries including
Power as recently as February, 2002. The Ministry of Finance had also
stated that they were open to any measure, which lead to faster
improvement of power projects as well as better utilization of funds
allocated to power sector. Taking note of the proposal of the Ministry
of Power to enhance the delegation of powers for implementation of
power projects as well as better utilization of funds allocated to power
sector. Taking note of the proposal of the Ministry of Power to enhance
the delegation of powers for implementation of power projects for the
CCEA approval is too meager. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation for enhance delegation of powers to the
Ministry and its PSUs. The Committee also feel that there is a need
for thorough analysis of the reasons for delay which can be related to
environment/forests, land acquisition, law and order problems, tying
up of financial resources, selling and power purchase agreements, etc.
At the same time the Committee favours the suggestion of the Ministry
of Power regarding creation of Power Investment Commission for all
projects in power sector on the lines of Telecom Commission or the
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) whereby PIB/CCEA

67


68

clearance can be obtained for 5 years plan target irrespective of taking
clearance for individual projects. The Committee desire that the Ministry
of Power should immediately take up this matter with the Government
at appropriate level and apprise the Committee of the resultant
outcome.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry of Power has taken the issue of enhanced delegation
of financial powers with the Ministry of Finance. The proposal mooted
by this Ministry seeks to streamline the appraisal as well as the
approved process for power projects. While at present, the projects for
Government approval have to undergo multiple appraisals by same
agencies, it has been proposed that the appraisal may be restricted
only at one level with greater and more effective scrutiny. After such
appraisal, the level of approval has also been proposed to be delegated
with higher financial autonomy.

2. The matter was discussed in a meeting of the Committee of
Secretaries which have recommended enhanced delegation of financial
power upto Rs. 1500 crore to the Ministry of Power. A draft cabinet
note on the basis of the recommendation has been circulated for the
same.

[Ministry of Power File No. 35011/29/2003-Fin., dated 17.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.37)

The Committee are unhappy to know that the Bureau of Energy
Efficiency (BEE) is still in the process of establishing institutional
mechanism to facilitate the implementation of the Energy Conservation
Act and therefore the activity of reviewing the energy conservation
equipment for 100% depreciation and other schemes are being proposed
to be taken up in the current financial year. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should take immediate action for
fiscal incentives to encourage faster penetration of energy efficient
technologies. The Committee stress that all these issues be decided
immediately and the Committee should be apprised of the action taken
in this regard within 3 months. The Committee also feel that there is
need for wider publicity to the various provisions of the Energy
Conservation Act which are likely to have a direct bearing on ordinary
consumers so that they are not caught unaware when the Act is
enforced.


69

Reply of the Government

Bureau of Energy Efficiency is in the process of inviting project
proposals from the various identified agencies to undertake research
on reviewing the existing scheme for energy conservation equipments
for accelerated depreciation. The project is to be awarded by end of
December, 2004 and is to be completed in a year’s time from the date
of award of contract.

The Hon’ble Minister of Power in his D.O. letter dated 28.10.2004
addressed to Hon’ble Finance Minister has suggested reducing custom
duty on energy conservation products particularly items like CFLs
which attract duty upto 20% to promote their large scale use.

The awareness about Energy Conservation Act was started with
launch of Action Plan of BEE which provides details about Energy
Conservation Act. The BEE has participated and made presentations
in most of the National Level Seminars to create awareness about
Energy Conservation Act. All the activities and programmes initiated
by the BEE in the Thrust Areas have been started with awareness
about Energy Conservation Act among all the stakeholders. The Energy
Conservation Act was also put on BEE’s Website (www.bee-india.com)
for online reference and free download. A list of various programmes
carried out is annexed (Annexure-I) which promoted awareness about
EC Act.


ANNEXURE-I

VARIOUS PROGRAMMES CARRIED OUT IN THE PROMOTION
OF AWARENESS ON ENERGY CONSERVATION ACT, 2001

1st Programme for the Aluminium Sector on 16th November, 2002
at Indian Aluminium Company Ltd. (INDAL), Hirakund (Orissa)
attended by 16 Members;

2nd Programme for the Aluminium Sector on 22nd July 2003 at
Hindalco Industries Ltd., Renukoot, Sonebhadra (Uttar Pradesh);

1st Programme for the Cement Sector on 22nd September 2002 at
Shree Cement Ltd., Beawar (Rajasthan), attended by 70 Members;

2nd Programme for the Cement Sector on 30th August 2003 at
New Delhi, attended by 90 Members;

1st Programme for the Chlor-Akali Sector on 8th November 2002
at Heavy Water Board, Mumbai (Maharashtra), attended by 25
Members;

1st Programme for the Fertilizer Sector on 7th November 2002 at
Heavy Water Board, Mumbai (Maharashtra), attended by 33 Members;

1st Programme for the Textile Sector on Sth October 2002 at BILT,
Ballarshah (Maharashtra), attended by 30 Members;

1st Programme for the Textile Sector on 3rd August 2002 at
Raymond Ltd., Chhindwara (७.०), attended by 64 Members;

2nd Programme for the Textile Sector on 12th January 2003 at
Kesoram Rayons, Hooghly (West Bengal), attended by 35 Members;

1st Programme for the Petrochemicals and Refinery Sector on 29th
August 2003 at Reliance Industries Ltd., Mumbai, attended by 94
Members;

Familiarization Programmes For Energy Managers

1, Three days Awareness Training Programme for Energy
Managers at Delhi on 22nd-24th April 2003;

70


या

2. Three days Awareness Training Programme for Energy
Managers at Mumbai on 29th April-lst May 2003;

3. Three days Awareness Training Programme for Energy
Managers at Chennai on 15th-17th July 2003;

4. Three days Awareness Training Programme for Energy
Managers at Kolkata on Ist-3rd July 2003.

Training Programmes/Workshops/Seminars held to promote the
Awareness on Energy Conservation Act, 2001

Energy Summit II 2002 at Hotel Brahmaputra Ashok on December
20-21, 2002 by North East Chamber of Commerce & Industry (NECCI),
Guwahati-Presentation in Business Session I on 20th December 2002
on “Government of India’s Initiatives on Energy Conservation”;

Seminar on Recent Trend in Energy Efficient Technologies by
Northern India Textile Research Association (NITRA), Ghaziabad on
3-4 January, 2003 at India International Centre Ltd., Lodi Road,
New Delhi-Keynote Address on Action Plan of the Government in the
light of Energy Conservation Act, 2001 on 3rd January 2003;

Training Programme for NDPL Jr. Engineer Trainess on 16th January
2003 by NPTI—Presentation on “Salient Features of Energy
Conservation Act, 2001 and its implications”;

Programme on ‘Design Selection and Energy Audit of Air-
conditioning and Refrigeration (AC&R) Systems’ during 5-6 February
2003 by National Experts Organization, Delhi—15 Minutes Presentation
on “Energy Conservation Act”;

Conference on Energy Efficiency Initiatives & Demand Side
Management on 14th—15th February 2003 at Saraswati Auditorium,
PMI, NTPC, Nodia—15 Minutes Presentation in Session-I on ‘Roadmap
for India’;

Workshop on “Energy Conservation & Management in Fertilizer
Industry” on 3rd March 2003 by the Fertilizer Association of India at
Hotel Samrat, Chankyapuri, New Delhi—Presentation on Energy
Conservation Act, 2001—A Policy Initiative to Promote Energy
Efficiency”;

REEP Regional Consultation Meeting on 4th-5th August 2003 by
TERI, New Delhi—Presentation on Energy Efficiency in India;


72

Conference on Energy Management & Conservation in Chemical
Industry at Magnolia Hall, the Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi by
India Chemical Manufacturers Association—Presentation on Energy
Conservation Act, 2001 and its mandatory provisions applicable to the
Chemical Industry on 16th February, 2004;

Training Programme on ‘Energy Conservation and Energy Audit’
at NTPC, PMI, Nodia during 7-9th June 2004;

Training Programme/Course on Energy conservation, Monitoring
& Auditing at ALT Centre, Ghaziabad on 18th June, 2004 by Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Ltd.—Open discussion on Energy Saving Measures &
Role of BEE;

Energium 2004 : Conference on Energy Efficiency in Commercial
Buildings by PCRA & US Environmental Resource Centre;

International Conference on Energy Conservation “Synergy for
Energy” and an explosion of energy saving products/services "EnConEx
2004” at Ahmedabad by M/s. Saket Projects Ltd.—Presentation on
Implementing Energy Conservation in India—BEE Action Plan”

Energy Summit 2004—EnCon & Renewable Energy Technology
Meet between 27th & 28th October 2004 at Hotel Le Royal Meridien,
Chennai by Cll—Presentation on Trends in Energy Conservation India
on 28th October, 2004.

Standard & Labelling Programme—Awareness Activities

The recommendations of the Technical Committee on the labelling
programme of Distribution Transformers were discussed in half a day
workshops at the following venue. Apart from the Utilities and
Distribution Companies, manufacturers in the specific region also
participated in these workshops. The venue and dates of these
programme are as follows:

Souther Power Distribution Company of A.P. Limited, Ticupati 13.02.2004
North Delhi Power Limited, Delhi 17.02.2004
Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited, Jaipur 21.02.2004
West Bengal State Electricity Board, Kolkata 23.02.2004
Central Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Ltd., Hyderabad 26.02.2004
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 08.03.2004

Bangalore Electricity Company Limited, Bangalore 09.08.2004


73

BEE participated in the Standards & Labelling programme
organised by PCRA and CII at New Delhi and disseminated
information on regulation on labelling programme and progress on
refrigerator labelling.

Participating in the Energy Vision 2007 on 10-12th October, 2003
organized by Energy and Fuel Users Association of India, Chennai to
discuss the action plan of BEE and the Energy Conservation Act.

The Ministry of Power in association with the International Energy
Agency (IEA) organized a two day Workshop on ‘Energy Efficiency
Standards and Labelling’ on October 13-14, 2004 at Bangalore, The
purpose of this two day event is to bring together domestic and
international participants and speakers from government, private sector
and Non-Governmental Organizations to stimulate discussion on the
key issues and regulatory mechanism for achieving the objective of
‘Energy Efficiency’ in general and standard and labeling of electric
appliances in particular.

Workshop on “Thermodynamic & Techno-Economic Analysis of
Domestic Refrigerators” organized by Bureau of Energy Efficiency
(BEE), in-collaboration of Mechanical Engineering Department, IIT Delhi
on October 6-8, 2004.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 14/3/2004-EM,
dated December 28, 2004]

Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No. 2.82)

The Committee observes that electricity is one of the main
infrastructural requirements for agricultural and agro-industrial
development, employment generation and improvement in the quality
of life of people in rural areas. Taking note of Central Electricity
Authority (CEA) report that 92,849 feasible villages still remain to be
electrified and Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh have reported that
some villages have to be rehabilitated and the slow pace of village
electrification, (as only 879 villages were electrified during 2003-04 (upto
February, 2004) the committee feel that repeated announcements made
by the Govt. to speed-up the pace of the rural electrification have not
been executed in letter and spirit. The Committee further note that
progress of agricultural pumpset energization for the year 2003-04 (upto
February, 2004) is also poor as only 1,92,721 pump-sets were energized
during the period and more than 5 million pumpsets of the identified
potential are yet to be energized. The Committee is further dismayed


14

to note that interest subsidy for rural electrification was revised from
Rs. 100 crore and budget estimates for rural electrification supply
mission were down-wardly revised to Rs. 1 crore from the original
outlays of Rs. 5 crore during 2003-04. In view of the slow pace of
rural electrification programme and low utilization of budgeted amount,
including subsidies, the Committee are unhappy to observe the way,
the Govt. have implemented /executed rural electrification schemes and
therefore, strongly recommended that the Govt. should come with a
detailed action plan to execute the rural electrification programme for
complete village electrification in the next five years as envisaged in
National Common Programme and apprise the Committee of the action
plan framed in this regard.

Reply of the Government

It is being proposed to launch a new scheme of “Rural Electricity
Infrastructure and Household Electrification” so as to attain the
objective of electrification of all rural households within next five years
as envisaged in NCMP. This scheme involves an outlay of Rs. 16000
crore in five years and there is a provision of 90% Capital subsidy in
it.

The scheme envisages following ingredients of rural electricity
supply infrastructure:

(a) Creation of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB)
of 33/11 KV substations, with one such substation in each
block appropriately networked and linked to the State
transmission system.

(b) Creation of Village Electricity-Infrastructure (VEI) by
providing Distribution Transformer(s) with at least one such
transformer in every village.

(c) Rural Household Electrification of unelectrified households
from village distribution transformer(s).

(d) Decentralized distributed generation system for such villages
where grid connectivity is either not feasible or not cost
effective.

The scheme has provision to provide Capital subsidy of 90% for

(a) I. Creation of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone of 33/11
KV substation in such block where it does not exist.

Il. Creation of Village Electricity Infrastructure in
unelectrified habitations.


75

(b) 100% Capital Subsidy for giving connection to Below Poverty
Line (BPL) household.

[Ministry of Power No. 44/37/2/2004-REC, dated 17.01.2005]
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 2.84)

The Committee are happy to note that after their repeated
recommendations to redefine the existing definition of village
electrification, the Government have now accepted the same and a
new definition of village electrification has been notified. As per the
new definition, a village would be declared as electrified if (b) Basic
infrastructure such as Distribution Transformer and Distribution lines
are provided in the inhabited locality as well as the Dalit Basti/hamlet
where it exists. (For electrification through Non-Conventional Energy
Sources a Distribution Transformer may not be necessary). (ii) Electricity
is provided to public places like Schools, Panchayat Office, Health
Centers, Dispensaries, Community centers etc. and (iii) the number of
households electrified should be at least 10% of the total number of
households in the village. While welcoming the change in definition,
the Committee feel that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that at
least 50% of the total village households electrified in the next five
years. The Committee feel that under the ambit of new definition the
number of non-electrified villages, which at present stands at 92,849
shall go up. Similarly, the number of remote villages may also change
based on’ more accurate survey. The Committee, therefore, urge that
new definition practiced uniformly and adopted by all the arms of the
Government, including the Ministry of Power. At the same time, the
committee desire that the Ministry of Power should impress upon the
State to update their statistics based on the new definition and carryout
fresh survey for identifying the non-electrified villages on priority basis.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power has directed all States/UTs authorities for
compilation of rural electrification statistics as per new definition in
the prescribed format, and forward the same by 15.12.2004 for this
year and subsequently by 15th May every year.
[Ministry of Power EN. 44/37/2004-REC, dated 17.1.2005]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter I of the Report)


76

Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 2.85)

The Committee would also like to know the mechanism under
which the Rural Electricity Service Provider would be selected and the
satisfactory arrangements for decentralized management and revenue
collection through Panchayats/Users Associations/Cooperative NGOs/
Franchises etc. The Committee would like to know the follow up action
taken by the Government on new guidelines issued for Rural
Electrification. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should
impress upon all the State Governments to constitute the District
Electricity Committees under Section 166(5) of the Electricity Act, 2003
which can facilitate expeditious rural electrification in each district by
monitoring the functioning of these projects.

Reply of the Government

Rural Electricity Service providers would be selected by the State
Government/State Power Utilities. States have been asked to send
Project proposals for sanction to Rural Electrification Corporation (REC)
as per new guidelines. States have also been requested to constitute
District Electricity Committees under Section 166(5) of Electricity Act,
2003.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 27/7/2004-05 (R&R), dated 17.12.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 2.94)

As regard to the National Electricity Policy, Policies for Rural Areas
and Tariff Policy, the Committee is constrained to note that the State
Governments have failed to respond on the report of Task Force which
was sent by the Ministry of Power of their comments. Again, on 28th
June, 2004 the Government have requested to furnish their views on
National Electricity Policy, Policies for Rural Areas and Tariff Policy
within a period of one month. The Committee stress that the
Government should take all desired steps to frame and notify the new
Electricity policy at the earliest. The Committee also desire that the
task of framing policies for Rural Areas and Tariff Policy be also
completed in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to
know the action taken by the Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government

Soon after the Electricity Act was brought into effect, Ministry of
Power initiated the exercise for formulation of this policy in July, 2003.


7

The State Governments were requested to give their views and the
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) was also requested
to send its advice. Regional meetings with the State Governments and
with the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions were organized for
discussion and to ascertain their views. A Task Force on ‘Power Sector
Investments and Reforms’ was constituted in August, 2003 the
Chairmanship of Member (Energy), Planning Commission. The Task
Force had in its terms of reference, inter alia, recommending National
Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy. It held consultations with all
stakeholders, The report of the Task Force with the draft National
Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy was sent to the State Governments
for their views.

On assumption of the office by the new Government, a fresh draft
of the National Electricity Policy was formulated in June, 2004 based
on comments received from the States on the previous draft and the
objectives of the National Common Minimum Programme. The views
received from other stakeholders were also taken into account. The
revised draft National Electricity Policy was forwarded to the State
Governments. The Minister of Power wrote to all the Chief Ministers
on 28th June, 2003 for views of the State Governments on the National
Electricity Policy, Tariff Policy and Rural Policies envisaged in the Act.
Ministry of Power also organized region wise meetings with the State
Governments in July/August 2004 for discussion and to ascertain their
views on the draft National Electricity Policy.

The draft of the National Electricity Policy has been finalized after
considering the views received from the State Governments, discussions
held with the State Governments in region wise meetings, advise of
CERC and the comments of CEA and the draft Cabinet Note is
presently under inter-Ministerial consultation.

Tariff Policy and Rural Policies would be taken up for finalization
on the basis of National Electricity Policy after due consultation with
the State Governments.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 27/7/2004 (R&R), (Pt.) dated 17.12.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 23, Para No. 2.126)

The Committee are constrained to note that during 2003-04 against
BE of Rs. 1450.00 crore and RE Rs. 600.00 crore the actual fund
utilization by Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) were only Rs. 317.00


78

crore. The reasons adduced by DVC on each of the schemes where
investments could not be utilized during the year resulting in
surrendering the plan outlays are not convincing and only indicate
the casual manner in which projects/plans are framed and executed.
Taking a strong note of the under-utilization of funds by DVC, the
Committee can not but deplore the way, the unrealistic plan outlays
are being proposed by DVC management for different projects /schemes.
The Committee are dismayed to note that whereas an average
Rs. 1000.00 crore are to be infused in the 3 ongoing projects of DVC
during 10th Plan to augment 1210 MW of additional capacity, only
Rs. 536.00 crore has been invested during the first two years of the
Plan. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should
review the existing system of budget formulation by DVC and all
necessary steps be taken to improve budget formulation of plan outlays
at the budget stage itself so that realistic targets could be set for
generation, transmission & distribution and renovation & modernization
activities proposed by the DVC during 10th Plan. The Committee may
also be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government
1. Plan Outlay

The projected Plan Capital Expenditure in Revised Estimates (RE)
2003-04 was estimated at Rs. 599.26 crore as against Rs. 1450.00 crore
in Budget Estimates (BE) 2003-04, based on the actual expenditure
incurred against various projects till September, 2003 and the anticipated
progress to be achieved till the end of the year 2003-04. The actual
fund that could, however, be utilized during 2003-04 was Rs. 437.89
crore (73% utilization) due to the following major constraints
encountered by the Corporation:

(i) Power Projects

The entire amount of Rs. 170.00 crore kept in RE 2003-04, for
making advance payment to the EPC Contractor of Mejia TPS Extn.
Unit #5&6 project remained un-utilized on account of delay in finalizing
the contract price, acceptable both to DVC and BHEL! through several
rounds of negotiation. Further, the provision kept in RE 2003-04 for
equity contribution to Maithon Power Limited (MPL) for development
of Maithon Right Bank Thermal Power Project also could not be
utilized fully due to the unforeseen next exit of erstwhile Joint Venture
M/s. BSES Limited from MPL leading to slow progress of land
acquisition and other preliminary activities.


79

The Engineering Project Contract (EPC) for the two projects viz.
Mejia TPS Extn. Unit #5 & 6 (2x250 MW) and Chandrapura TPS Exnt.
Unit #7&6 (2x250 MW) have since been awarded in June, 2004 with
commissioning targets in 2006-07 and hence, most of the estimated
Project cost is anticipated to be spent during the remaining years of
10th Plan commencing 2004-05. In order to ensure timely completion
of the on-going projects taken up by DVC. Government has approved
Rs. 2373.51 crore budget allocations at BE stage for the year 2005-06.

(ii) Transmission and associated Communication Projects

Against projection of Rs. 49.47 crore in RE 2003-04, an expenditure
of Rs. 63.71 crore has been booked in the year in respect of entire
T&D works. The upward variation in actual expenditure over budgetary
allocation resulted because of higher achievement in some on-going
project as compared to what was justified because and the same could
not be restricted within the limit. However, some works still remain
pending due to non-receipt of land and forest clearances. An
expenditure of Rs. 15.83 crore (approx.) has been incurred up to
September, 2004 and it is expected to cover up the whole RE 2004-05
projection of Rs. 72 crore (approx.) for the remaining period of the
year, considering present status of the work.

In the case of communication schemes, the expenditure allocated
in RE 2003-04 could not be utilized fully on account of deferred
procurement schedule of PLCC equipment so as to match with the
HV line schedule, re-scheduling of commissioning of ULDC project,
etc. Consequently, the expenditure requirements have been shifted to
the remaining years of the 10th Plan.

All endeavours is being made to achieve most of the plan targets
in the remaining period subject to early resolution of land acquisition,
forest clearance and ROW problems.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 4/5/2004-DVC, dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 24, Para No. 2.127)

The Committee are also unhappy to note that the meager amount
has been earmarked for R&M works which needs a much bigger
allocation. The Committee recommend that DVC should carry out R&M
related works in a time-bound manner and the Committee should be
informed of the schedule chalked out for the purpose.


80

Reply of the Government
R&M Projects

Provision of comparatively lower amounts during the first 3 years
of 10th Plan against R&M work was against due to slow Progress of
Preparatory work towards finalization of scope, cost, etc., resulting
delay in finalization of technical specifications and bid documents.
Even today the fate of R&M for Chandrapura TPS Units #4, 5&6 is
undecided in view of non-availability of any specific engineering
solution to the generic problems of the boilers of these units. The
matter is, however, under review by CEA and some decision is
expected by the end of 2004.

In view of above, most of the R&M/LE jobs are expected to be
placed during the later part of 2004-05 and early 2005-06 and allocations
to the tune of Rs. 202.38 crore has been approved at B.E. stage for
R&M schemes for the year 2005-06.

2. Non Plan Outlay

Variation of non-plan expenditure occurred mainly due to revised
procurement programme in respect of power House Plant & Machinery
like HT Motors, Generator Rotor, Excitation Transformers, etc. followed
by deferment of civil works in four major thermal power plants. The
replacement of various plant & machinery proposed under non-plan
capital expenditure has been shifted to R&M package under plan outlay,
resulting in variance. Efforts are being made to streamline the
formulation of non-plan outlays so as to minimize the variance.

DVC has taken note of the observations of the Standing Committee
on Energy and would strive to formulate the future plan & non-plan
outlays with realistic targets to the extent practicable, however, this is
to emphasize that certain uncertainities viz. land acquisition, physical
possession of land, receipt of statutory clearance, etc. are beyond the
control of the Corporation. The Corporation is reviewing physical and
financial progress of Plan and Non-Plan schemes on monthly basis
and the areas of constraints/issues equiring attention are being
following up for achieving the set targets.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 4/5/2004-DVC, dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)

New Detni; GURUDAS KAMAT,
February 10, 2005 Chairman,

Magha 21, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


ANNEXURE-I

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD ON 28TH JANUARY, 2005 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM NO. ‘G-074’, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 11.00 hours to 1215 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

. Shri B, Vinod Kumar

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Khiren Rijiju

. Shri M. Shivanna

9. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

a छा # ७० ७

oN

10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri G. Venkataswamy
12. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav
13. Shri Kamal Akhtar
14. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
15. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
16, Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
17. Shri Bimal Jalan
18. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
19. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
20. Shri Matilal Sarkar
21. Shri Jesudas Seelam
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P-K. Bhandari = Director
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — __ Assistant Director
81


82

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
(2004-05) welcomed the Members of the sitting of the Committee.

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—

(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the Ist Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Power.

(i) *+* wee ae

4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports with minor
additions / deletions /amendments.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports after making consequential changes arising
out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and to present
the same to the Houses of Parliament.

6. * tee ee

The Committee then adjourned.

“Does not relate to this Report.


ANNEXURE-II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF

Il.

1५.

THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

Total No. of Recommendations made

Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 20 and 21)

Percentage of total

Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to persue in view of the Government's
replies

(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 12,

14, 18, 19 and 22)

Percentage of total

Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted

by the Committee

(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 7, 9,

10 and 11)

Percentage of total

'.. Recommendations in respect of which the final

replies of the Government are still awaited
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 8, 13 15,
16, 17, 23 and 24)

Percentage of total

83

24

12.5%

29.17%

25%

33.33%