STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2008-2009)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

+ [Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Energy on Ultra Mega Power Projects}

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Energy on Ultra Mega Power Projects]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.2.2009

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 80

Price : Rs. 74.00

© 2008 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Composirion of THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)

INTRODUCTION

Cuapter I Report .

Cuarrer II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ....

Cuarrter वा Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies

Cuarrer 1५ Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration...

Craprer V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ....

APPENDICES

I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 27.1.2009....

I. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 22nd Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (14th Lok Sabha)

Pace

37

61

62

0)


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2008-09)
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
Memsers
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron
Smt. Susmita Bauri®

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Smt. Anuradha Choudhary
Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

ye Pnane wp

@ बन oe
RS BRE S

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar*

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

Vacant

x a 6 हा.
PSS aye

‘Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 18.12.2008.
"Re-Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 9.1.2009.

(ii)


22.

24.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

Rajya Sabha

Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
Dr. Bimal Jalan

Shri Prakash Javadekar
Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Shri Anil H. Lad*

Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Jesudasu Seelam

Shri Shivpratap Singh
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Juneja = Committee Officer

Nominated wef 15th January, 2009.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 27th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
22nd Report of the Standing Committee on Eenrgy on the subject
‘Ultra Mega Power Projects’ (UMPPs).

2. The 22nd Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha/Chairman, Rajya Sabha on
15th October, 2007 and was later presented to Lok Sabha on
23rd November, 2007. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
11th February, 2008. The Committee took up the draft Action Taken
Report for adoption at their sitting held on 30th July, 2008. However,
the Committee decided to have an updated position on the subject
from the Ministry of Power. The Ministry furnished updated replies
on 20th August, 2008. Again, at a sitting of the Committee held on
19th September, 2008 to have a briefing from the Ministry of Power
on the Status of Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Reports of Standing Committee on Energy amongst other issues,
the issue of setting up of UMPPs also came up for disucssion. The
latest information as obtaining in the matter, at that point of time has
also been incorporated in the Action Taken Report.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 27th January, 2009.

4, An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 22nd Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
January 27, 2009 Chairman,
Magha 7, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the
subject Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs).

2. The Twenty-Second Report was presented to Speaker,
Lok Sabha/Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15.10.2007 and was later
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.11.2007. The
Report contained 15 recommendations.

3. Action taken notes in respect of all the Recommendations /
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 8, 12, and 14
Total : 05
Chapter-II

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

SL Nos. 3, 7, 9, 10 and 13
Total : 05
Chapter-IIT
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the

teplies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

91. Nos. 2, 5, 6, 11 and 15
Total : 05
Chapter-IV

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Nil
Total : 00
Chapter-V


4, The Committee desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported back to the Committee in
time along with the reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations:—

A. Slow pace of development of Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs)
Recommendation (SI. Nos. 2, Para No. 2.10.20)

6. The Committee had expressed concern in their 20th Report on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2007-08 as
regards the coming up of UMPPs on time as had been envisaged by
the Ministry of Power earlier. While taking review of the functioning
of the Ministry of Power similar concerns had also been reported to
be expressed by the Prime Minister in regard to meeting targets by
the Ministry of Power in the setting up of UMPPs.

7. The Committee felt deeply concerned with the pace of progress
in the development of UMPPs as initially the Government had
announced four UMPPs in the Budget for the year 2006-07, with the
intention to award these projects before December, 2006. However, out
of these, the Government was able to stick to the deadline with regard
to only two projects, namely Sasan and Mundra. Both of these projects
were awarded before the target date of 31st December 2006 — though
further progress on Sasan project suffered due to the controversy
regarding the validity of the award of the project. The remaining two
projects — one in Andhra Pradesh and another in Orissa were scheduled
for being awarded by 30th April, 2007. The submission date for RfP
for Andhra Pradesh project had been postponed and regarding the
project to be developed in Orissa, the site remained to be finalised.

8. Later five more projects had been added to the list. However,
the way in which their development was progressing left much to be
desired. In most of the cases selection of site was the main reason for
delay. There were agitations by local people in Karnataka and
Maharashtra and certain technical problems in Tamil Nadu. The
Committee felt that the State Governments should have been associated
with the selection of sites in the beginning itself to avoid any last
minute disagreement on the sites. The Committee desired that the
sites for UMPPs should be finalized at the earliest so that these projects

2


could come up within 12th Plan as envisaged and promised. The site
for UMPPs should be selected only after the State Government had
agreed to the same.

9. The Committee observed that in PPA for Mundra Project
64 months, that is more than five years, had been given to the
developers for commissioning the first unit of the power Project and
the last unit would be commissioned after 88 months, i.e., after more
than seven years from signing the PPA. The Committee felt that in the
present age of fast development, it should not take such a long time
for setting up of these projects.

10. The Committee further noted that this time schedule also
depended on time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and
acquisition of land for the project; time taken in bidding process and
time schedule submitted by the bidder in his bid. There was no time
limit fixed within which clearances would be made available and the
land acquired. In addition to this, it had been stated before the
Committee that time fixed for start of various units would be calculated
from signing of PPA. The Committee, therefore, felt that such an open
ended fixation of completion schedule would not serve any purpose.
The Committee thus desired that exact dates/periods should be
provided for setting up of each project at the time of issue of Letter
of Intent and penalties should be provided in case of default so that
the projects could be set up in a time-bound manner.

11. The Committee further desired that there should be proper
coordination between the Central and State Governments so that the
issues involved in the various projects could be resolved and more so,
in future the coordination between the Central and State Governments
should begin right from the conceptual stage of the project itself.
Considering the urgent need of power, the Committee strongly
recommended that these projects should become fully operational by
all means in 12th Plan itself and the recently constituted National
Power Project Management Board should also, in particular, be assigned
the responsibility to ensure the timely completion of all these projects.
For this, it was very important that this Board should be sufficiently
empowered to take project related decisions and also it must be ensured
that these were implemented without any bottlenecks from any
quarters, i

12. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

“I. The Committee has given recommendations for involving the
State Governments in selecting/finalizing sites for the UMPPs,

3


having consultations with them before announcing the project,
having proper coordination between the Centre and the State
Governments and involving the States in the whole process of
development of UMPPs in para Nos. 2.10.20, 4.5.8 and 45.10.

It is submitted that the scheme of developing UMPPs has following
mechanisms for active involvement of the concerned State
Governments:

@

@)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

Involvement of the State Government agencies has been
ensured from the initial stage itself. Probable sites as
identified by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) in
consultation with CMPDI, NRSA and Railways/sites as
proposed by the States, are visited by a team of officers
from CEA, PFC, State Utilities, State Revenue Department,
State Pollution Control Board, State Irrigation Department
and State Maritime Boards (in case of coastal sites).

On the basis of the inputs provided by the above mentioned
State agencies a likely site is identified by CEA.

Thereafter, CEA holds meetings with senior State
Government officials at the level of Chief Secretaries/
Principal Secretary (Energy) to obtain their specific
confirmation about the availability of land and water for
the identified likely site.

This is followed by a formal request to the State Government
for making available land and water.

The State agencies also continue to be involved at different
stages of the process. The representative of the Power
Utilities who are getting to procure major share of electricity
from the project are nominated by the concerned State
Governments on the Board of the Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) formed for a particular UMPP. The Board of the SPV
takes final decision at various stages of the bidding process
for the particular UMPP.

The representatives of the State Power Utilities are also
consulted in finalization of the project specific bidding
documents.

The representative of the State Power Utility in whose area
a project is located is nominated as the lead procurer in the
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). After signing of the PPA,
the lead procurer is the representative of all the procurers
to coordinate/interface with the developers of the project.


(viii) After award of the project, a monitoring committee is
constituted for every UMPP to review and facilitate
resolution of issues arising during implementation of the
Project. These committees are co-chaired by a Member of
the Central Electricity Authority and the Principal Secretary /
Secretary (Energy) of the concerned State Government.

However, the observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been
noted and all efforts will be made to improve the level of
coordination with the State agencies.

Tl. Regarding the stipulated timelines set for the development of
UMPP, the Ministry of Power the Competitive Bidding Guidelines
provide in clause 5.6(v) that the procurer shall provide the
maximum period in the RfP within which the selected bidder must
commence supply of electricity after the PPA being effective.
According to the guidelines, this period shall ordinarily not be
less than 4 years in those cases where supply of electricity is called
for long term procurement. Long term procurement is defined as
a period of 7 years and above. Format 3 of Annexure-6 of RfP in
SBDs accordingly requires the procurer to indicate the outer limit
of the COD of the first unit. However, Article 3.1.2 (viii) of the
PPA is SBDs gives option to the selected bidder to prepone his
schedule of commissioning of various units.

The time period for commissioning of units in case of UMPPs was
kept on higher side in view of the following:

* These will be the first large sized super critical unit to be
set up in the country.

* PPA provides for penalties in the form of liquidated
damages if the project developer is not able to commence
supply of electricity within the scheduled time.

* There was a need to have an appropriate risk mitigation
mechanism in the form of a reasonable time for
commissioning in order to encourage more number of
bidders to compete in the first set of the UMPPs.

The Competitive Bidding Guidelines have been amended in Sept.’07
and one of the amendments relate to the time table for the bidding
process. The amended guidelines now provide for specific
milestones regarding acquisition of land, environmental clearance,
fuel arrangement, water linkage, forest clearance, provision of data

5


for preparation of project report. Various milestones are required
to be completed before the different stages in the bidding process
are taken up with the objective of ensuring timely commencement
of the supply of electricity after award of the project.

The Letter of Intent is required to be issued after the selection of
the bidder and therefore the various schedule for development in
commissioning of the project become certain by that stage. Signing
of the PPA or the date of PPA becoming effective in the case PPA
has been signed before hand by SPV, has to be the reference point
for contractual obligations. This is so because during the bidding
process, there are no contractual obligations as the other party is
yet to be selected. The bidding guidelines provide for a period of
30 days for signing of PPA after the issue of Letter of Intent.

The PPA in SBDs already has provisions for penalties in case of
delays in setting up of the projects. Article 3.3 of the PPA deals
with penalties in case of delays in achieving the financial closure.
Article 4.6 of PPA deals with liquidated damages to be imposed
for delays in providing contracted capacity.

Ill. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that these
projects should become fully operational by all means in the 12th
Plan itself - the bidding process in respect of the Sasan, Mundra
and the Krishnapatnam projects is already over and the SPVs have
also been transferred to the selected project developers. These
projects are therefore scheduled for commissioning in the 12th Plan.
In respect of the Tilaiya UMPP, the RfQ stage is over and the bids
are currently under evaluation. In respect of the other UMPPs in
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Chhattisgarh,
necessary clearances are awaited from the respective State
Governments, after which the bidding process will be initiated.

IV. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that the
recently constituted National Power Project Management Board
should also, in particular, be assigned the responsibility to ensure
the timely completion of all these projects - a Power Project
Monitoring Panel is now being set up instead of the Board. The
Panel would be responsible for monitoring of all the power projects
in the country. However, in order to ensure successful
implementation of these projects after their award, Joint Monitoring
Committees (JMCs) have been constituted for Sasan and Mundra
UMPPs. JMCs are chaired by Member (Thermal), CEA and co-
chaired by Principal Secretary (Energy) of concerned host State.


Other members of JMCs include (a) representatives of procuring
States (b) representative of developer and (c) representative of PFC
(till fulfillment of commitments of Procurers given under RfP).”

13. The Ministry have further informed the Committee that all
efforts are being made to improve the level of coordination with the
State agencies. Identification of sites is continuing to be done in
consultation with the State agencies. Regarding the need for early
finalization of sites for the UMPPs in close coordination with the State
Government agencies, it is stated that the Union Minister of Power
had convened a meeting with the State Governments of Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa and Chhattisgarh on 4th August 2008.
As a result of the detailed discussions, the State Government of Tamil
Nadu confirmed the project site at Cheyyur alongwith development of
a captive port site near Paramankeni village; the State Government of
Maharashtra confirmed the project site at Munge in Sindhudurg Distt.
alongwith development of a captive port site near Achra Creek; and
the State Government of Orissa confirmed the project site at Bedabahal
in Sundergarh Distt. alongwith water linkage for which modalities
would be finalised later by the State Government. The detailed
discussions during the meeting however revealed that setting up of a
UMPP each in Karnataka and Chhattisgarh would require further
examination with regard to suitability of identified sites, availability of
water and other related factors. It was therefore not possible at this
stage to proceed further in respect of these two UMPPs. Further action
will now be taken in respect of the three identified sites in Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra and Orissa.

14. According to the Ministry of Power all the three UMPPs where
bidding process has been completed, in accordance with the PPA, are
envisaged to be operational during the 12th Plan. M/s. Sasan Power
Limited and M/s. Coastal Gujarat Power limited have since revised
the commissioning schedules of their units at Sasan UMPP and Mundra
UMPP. As per revised schedules, two units each at Sasan UMPP and
Mundra UMPP are expected to be commissioned in 11th plan itself.
The Ministry have further informed that contractual obligations in
tespect of commissioning schedule are spelt out in the Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA). PPA also incorporates the penalty clauses in cases
of non-adherence to the specified schedule.

15. The Ministry have also informed that the National Power
Project Management panel has since been set-up. As far as the UMPPs
are concerned, the meetings of the Joint Monitoring Committees of the
three UMPPs already awarded are being held regularly.


Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 4.5.8)

16. The Committee noted that development of Ultra Mega Power
Projects required support and coordination between the various players
involved, i.e., the Central Government, State Governments, PFC, project
developers, Consultants, etc. Lack of support from any of these players
could lead to delay in the development of these projects and as such
can derail capacity addition programme and, in turn, economic growth
of the country as envisaged - because power is the key driver for any
growth agenda set for the country.

17. The Committee further observed with concern that the Ministry
of Power was facing some problems in finalisation of sites in States
such as Orissa, Karnataka and Maharashtra. Though the Ministry had
stated that the State Electricity Boards and State Companies are
involved while the site is selected, the Committee, however, felt that
the involvement of the State Governments has just been a formality.
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) which had a major role in selection
of sites did not seem to have given a serious thought before selecting
project sites. As stated by the Government of Orissa that the
Government of India/CEA had “just intimated” to the State
Government about the identification of site. It implies that the State
Government was not involved in identification of site. Similarly, the
Government of Chhattisgarh had stated that no formal consultations
with the State Government were held. Regarding the site in
Maharashtra, the statement of the Ministry that it was just one of the
probable sites and not the final one, raised questions as to the manner
in which the Central Government has gone about the selection of sites
for the UMPPs. The Committee felt that since the State Governments
had better knowledge of the feasibility of making a particular land
and other resources available for the development of power projects -
also considering the environmental and other aspects - the State
Governments should have been involved in the development process
of UMPPs right from the conceptual stage. This, in turn, would ensure
that the projects were not unnecessarily held up due to land and
other related disputes. Further, the sites should be formally announced
only when the finality in this regard had been reached — after the due
consultation process - with the respective State Government.

18. The Committee understand that in view of the local issues
involved in the setting up of UMPP at Tadri, the Central Government
was considering certain alternative sites for the purpose which was in
line with what the Committee also felt after their visit at the proposed
site for UMPP at Tadri. The Committee recommended that the Ministry

8


of Power takes an urgent action in the matter so that the UMPPs
could be established both in Maharashtra and Karnataka at the earliest,
at the alternative sites.

19. The Ministry in their teply have stated:

“It is well recognized that development of UMPP requires support
and coordination between the various Players involved particularly
the State Governments. Keeping this in view a coordinated
approach is being adopted for the development of UMPPs. The
Project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed under PFC
are responsible for carrying out various developmental activities
on behalf of the procurers which include appointment of consultants
to undertake preparation of Project reports, preparation of
Environmental Impact Assessment Reports, preparation of bidding
documents, carrying out bidding process, acquisition of land,
getting clearances regarding water and environment & forests etc.
The Boards of SPVs includes officials of the PEC, the representatives
of the distribution companies of the major power procuring states.
CEA is providing the technical support to the SPVs in formulation
of project reports and other feasibility studies. Power Grid
Corporation of India (PGCIL) is providing support in formulating
the transmission system for evacuation of power. State Governments
are being involved right from the beginning i.e. in site identification,
land acquisition, water allocation, R&R Plan, Participation in various
Committees for undertaking the competitive bidding process,
facilitation of signing of the Power Purchase Agreement and
Payment Security Mechanism.

IL Kind attention of the Committee is drawn also to this Ministry’s
response given under the earlier Recommendation No. 2.10.20.
However, despite involvement of the State agencies, and despite
repeated efforts and constant follow up, the States of Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have not been
able to provide required clearances for the sites, Accordingly, the
bidding process for the UMPPs in these States will be initiated
only after the requisite clearances are given by the States.”

20. The Ministry have further informed that identification of sites
is continuing to be done in consulation with the State agencies.
Regarding the need for early finalization of sites for the UMPPs in
close coordination with the State Government agencies, it is stated
that the Union Minister of Power had convened a meeting with the
State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa and

9


Chhattisgarh on 4th August 2008. As a result of the detailed discussions,
the State Government of Tamil Nadu confirmed the project site at
Cheyyur alongwith development of a captive port site near
Paramankeni village; the State Government of Maharashtra confirmed
the project site at Munge in Sindhudurg Distt. alongwith development
of a captive port site near Achra Creek; the State Government of Orissa
confirmed the project site at Bedabahal in Sundergarh Distt. alongwith
water linkage, for which, modalities would be finalised later by the
State Government. The detailed discussions during the meeting,
however, revealed that setting up of a UMPP each in Karnataka and
Chhattisgarh would require further examination with regard to
suitability of identified sites, availability of water and other related
factors. It was therefore not possible at this stage to proceed further
in respect of these two UMPPs. Further action will now be taken in
respect of the three identified sites in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and
Orissa.

21. During a review meeting of the Committee held on
19th September, 2008 to know the current status of implementation of
recommendations of the Committee regarding finalization of sites for
UMPPs, Secretary, Ministry of Power informed:—

“We have a suggestion to make in this regard. We feel that for
this very major inter-State inter-Government kind of interaction as
well as inter-agency at least as far as the Central agencies are
concerned, there could be a structure of an Empowered Group of
Ministers having the Union Minister of Power, the Union Minister
for Water Resources, Coal and Environment and Forests with
probably Railways and Ports as special invitees as the need may
be. A certain time limit could be assessed and set. We allow the
system to take so much time. In case it does not fructify within
this much time, the matter be brought before the empowered Group
of Ministers. That Empowered Group of Ministers could give the
direction to the agencies to comply with these clearances within
the prescribed time. But that also may not be possible because in
the environmental issues and forest issues, the Supreme Court has
taken upon itself the power to give the final clearance. They have
set up special committees which the Empowered Group of Ministers
may not also be able to short-circuit.

Sir, these are the hard -ealities of the matter. Then, in the parallel
interface where State interaction is involved, there we have a
standing Group of Ministers, comprising State and Central
Ministers. In the structure of governance, it is not possible to give

10


that Empowered Group of Ministers power over issues which are
within the power of the State Government, Sir, the Standing Group
of Ministers is a group of Ministers which has been notified. It
could be enlarged. There again the Group is headed by the Power
Minister, It may have the Minister for Environment and Forests,
the Minister for Coal and the Chairman, Railway Board as special
invitees or permanent invitee because movement of coal is an
essential issue for these projects we well as the Secretary, Surface
Transport, to take care of shipping as well as the highway issues
for connectivity as permanent invitees.

Then, wherever the project is to be taken up, the concerned Minister
or Ministers from the State can be called. If it is the Chief Minister.
I presume, he carries the authority of the entire State. This is the
kind of structure that we can suggest. I think beyond that in the
federal set up it will not be possible to ask one agency to give a
clearance because there is a clash of jurisdiction between the Centre
and the States.”

22, The Committee are deeply concerned to note the slow
progress in development of UMPPs which were initially announced
by the Government in the Budget for the year 2006-07, with the
intention to award the four UMPPs in Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh and Orissa before December, 2006. Regarding the
Present status of these projects, the Committee note that the bidding
process in respect of the Sasan (Madhya Pradesh), Mundra (Gujarat),
and the Krishnapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) projects is already over
and the SPVs have also been transferred to the selected project
developers. Later on, five more projects in Tamil Nadu, Maharastra,
Karnataka, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh were added to the list of
UMPPs. As pointed out earlier by the State Government of Orissa,
the Government of India/CEA had “just intimated” to the State
Government about the identification of site and it implies that the
State Governments were not involved in identification of site.
Similarly, the Government of Chhattisgarh had stated that no formal
consultations with the State Government were held. As regards the
Present status of remaining 6 UMPPs, the Committee find that in
respect of the Tilaiya UMPP (Jharkhand), the RfQ stage is over and
the bids are currently under evaluation. In a latest update on the
development of UMPPs, the Committee have however, further been
informed that Union Minister of Power had convened a meeting
with the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Chhattisgarh on 4th August 2008 and as a result of this,
the State Government of Tamil Nadu had confirmed the project site

1


at Cheyyur alongwith development of a captive port site near
Paramankeni village. The State Government of Maharashtra has also
confirmed the project site at Munge in Sindhudurg Distt. alongwith
development of a captive port site near Achra Creek. Similarly, the
State Government of Orissa has confirmed the project site at
Bedabahal in Sundergarh Distt. alongwith water linkage for which
modalities are reported to be finalised later by the State Government.
The Committee have now been informed on 20.08.2008 that setting
up of a UMPP each in Karnataka and Chhattisgarh would require
further examination with regard to suitability of identified sites,
availability of water and other related factors. The Committee feel
that had proper action been taken at the conceptual stage of the
development of UMPPs, problems relating to probable sites for
UMPPs in Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and
Orissa could have been avoided. Not convinced with the reply of
the Government that the State Governments are being involved right
from the beginning, ic., at the time site identification, land
acquisition, water allocation, R&R Plan, etc., the Committee would
again emphasise that close co-ordination among the various agencies
involved, viz., Central Government, State Government, Power Finance
Corporation, Central Electricity Authority, etc. to resolve the local
issues blocking the development of UMPPs should be maintained
and the identification and finalisation of alternate sites for the
UMPPs on hold be completed expeditiously.

23. For the speedy resolution of issues which hamper early
clearance of various power projects, the Committee tend to be in
agreement with the two suggestions of the Ministry: (i) There should
be an empowered Group of Ministers having the Union Ministers
of Power, Water Resources, Coal and Environment and Forests with
probably Railways and Ports as special invitees to give directions to
the agencies—if a specific project does not fructify within fixed time
frame, (ii) For power projects involving interaction with States, the
concerned Ministers of the State or the Chief Minister could be
associated to resolve the pending issues in the separate Standing
Group of Ministers—which already exists in the Ministry of Power.
The Committee would like to be informed whether these two
proposals have been put in actual practice and if so, how far these
Committees have helped in the expeditious development and
formulation of concrete proposals for development of UMPPs.

24. The Committee are dismayed to note that in spite of their
repeated recommendations that the Central and State Governments
should take necessary steps in advance to settle the local issues,

12


if any, before the State Government offers a site to set up an UMPP,
the selection of sites and necessary clearances in respect of the
UMPPs in Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Orissa have been given
only recently after intervention of the Ministry of Power. The bidding
process in respect of these projects is however, yet to be initiated.
The Committee recommend that the Government should take
necessary steps and ensure that bidding process for there three
UMPPs in Maharastra, Tamil Nadu and Orissa where sites have been
identified/approved should be initiated without any further loss of
precious time, At the same time, the Committee desire that sites in
Karnataka and Chhattisgarh should also be finalised at the earliest
so that the projects are commissioned as targeted.

25. Regarding recommendation of the Committee to assign the
responsibility of monitoring the implementation of Ultra Mega Power
Projects (UMPPs) on the National Power Project Management Board,
the Committee note that in its place the Power Project Monitoring
Panel has been set up instead of a Board which would be responsible
for monitoring all the power projects in the country. As far as the
UMPPs are concerned, the Ministry have informed that the meetings
of the joint monitoring Committees of the three UMPPs already
awarded are being held regularly. The Committee expect that this
panel is closely monitoring the setting up of all the UMPPs. The
Committee reiterate that the panel should be sufficiently empowered
to take project related decisions on its own and also it must be
ensured that these are implemented without any bottlenecks from
any quarters. The Committee have also been given to understand
that two units each of Sasan and Mundra Ultra Mega Power Projects
are to be commissioned ahead of the targeted schedule during the
11th Plan. The Committee hope that the Government will take
necessary action to expedite and advance, if possible, few other
UMPPs as well to augment capacity addition during 11th Plan.

B. Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs) in Hydro Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.10.23)

26. The Committee observed that all the Ultra Mega Power Projects
which had been envisaged by the Government are thermal projects.
The Committee noted that there is a huge hydro power potential in
our country—which yet remained to be exploited. Moreover, use of
coal for power generation should be done keeping in mind the future
requirement of coal for other purposes as well. Hence, the Committee
felt that a policy for hydro Ultra Mega Power Projects should also be

13


formulated by the Government on top priority. Further, in the recently
held Conference of Chief Ministers, the Prime Minister had asked the
Union Power Minister to set up a Task Force on hydro power to lend
special focus on this area. The Committee desired that this Task Force
should also be assigned the task of working out the modalities for the
development of hydro based Ultra Mega Power Projects. Development
of UMPPs based on hydel power could greatly benefit the North-
Eastern region of the country - which abounds in the hydel potential.

27. In their reply the Ministry have stated:

“Even though it has been permitted under the provisions of the
Tariff Policy and Electricity Act, 2003, tariff based bidding had not
been undertaken so far for hydro projects in the country. This is
largely due to the high level of uncertainty arising out of
construction risks on account of adverse geological conditions,
delays in land acquisitions, rehabilitation and resettlement (R&R)
issues, law and order problems, natural calamities etc. These risks
cannot be anticipated with enough confidence so as to enable tariff-
based bidding. The risks get further compounded prior to even
the preparation of DPRs. The problems are particularly acute in
the case of projects in the Northeast, where apart from high
geological risks there is also the higher transmission costs
associated, as the power has to be evacuated over long distance to
the deficit regions in the North and the Western parts of the
country.

In view of the above difficulties, the Ministry of Power had duly
circulated a proposal on 30th April, 2007 for revision of policy on
development of hydro electric projects. As per this proposed policy,
though the tariff based bidding would remain the most desirable
option, since the hydro projects construction involves huge risk
and uncertainty as explained above, it had therefore been proposed
to provide them with the option of regulated tariff under section
62 of the Electricity Act, 2003 where tariff is fixed by the regulator
under cost plus norms, if all other conditions like transparency in
allocation of sites etc. are complied with.

The Task Force (constituted in pursuance of the Conference of
Chief Ministers held on 28th May, 2007) in its first meeting held
‘on 12.12.2007, considered both the proposal on revision to the hydro
policy as proposed by the Ministry of Power as mentioned above,
as well as setting up of Mega Hydel Projects on the lines of UMPPs.
There was a broad general consensus in the Task Force on the


Proposal of the Ministry of Power to extend to the Hydro Electric
Projects being developed by private developers, the benefits of
fixation of tariff under Section 62 of the Electricity Act, 2003 at par
with the projects being developed by CPSUs/PSEs. The new Hydro
Policy since has been approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held
on 3.1.2008.

On the issue of development of Mega Hydel Projects on the lines
of UMPPs, the Task Force was of the opinion that the State
Governments be asked to identify the potential sites for setting up
of Mega Hydel Projects and propose their implementation though
an SPV on the lines of UMPPs. This is necessary since, as water
and water power are State subjects under the Constitutional
provisions, the consent of State Governments needs to be obtained
for development of such hydro power schemes though tariff based
competitive bidding on the lines of Ultra Mega Power Projects.”

28. The Ministry have further informed that the New Hydro Policy
has since been notified on 31.03.2008.

29. As regards the Committee’s recommendation that a task force
on hydro power should work out the modalities for the development
of hydro based Ultra Mega Power Projects, the Ministry has stated
that although it has been permitted under the provisions of the
Tariff Policy and Electricity Act, 2003, tariff based bidding has not
been undertaken so far for hydro projects in the country. According
to the Ministry this is largely due to the high level of uncertainty
arising out of construction risks on account of adverse geological
conditions, delays in land acquisitions, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(R&R) issues, law and order problems, natural calamities etc. These
risks cannot be anticipated with enough confidence so as to enable
tariff-based bidding. The task force at their final meeting held on
12th December, 2007, had taken a consensus on the proposal of the
Ministry of Power to extend to the Hydro Electric Projects being
developed by private developers, the benefits of fixation of tariff
under section 62 of the Electricity Act, 2003, at par with the projects
being developed by CPSUs/PSUs. The task force had desired that
the State Governments be asked to identify the potential sites for
setting up of Mega Hydel Projects and propose their implementation
through an SPV on the lines of UMPPs. The Committee would like
to know the follow up action taken by Central Government, the
State Governments and Central Electricity Authority (CEA) in
identifying the potential sites, carrying out Survey & Investigation
and steps taken for preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).

15


The Committee would stress again that while developing the UMPPs
based on hydel power, emphasis should be laid by the Government
on the North-Eastern region of the country - which abounds in the
hydel potential.

C. Private Investment in Transmission
Recommendation (51, No. 6, Para No. 3.7.6)

30. The Committee noted that under the Payment Security
Mechanism for UMPPs in case of default by any procurer there was
a clause of third party sale. As per this clause other procurers would
have the first right to buy power share for which payment default
had occurred. However, in case the other procurers were unwilling to
buy default power, the same would be sold in the all India market
through prevailing ‘open access’ in transmission either directly or
through traders. The Committee, however, felt that for selling it in the
market there was need for the speedy and proper implementation of
‘open access’ in States as envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003.
Further, in order to avail the ‘open access’ — both for Intra and Inter-
State open access, without any infrastructural bottlenecks, the
transmission system (national grid) needed to be suitably strengthened
and congestion points be removed. Powergrid was stated to be carrying
out the open access system study. The transmission system would be
augmented accordingly to ensure evacuation of power from these
UMPPs. The Committee desired that this study should be completed
within a specific time frame so that the transmission system was ready
by the time the first unit of UMPPs became operational. Further the
States, particularly, the States procuring electricity from the UMPPs
should be able to provide open access by 2009 as per the Electricity
Act, 2003. To achieve this goal, the Committee recommended that all
efforts in this direction be made in a mission mode manner.

31. The Committee further observed that for successful
implementation of such a payment security arrangement, it was
essential to speed up the pace of electricity reforms in the States. The
Committee felt that improving the commercial viability of the power
sector in the States was very important for the success of such a
payment security arrangement. The Committee, therefore, recommended
that concrete steps be taken in this direction urgently.

32. Evacuation of power from UMPPs was another area which
need attention from the beginning itself as it also needed large
investments. The Committee noted that Power Grid Corporation of
India Ltd. (PGCIL) had been assigned this job. The Committee desired

16


that advance Planning and provision of funds should be done by
PGCIL in consultation with CEA so that there were no bottlenecks in
evacuation of power. The Committee were of the considered opinion
that the private investment should be encouraged in this sector. At the
same time, the Committee felt that State distribution utilities should
be encouraged to take up transmission and distribution network in
their respective States.

33. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

Act relating to open access, the CM’s Conference on power sector
held in May’07, resolved inter alia that the States commit themselves
to operationalizing ‘open access’ in the transmission and
distribution sectors and resolve to issue policy directives to
regulators, if necessary, to appropriately restructure cross subsidy
surcharge, wheeling charges and other charges, with a view to
augment the quantum of power flowing into the grid in the
Prevailing environment of shortages. The Ministry of Power also
organized an interaction with the Forum of Regulators on
5th November’07 to follow up on the decision of the CM's
Conference. The SERCs have committed themselves to accelerate
the implementation of the open access.

Open access in inter-state transmission is already implemented and
is by and large satisfactory. Constraints in the inter-states
transmission, in the inter-region as well as intra-regional system,
which were at a significant level till a few years ago, have been
generally addressed and further strengthening of National grid
system is under way with the programme being implemented in
a mission mode. A number of transmission schemes linked with
evacuation from various generating stations and system
strengthening schemes have been planned during the XI Plan time
frame and are in various Stages of implementation. The inter-
regional transmission capacity is also planned to be increased from
the present level of about 17000 MW to about 37700 MW by the
end of XI Plan.

Regarding putting in place power evacuation system inline with
the commissioning schedule of various units associated with the
UMPP projects it is to state that studies for evolving the

17


transmission system for the evacuation of power from Sasan UMPP,
Mundra UMPP and Krishnapatnam UMPP have been completed.
Feasibility Report/Detailed Project Report (FR/DPR) for
transmission system for Sasan and Mundra has been prepared and
is in process of investment approval. FR/DPR for transmission.
system for Krishnapatnam is under preparation. The
implementation schedule of the transmission system is firmed up
matching with the commissioning schedule of generating units to
avoid any bottlenecks in evacuation at the time of commissioning
of generating units. The transmission network has been planned
with margins to take care of any need for diverting power from
UMPP to other procurers or selling it in the all India market
through open access or trading in case of default by any procurer.

As suggested by Hon’ble Committee improving the commercial
viability of the power sector in the States is of crucial importance
in the context of payment security arrangement. Issue related to
improving the commercial viability of the State utility is being
discussed in every possible forum. In the Chief Minister’s
Conference held on 28th May, 2007, inter-alia following resolution
was adopted:

“The Conference recognizes that the current level of AT&C losses
constitute a grave threat to the viability of the power sector and
the distribution segment, which is currently losing about Rs. 47,000
crores per annum, is the weakest link in the power system; and
resolves that the States commit themselves to achieve and sustain
drastic reduction in the overall AT&C losses through the next five
years, and at least to a level of 15% in the APDRP project areas
as has been demonstrated by the participating States in 163 towns
and cities. Towards this end, the States with appropriate assistance
from the Centre would establish the necessary baseline data and
IT applications for energy accounting and auditing, besides ensuring
a resolute elimination of electricity theft, which is negating various
investments and initiatives for power sector reforms. It is further
reiterated that where free or subsidized power is provided to a
section of consumers, the State Government shall ensure upfront
payment of the same to the utilities.”

34. Asked to update the above information, the Ministry have
informed the Committee that studies for evolving the transmission
system for the evacuation of power from Sasan, Mundra,
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs have been completed and the
system has been finalized in respect of Sasan, Mundra and

18


Krishnapatnam UMPPs. Feasibility /Detailed Project Reports for these
three transmission schemes have been prepared and are in the Process
of investment approval. The implementation schedule of the
transmission system is firmed up matching with the commissioning
schedule of generating units to avoid any bottlenecks in evacuation at
the time of commissioning of generating units.

35. As regards the transmission system for Tilaiya UMPP, it is
teported to be in the process of being firmed up after deliberations
with the various beneficiaries of the concerned regions. The
transmission network has been planned with adequate margins to take
care of any need for diverting power from UMPP to other procurers
or selling it in the all India market through open access or trading in
case of default by any procurer. For 11th Plan period, based on the
generation capacity addition under the Central sector and other
generation projects for which transmission system is required to be
built by the PGCIL including Ultra Mega Power Projects, an investment
of about Rs. 55,000 crore is planned by PGCIL. PGCIL has already
initiated actions to mobilize suitable mix of funds from domestic and
international markets, which shall be availed on year to year basis,
depending upon the tequirement. Project implementation would not
suffer on this account. Equity contribution by PGCIL shall be deployed
as per requirement during implementation of the Projects. As regards
the transmission system in respect of UMPPs, the Ministry have
informed the Committee that it has been decided that this will be
implemented by the PGCIL as the Central Transmission Utility.

36. While observing that Powergrid Corporation of India Ltd.
(PGCIL) was assigned the job of evacuation of Power from the
UMPPs, the Committee had desired that private investment should
be encouraged in transmission and distribution sector, At the same
time, the Committee had also felt that State distribution utilities
should be encouraged to take up transmission and distribution
network in their respective States. The Government in their reply
have stated that power evacuation systems are being put in place in
line with the commissioning schedule of various units associated
with the Ultra Mega Power Projects and Feasibility Report/Detailed
Project Reports (FR/DPR) for transmission system for Sasan, Mundra,
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya have been completed and the system
has been finalised in respect of first three projects. FR/DPR for these
three transmission schemes are reported to be in process of
investment approval. Further, PGCIL has initiated actions to mobilise
suitable mix of funds from domestic and international markets which
shall be availed on year to year basis, depending upon the

19


requirement. While observing that power evacuating systems are
being put in line with the commissioning schedule of various units
of UMPPs, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that the Government should take all the necessary steps to
encourage private investment in transmission sector especially for
the UMPPs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the same.
At the same time, the Committee would emphasise that the State
distribution utilities need to be encouraged to take up transmission
and distribution network projects in their States.

D. UMPPs in Chhattisgarh and Orissa
Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No. 4.5.11)

37. The Committee were concerned to note that the project at
Chhattisgarh was being held up because of the demand of 12% free
power made by the Government of Chhattisgarh. The Committee
understood that there was no policy regarding giving free power to
the Host States from the thermal projects as was the case with the
hydro projects. The Committee desired that this point should be
impressed upon all the Host States and Chhattisgarh in particular. The
Committee observed that the delay on account of demand of the
Chhattisgarh Government was disheartening. The Committee desired
that the matter be taken up with the State Government and the issue
be resolved at the earliest. The Committee noted that any demand for
free power by State would have to be borne by the electricity
consumers by way of increased tariff. This might even make the project
economically unviable and uncompetitive leading to dropping of the
project. The Committee desired that these facts should be clearly
brought to the notice of the States which are demanding free power
from UMPPs.

38. In their reply, the Ministry have stated:

“I, The demand of 12% free power or power at variable cost to
the host State was initially raised by States of Chhattisgarh, Orissa
and Jharkhand. It was made clear to these States that such a
demand is untenable. These States have now revisited this issue,
and as a consequence bidding process in respect of Tilaiya UMPP
in Jharkhand has already been initiated.

Il. The issue of development of Akaltara UMPP in Chhattisgarh
without any pre-conditions relating to supply of power at variable
cost from UMPP came up for discussion in a meeting convened in
August, 2007 with the State Government representative. The State
Govt. indicated that it was agreeable to support the project
provided 50% power from the project is allocated to Chhattisgarh.

20


Ministry of Power informed Government of Chhattisgarh that while
it is agreeable to allocate upto 50% of contracted power, however,
decision regarding confirmation of allocation of 50% power to
Chhattisgarh from UMPP and remaining 50% power to other States
is to be discussed and decided in a meeting to be convened by
Ministry of Power. Subsequently CEA in October 2007 wrote to
Govt. of Chhattisgarh that considering the Akaltara site being far
off from the allocated coal blocks in Hasdeo-Arand coal fields,
alternative sites have been identified near Hasdeo-Arand coalfields.
Govt. of Chhattisgarh was tequested to get these sites examined
with reference to land and water availability and furnish details to
CEA so that the CEA team could visit the sites to select the most
suitable site for setting up of UMPP in Chhattisgarh. The Govt. of
Chhattisgarh vide letter dated 9.10.07 informed that a team of
Engineers had been formed to examine the proposed alternative
sites and it would be appropriate if a team of officers from CEA/
PFC could visit the proposed alternative sites for examination and
selection of the most suitable site. Accordingly a team of CEA/
PFC officers have visited on 20th & 2ist Nov., 2007 the alternative
sites in Hasdeo-Arand area alongwith the State Government
officials. Subsequently in discussions a site has been identified.
For this site the State Govt. has been Tequested to provide full
details of the land and a pre-feasibility study on the water
availability before a final decision is taken. Govt. of Chhattisgarh
vide its communication dated 7th February, 2008 has indicated that
the site near Salka and Khamaria villages near Udaipur in district
Sarguja appears to be suitable. Furthermore, availability of
135 million cubic meter of water from Rehar river near village
Salka (Udaipur) has also been confirmed. It has also been indicated
that the information with regard to exact location of site, settlement
pattern, forest area involved is under compilation and would be
forwarded shortly.

Similarly, the demand made earlier by the Government of Orissa
was subsequently withdrawn by the State Government and steps
were initiated last year to identify a suitable site for the UMPP.
Though a possible site has been identified, however, Orissa
Government is yet to confirm the site and water availability from
Hirakud Dam.”

39. Further, as regards the current status of implementation of the
Ttecommendation, the Ministry have informed that the State Government
of Orissa confirmed the Project site at Bedabahal in Sundergarh Distt,
along with water linkage for which modalities would be finalized later
by the State Government. Regarding setting up of UMPPs in
Chhatisgarh, the Ministry have stated that it would require further

21


examination with regard to suitability of identified sites, availability of
water and other related factors.

40. The Committee note that the demand initially made by the
State Governments of Chhattisgarh, Orissa and Jharkhand for 12%
free power from UMPP to be set up in their States has been
subsequently withdrawn. The Committee are, however, unhappy to
note that the project at Chhattisgarh has still not made the desired
headway. The Committee, therefore, cannot but deplore the
lackadaisical approach adopted in the matter of finalisation of
appropriate sites for the UMPPs and strongly urge the Government/
CEA to take necessary action with the State Government so that the
site for setting up UMPP in Chhattisgarh may be finalised at the
earliest and bidding process initiated soon. The Committee would
like to know the concrete action taken by the Government in this
regard.

E. Identification of UMPP Sites in Karnataka and Maharashtra
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 4.5.12)

41. The Committee observed that projects at Karnataka and
Maharashtra have been held up due to some objections from the local
people of the area. The people of Tadri in Karnataka were against the
development of Ultra Mega Project there because of this being an
ecologically sensitive area and also in view of the fact that this area
already had four hydroelectric power plants and one nuclear plant.
The local people also had a fear of losing their livelihood. Now the
Government of Karnataka had constituted an Expert Committee on
28.05.2006 consisting of MP, MLAs and other stakeholders, PFC and
Government of Karnataka KPCL, etc. to examine various issues
involved. In one of the meetings of the Committee, it is learnt that
CEA/PFC/Government of Karnataka had proposed that a study be
carried out to assess impact of the power plant on the environment
by a reputed consultant. However no decision in this regard had so
far been taken. The Committee desired that the Expert Committee
expedite the process so that clear picture in regard to the development
of project emerges. The Comumittee felt that engaging a consultant to
carry out a study, as proposed by CEA/ PFC/Government of Karnataka
should also be consideted by the Expert Committee. In case if it came
out that the development of power project would have an adverse
effect on the environment, an alternative site be finalised at the earliest.
Similarly in case of Maharashtra where the local people had raised
certain environmental issues relating to the growing of Alphanso
Mangoes, the Committee desired that the consultant appointed for
carrying out environment studies should submit its report at the
earliest. Considering the importance of these projects, the Committee

22


strongly recommended that these projects should not be unduly held
up and finalised at the earliest in the larger interest of the country.

42. The Committee also desired that before announcing any site
for UMPP, it should be ensured that there was a broad consensus
amongst the various stakeholders for a particular site. The cases of
generation of opposition after the announcement of sites as that of
Tadri in Karnataka and Girye in Maharashtra should not be allowed
to happen. The Committee desired that all the local issues should be
decided in advance by State Governments, before offering a site to set
up UMPP.

43. The Ministry in their reply have stated:

“I. As brought out in the Standing Committee’s report itself a
Committee had been constituted by the State Government to go
into various issues in connection with the Proposed site at Tadri.
The report of the Committee is still awaited. Meanwhile Govt. of
Karnataka vide its communication dated 6th September, 2007 had
requested Govt. of India to establish two UMPPs in the State.
While it had been suggested to retain the site of Tadri, a second
site at Ghataprabha in Belgaum District had also been suggested.
Ministry of Power in its communication dated 23.10.2007 had made
it clear that it would be difficult to go ahead with the establishment
of a UMPP at Tadri if the issue related to local agitation is not
resolved. Clearance for the second site of Ghataprabha has also
been sought to process the case further. Govt. of Karnataka has
yet to respond on these issues.

I. Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for taking steps
to resolve the issues as far as the UMPP in Maharashtra is
concerned, considering the local agitation the development at Girye
has not been taken up.

However, subsequently the State Government suggested an
alternative site near Dighe port in Raigarh District. This site was
visited by CEA/PFC team in June 2007 alongwith State Government
Officials. But the site was found to have constraints in regard to
CRZ Regulations. Recently one more site has been suggested by
the State Government near Kasarde village in Sindhudurg District.
This site has also been visited by CEA/PFC team alongwith State
Government officials. The Govt. of Maharashtra has been requested
by CEA to furnish the details of land and the water availability
data with regard to the site. Some details have since been furnished
but additional details are awaited. Efforts are being made to obtain
these details as early as possible.”

23


44. According to the Ministry of Power, the issue regarding urgent
finalisation of sites has been taking up by them with the concerned
States. The Committee have been further informed that State
Government of Maharashtra confirmed the project site at Munge in
Sundergarh Distt. alongwith development of a capture Port near Achra
Creek. Maharashtra Maritime Board (MMB) has cleared the proposal
to set up captive port at Achra Creek on 11.09.2008. The site visit by
CEA/PFC is reported to be planned and ‘i-Maritime’ is preparing
feasibility report for the port. As regards the setting up of UMPPs in
Karnataka, the Ministry have informed that it would require further
examination with regard to suitability of site, availability of water and
other factors.

45. The Committee note that despite their recommendation that
the Expert Committee constituted by the Government of Karnataka
on 28.05.2006 to look into various issues/objectives in finalisation of
UMPP site at Tadri in Karnataka should expedite the process at the
earliest, no concrete action has been taken in this regard as the
Expert Committee has not furnished their report so far. Although,
the Government in their reply has informed the Committee that the
State Government of Karnataka vide their communication dated
6th September, 2007, had requested to set up two UMPPs in the
State—one at Tadri and the other at Ghataprabha in Belgaum District,
issues relating to local agitation at Tadri has not been resolved so
far. As regards the UMPP in Maharashtra, the Committee have now
been informed that State Government of Maharashtra confirmed the
project site at Munge in Sindhudurg Distt. on 20.07.2008 along with
develolpment of a captive port site near Achra creek. The site visit
by CEA/PFC is reported to be planned and i-Maritime is preparing
the feasibility report. In the opinion of the Committee, both the
Central and State authorities have taken quite some time to take
appropriate action in timely identifying the project sites — resulting
in delays in development of UMPPs - both in Maharashtra and
Karnataka. While recommending that the Government should make
all out efforts in close co-ordination with the State Government of
Karnataka to resolve all pending issues and finalise the site for
setting up the UMPP in Karnataka at the earliest, the Committee
would also like to know the further progress of the UMPP project
in Maharashtra in due course. At the same time, the Committee
would also like to impress upon the Government, the imperative
need to duly streamline the project formulation machinery so that
both these ambitious UMPPs are commissioned in time and yield
benefits during the 12th Plan period as targeted.

24


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No. 2.10.19)

The Committee welcome the new initiative of the Ministry of Power
to embark on the path of huge capacity addition by way of developing
UMPPs. Being a new concept, there are no models to emulate. Hence,
the improvements will have to be made by learning through experience.
Failure of capacity addition targets in the 8th, 9th and 10th Plan, by
the Private Sector leaves much to be desired. The achievement of
Private Sector in all these Plans have been less than 30% of the targets.
This leaves ample scope for soul searching on the part of Government.
The Cominittee recommend that the factors which led to the debacle
of capacity addition targets particularly capacity addition by the Private
Sector should be analysed by the Government in depth and corrective
steps in way of development of UMPPs be taken in right earnest.
Going by the experience in the award of Sasan Ultra Mega Power
Project, the Committee feel that certain changes are warranted in the
bidding guidelines to plug the loopholes therein, and making them
foolproof. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the Precious
time lost in the Sasan Project on this count is simply disconcerting -
considering the immense strategic importance and generation potential
of the development of these projects. The Committee desire this Project
to see light of the day as early as possible. They would further like
the Ministry to try in all sincerity and make up for the time lost
owing to this controversy so that this project comes up as scheduled
earlier,

Further, since the whole purpose of resorting to competitive bidding
is to encourage competition, the Committee are of the opinion that the
developers who have already bagged a project should not be allowed
to bid for another project, on the basis of the same balancesheet on
which he has got one project. However, if the balancesheet is so strong
that it can meet the eligibility criteria for the two Projects together,
they may be permitted to bid. Because besides encouraging competition,
it will also ensure that the Power sector is not monopolized by only
a few companies.

25



Reply of the Government

Regarding the observation of the Committee in connection with
the failure of capacity addition targets in the 8th, 9th and 10th
Plans, by the Private Sector

With the announcement of policy for private sector participation

in the power generation in 1991 it was expected that private investment
in the power sector would gather momentum. However, the
achievement during 8th, 9th and 10th Plans, against the target set: for
the private sector, had been much below the expectations. The reasons
for shortfall inter-alia are:

(a)

(b)

(०

The foremost problem has been the inability of Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) to achieve financial closure (in spite
of progressing well on the other inputs/ clearances), due to
the poor financial health of the State utilities which did not
have the financial capabilities to support more private
projects in terms of ability to open revolving letter of credit
and escrow accounts for regular payment of power. Some
other causes for the private projects not achieving financial
closure have been inordinate delay in finalization of PPA;
in addition, especially during the 10th Plan, some projects
could not be synchronized due to non-availability of gas
and delay in supplies by the equipment manufacturers.

Large Aggregate Technical and Commercial losses leading
to sub-optimal revenue collection hit the financial health of
State distribution utilities. This led to a lack of capability of
the State distribution utilities to provide payment security
to the private sector.

The cost of power indicated by potential developers tended
to be high in the absence of a competitive bidding process.
This led to inordinate delay in signing Power Purchase
Agreements.

The major initiatives launched to promote private sector

participation in the power sector are elaborated below:

26

The Electricity Act, by replacing the earlier laws governing
the electricity sector, has put in place a liberal and
progressive framework, including the institution of
independent electricity regulatory commissions.

Under the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, open access
in transmission has been introduced which has opened up
options for alternative sales of electricity.


* Open access to distribution networks is to be introduced by
the respective State Commissions not later than five years
from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act,
ie. from 27.1.2004, for enabling bulk consumers to buy
directly from power producers.

* The requirement of Techno-Economic Clearance of CEA for
thermal power plants has been done away with.

° Automatic approval for foreign direct investment (FDI) for
100% without any upper ceiling on the quantum of
investment is permitted in all sectors of the power sector.

* Under section 63 of the Act, Guidelines for development of
projects through tariff based competitive bidding route
notified in January 2005.

* Guidelines for encouraging competition in development of
transmission projects have also been notified by the Ministry
in April 2006.

* Ministry of Power has been closely monitoring the power
projects in the private sector which are considered possible
for early financial closure. An Inter-Institutional Group (16)
comprising senior representatives from the lenders and
Ministry of Power has been constituted to jointly appraise
such projects and facilitate financial sanction in a time bound
manner.

* Recently on the direction of MoP CEA has constituted a
Standing Committee to examine the proposals/applications
of IPPs/CPPs for grant of coal linkage/captive coal blocks
keeping in view the prescribed norms of allocation of coal
blocks/linkages of the Ministry of Coal and the policy
guidelines of the Ministry of Power in this regard as issued
from time to time. This Standing Committee is expected to
help streamline the procedure for allotment of coal linkages
and captive coal blocks.

Current Status

As a result of the measures, private sector participation in power
sector has begun to show an upward trend.

For example, in the power generation segment, against 1,930 MW
capacity added during the 10th Plan, capacity of the order of 18,000
MW approximately is presently feasible and is under construction in

27


the private sector during the 11th Plan, out of which 1,000 MW capacity
has already been commissioned.

Il. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that changes
are required in the bidding guidelines:—

The bidding process for the Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs)
is carried out inter alia on the basis of the Standard Bid Documents
(SBDs), based on which project specific bidding documents are
prepared. The SBDs were issued by the Central Govt. under the
provisions of the Competitive Bidding Guidelines in accordance with
section 63 of the Electricity Act. The SBDs have been amended six
times since their issuance on 31st March, 2006. These amendments
were issued on 18th May, 2006, 2150 August, 2006, 22nd September,
2006, 31st January, 2007, 21st September, 2007 and on 12th November,
2007, keeping in view the feedback received from various stake holders
and the experience gained during the course of implementation of the
first set of the UMPPs.

The Empowered Group of Minister (EGoM) on UMPPs had decided
in July’07 that an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) may be set up to
review the SBDs in order to determine whether any modifications
were required in the bidding documents at the RfQ and RfP stages,
particularly keeping in view the recent trends of mergers and
acquisitions and also obviate any chance of misrepresentation in the
course of bidding. The changes as approved by the EGoM after
consideration of the report of the IMG have been incorporated in the
SBDs vide amendment dated 21st September’07.

The EGoM has also decided that the SBDs may be got legally
vetted by a law consultancy firm which has sufficient exposure in
dealing with international power contract and standing in the power
sector. Ministry of Power is taking steps to implement this decision of
the EGoM.

The issue of safeguards in award of UMPPs was considered by
the EGoM in its meeting held on 22.11.07. The recommendation of the
Standing Committee was also placed before the EGoM in the same
meeting. After considering the matter, EGoM decided that the Standard
Bidding Documents (SBDs) may be amended to incorporate following
provisions in respect of UMPPs:—

(a) A company (including its parent, affiliate or ultimate parent)
or a consortium would be required to submit a Performance
Bank Guarantee (PBG) according to a graded scale, by

28

‘Bor


enhancement of 50% of the present requirement for a project,
for every subsequent UMPP awarded to it. Thus for example
the requirement of PBG would be as follows:

(i) Rs. 7.5 lakh per MW - for one UMPP (ie. the existing
provision)

(ii) Rs. 11.25 lakh per MW - for the second UMPP
(iii) Rs. 15.0 lakh per MW - for the third UMPP

Simultaneously, the requirements for additional performance
guarantee and limits on liquidated damages in various
articles of the PPA would also be enhanced by 50% for
each subsequent UMPP.

(b) The condition at (a) above would not apply if the company
(including its parent, affiliate or ultimate parent) which has
earlier been awarded any UMBPP, itself, or as a part of
consortium of which it was a Lead Member, subsequently
bids as a part of a consortium in which this company
(including its parent, affiliate or ultimate Parent) is not the
Lead Member, and the share of such company (including
its parent, affiliate or ultimate Parent) in the consortium is
less than 26%,

These changes are being incorporated in the SBDs.
Current Status

Keeping in view the feedback received from various stakeholders
and the experience gained during the course of implementation of the
first set of UMPPs, the Standard Bid Documents have already been
amended 6 times so far. Furthermore, Ministry of Power has also
initiated steps to implement the decision of the EGoM to get the SBDs
legally vetted.

The modifications in regard to Performance Bank Guarantee,
Additional Performance Guarantee and liquidated damages have since
been incorporated in RfP for Tillaiya UMPP in Jharkhand State and
the same has been approved by CERC. The revised RfP documents
for Tillaiya have also been issued to the qualified bidders.

III. Implementation of Sasan UMPP

Regarding the implementation of Sasan UMPP, the Special Purpose
Vehicle was transferred to the selected bidder on 7th August, 2007. In

29


accordance with the provisions of the PPA, the commissioning schedule
is as follows:

Unit No. Months from Scheduled COD*
PPA signing
L 69 07.05.2013
25 76 07.12.2013
3. 83 07.07.2014
4 90 07.02.2015
De. 97 17.09.2015
6. 104 07.04.2016

“However, developer has an option under PPA to advance the above commissioning
schedule

Current Status

M/s. Sasan Power Limited has since indicated revived
commissioning schedule of their units at Sasan UMPP which is given
below. As per revised schedule, two units at Sasan UMPP are expected
to be commissioned in 11th Plan itself.

Commissioning Schedule for Sasan UMPP (6X660 MW)

Unit Months from Schedule COD as Revised schedule
No. _ the date of worked out from of COD indicated
PPA signing date of signing by SPL
(7.8.2007) of PPA

1. 69 07 May, 2013 Dec. 2011

ee 76 07 Dec., 2013 Mar. 2012

2 83 07 July, 2014 Jun. 2012

4. 90 O7Feb., 2015 Sept. 2012

5. 97 07 Sept., 2015 Dec. 2012

6. 104 07 April, 2016 Mar. 2013

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]
30


Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.10.22)

The Committee note that the pit head Ultra Mega Power Projects
will be based on domestic coal, whereas the coastal projects would be
based on the imported coal. The justifications given by the Ministry
for using imported coal are that the indigenous resources of coal are
limited, which, need to be conserved for the future use and imported
coal would be more cost competitive at Western & Southern coasts, as
compared to domestic coal.

However, the Committee observe that each project would require
around 12-14 million tones of imported coal per-annum. Considering
the current market price of coal in the international market, the
expenditure on importing coal would thus be quite huge. Though the
Mundra Project - the first UMPP to be developed - will run on
imported coal only, the Committee desire that techno-economic
feasibility study of using imported coal after blending it with
indigenous coal, which is being examined, should be expedited and
completed at the earliest so that rest of the coastal Projects could be
planned with the option of using the blended coal.

Reply of the Government

After a study conducted by CEA, it emerged that the option of
blending of indigenous coal with the imported coal has certain
limitations in case of coastal UMPPs. The Indian coal is generally of
poorer quality having high ash content and lower calorific value. The
imported coal on the other hand has very low ash content and high
calorific values and thus the power plant equipment designed for
imported coal could lead to considerable savings in equipment cost.
However, flexibility to use Indian coal in blending with imported coal
would require appropriate changes in design at the initial stages itself
so as to offer necessary flexibility. This in turn would raise the
equipment cost.

With the adoption of the option of using blended coal in coastal
UMPPs, project cost could go up substantially due to following reasons:

(i) Use of blended coal would require fuel handling & transport
facilities to be built up for both imported coal and
indigenous coal.

(ii) Indigenous coal for blending would require coal supply
allocation and setting up of washery if required.

31


(iii) The plant would need is to be designed and sized for use
of high ash content coal such as Electrostatic Precipitators
(ESP), milling system, ash handling plant, ash disposal etc.

(iv) Higher initial cost due to coal handling & transport facilities,
blending mechanism, higher ESP sizing for indigenous coal,
mill sizing, ash handling plant sizing which may not get
utilized in case imported coal continues to be available.

(v) Suppliers may show reluctance in providing performance
guarantee of boiler with blended coal as tests need to be
conducted to determine the combustion behaviour of the
blended coal and performance would depend on the
homogeneity of blending.

(vi) CEA has opined that it is possible to blend any combination
of indigenous coal with imported coal and use in Circulating
Fluidized Bed Combustion (CFBC) boilers. However, the
blended ratio has to be pre-decided at the time of designing
the boiler so as to specify the size and ratings of associated
equipments like, coal handling and preparation system, ash
handling equipments accordingly. Further, CFBC boilers are
much costlier compared to conventional Pulverised coal fired
boilers with higher auxiliary consumption and have lower
efficiency compared to supercritical units. Also power plants
having unit size up to 250 MW only are in operation with
this type of boilers. Hence this technology may not be viable
for 4000 MW Ultra Mega Power Projects.

In view of the above mentioned issues, CEA has recommended
that for coastal UMPPs, use of imported coal only should remain the
preferred option. Furthermore, keeping in view long term coal
requirement which will be the mainstay of our power generation for
sometime to come it would also be prudent to conserve our domestic
coal to the extent possible, as long as some prospective project
developers can structure viable projects with long term tie up of
imported coal.

Current Status

The positio:: indicated above is self explanatory. No further action
is required.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

32


Recommendation (51, No. 8, Para No. 3.7.8)

The UMPPs will be based on super-critical technology. As stated
by the Ministry of Power, there are no constraints in the availability

from abroad or from indigenous manufacturer. BHEL, the only
indigenous manufacturer which Provides equipment for power secto:,
has recently made a foray into manufacturing super-critical technology
based equipment by entering into collaboration with Alstom and
Siemens, The Committee while noting this with satisfaction desire that
such collaborations should be suitably encouraged in the future as
well. The Committee feel that Government should encourage other
indigenous manufacturers/players since BHEL already has its hands
full. The Committee, therefore, recommend that some new companies

of super-critical technology - in order to ensure that this technology
is easily available in the country.

Reply of the Government

The choice of vendor/manufacturer of equipment rests with the
successful developer of the UMPP. As per indication received in respect
of first UMPP project of Mundra, the main plant and equipment has
not been bagged by BHEL. However, as a part of various efforts being
made for expediting addition of generation capacity in the country,
discussions were held with various manufacturers of international
power plant equipments to spread awareness about large generation
capacity being envisaged in the country and to promote setting up
indigenous manufacturing capacity by these manufacturers.

Ministry of Power on 4th and 5th July regarding key inputs to capacity
addition during 11th Plan and beyond in which equipment suppliers
were invited. They were sensitized about the future capacity addition
programme and requirement of power sector.

As a result of these efforts M/s. Midsudbishi Heavy Industry
(MHI), Japan have entered into a joint venture agreement with
M/s. Larsen & Toubro, India for setting up manufacturing facility for
manufacture of supercritical boilers and turbines & generators in India.
The manufacturing capacity envisaged is about 3000 MW/ year. Certain
other manufacturers are also known to have expressed interest in the

33


setting up manufacturing facilities for boilers and turbo-generators in
the country.

Current Status

Efforts in this direction are continuing with the objective of
strengthening the domestic manufacturing facilities.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 4.5.9)

The Committee observe that water requirement of Sasan UMPP at
Madhya Pradesh will be met from the Govindbalabh Pant Sagar
(Rihand Reservoir). As stated by the Ministry of Power, water used
for drinking and irrigation will not be diverted in this case.

The Committee further observe that there was some dispute
between the Governments of Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh
regarding the use of water, required for Sasan UMPP in Madhya
Pradesh. The Government of Chhattisgarh had objected to the use of
water of Rihand reservoir for Sasan project. Thereafter, the Central
Water Commission had conducted Inter-State Meetings in which it
was decided that “the water requirement of 0.109 million acre feet of
UMPP could be met from the share of Rihand water of Madhya
Pradesh by curtailing their future requirement of 0.216 million acre
feet earmarked for medium irrigation projects.”

The Committee, therefore, desire that such disputes should be
resolved in advance so that the project developer may not have to
face any difficulty in availability of water at a later stage. If need be,
the concerned States should enter into a written agreement on the use
of water for UMPPs, to avoid any controversy in future, which should
be then made available to the developer.

Reply of the Government

As the water supply from the Govindbalabh Pant Sagar (Rihand
Reservoir) to Sasan UMPP involved inter State issues, Ministry of
Power/ CEA referred the matter to Ministry of Water Resources/
Central Water Commission for their confirmation regarding availability
of water regarding Sasan UMPP. Central Water Commission held inter-
state meetings with concerned states namely Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Central Water Commission vide
letter dated 27.7.06 communicated the decision taken in the inter-state
meeting held on 6th July 2006 according to which the water
requirement of Sasan UMPP was to be met from the share of MP
from Rihand Reservoir, and that Chhattisgarh may have to supplement

34


in the event of shortfall, if any, on the share of MP and share the
benefits from UMPP at Sasan. As such the inter-state water issue in
respect of Sasan UMPP was resolved before the bidding process was
completed. For other projects also, the water requirements are being
tied up by the SPVs before completing bidding process.

Current Status

As has already been brought out in the Ministry’s response, efforts
are made to get a clear commitment of water availability.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No. 4.5.11)

The Committee are concerned to note that the Project at
Chhattisgarh is being held up because of the demand of 12% free
power made by the Government of Chhattisgarh, The Committee
understand that there is no policy regarding giving free power to the
Host States from the thermal projects as is the case with the hydro
projects. The Committee desire that this point should be impressed
upon all the Host States and Chhattisgarh in particular. The delay on
account of demand of the Chhattisgarh Government is disheartening.
The Committee desire that the matter be taken up with the State
Government and the issue be resolved at the earliest. The Committee
note that any demand for free power by State would have to be borne
by the electricity consumers by way of increased tariff. This may even
make the project economically unviable and uncompetitive leading to
dropping of the project. The Committee desire that these facts should
be clearly brought to the notice of the States which are demanding
free power from UMPPs.

Reply of the Government

I. The demand of 12% free power or power at variable cost to
the host State was initially raised by States of Chhattisgarh, Orissa
and Jharkhand. It was made clear to these States that such a demand
is untenable. These States have now revisited this issue, and as a
consequence bidding process in respect of Tillaiya UMPP in Jharkhand
has already been initiated.

IL The issue of development of Akaltara UMPP in Chhattisgarh
without any pre-conditions relating to supply of power at variable
cost from UMPP came up for discussion in a meeting convened in
August, 2007 with the State Government representative. The State Govt.
indicated that it was agreeable to support the project provided 50%
power from the project is allocated to Chhattisgarh. Ministry of Power
informed Government of Chhattisgarh that while it is agreeable to

35


allocate upto 50% of contracted power, however, decision regarding
confirmation of allocation of 50% power to Chhattisgarh from UMPP
and remaining 50% power to other States is to be discussed and decided
in a meeting to be convened by Ministry of Power. Subsequently CEA
in October 2007 wrote to Govt. of Chhattisgarh that considering the
Akaltara site being far off from the allocated coal blocks in Hasdeo—
Arand coal fields, alternative sites have been identified near Hasdeo—
Arand coalfields. Govt. of Chhattisgarh was requested to get these
sites examined with reference to land and water availability and furnish
details to CEA so that the CEA team could visit the sites to select the
most suitable site for setting up of UMPP in Chhattisgarh. The Govt.
of Chhattisgarh vide letter dated 9.10.07 informed that a team of
Engineers had been formed to examine the proposed alternative sites
and it would be appropriate if a team of officers from CEA/PFC
could visit the proposed alternative sites for examination and selection
of the most suitable site. Accordingly a team of CEA/PFC officers
have visited on 20th & 21st Nov., 2007 the alternative sites in Hasdeo
Arand area alongwith the State Government officials. Subsequently in
discussions a site has been identified. For this site the State Govt. has
been requested to provide full details of the land and a pre-feasibility
study on the water availability before a final decision is taken. Govt.
of Chhattisgarh vide its communication dated 7th February, 2008 has
indicated that the site near Salka and Khamaria villages near Udaipur
in district Sarguja appears to be suitable. Furthermore, availability of
135 million cubic meter of water from Rehar river near village Salka
(Udaipur) has also been confirmed. It has also been indicated that the
information with regard to exact location of site, settlement pattern,
forest area involved is under compilation and would be forwarded
shortly.

Similarly, the demand made earlier by the Government of Orissa
was subsequently withdrawn by the State Government and steps were
initiated last year to identify a suitable site for the UMPP. Though a
possible site has been identified, however, Orissa Government is yet
to confirm the site and water availability from Hirakud Dam.

Current Status

Response as given against ‘current status’ under para-I of
recommendation 2.10.20 may also please be seen.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 40 of Chapter-I of the report)

36


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (SI. No, 3, Para No. 2.10.21)

The Committee observe that the sites for the setting up of the
coastal projects have been selected by keeping in mind the import of
coal for these projects. The Committee, however, observe that the ports
at these locations do not have enough infrastructure to handle the
huge volumes of the imported coal. The Ministry of Power, while
acknowledging this, has stated that at existing ports additional facilities
can be created to handle the imported coal and at some locations new
Ports could also be set up. It implies that the required infrastructure
for some of these projects is yet to be developed. The Committee feel
that delay in the development of infrastructure can lead to further
delay in development of UMPPs, which in turn, can derail the capacity
addition targets and jeopardise growth of the economy as such. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that all works relating to
development of infrastructure particularly the port capacity to handle
the huge volumes of imported coal be completed in a time bound
manner and the same should be reflected in L.o.I, etc. The Committee
also desire that the various project related works which are to be
facilitated by SPVs, should also be made available by the time L.ol is
issued to the successful bidder.

Reply of the Government

With reference to the recommendation of the Committee that port
infrastructure be strengthened and various projects related works should
also be made available by the time Lol is issued to the successful
bidder:

(i) It is submitted that in case of the coastal Projects, port
service agreement is an integral part of the R£P documents,
and it is executed with the port developer. Furthermore, as
submitted in response to the previous recommendation, the
SBDs have been recently amended and these provide for
specific milestones regarding acquisition of land,
environmental clearance, fuel agreement, water linkage,

37


forest clearance, provision of data for preparation of project
report. Various milestones are required to be completed
before the different stages in the bidding process are taken
up with the objective of ensuring timely commencement of
the supply of electricity after award of the project.

(ii) Subsequent to the award of the project, procurers are
required to complete the activity of obtaining order of the
appropriate Regulatory Commission adopting the tariff
under the provision of the Act within a period of six months
in accordance with Article 3.1.2A of the PPA.

(iii) Clause 3.4 of the Competitive Bidding Guidelines provides
that in case more than one procurers are jointly getting the
project developed through competitive bidding, the various
project related agreements may be entered into the concerned
parties prior to the last date of submission of price bids. In
case of Mundra and Krishanpatnam UMPPs, port service
agreements were finalized and signed before the submission
of the RfP price bids.

(iv) The RfP in SBDs requires in clause 1.4 that the procurer
shall indicate various project development activities to be
undertaken by the procurer/SPV and the timeframe for the
completion.

Current Status

At the time of issuance of Lol, terms and conditions of entering
into Port Service Agreement (PSA) are known and for coastal projects,
PSA is an integral part of R£P document and it is executed with the
port developer. Action continues to be taken accordingly.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No. 3.7.7)

The Committee note that there is an apprehension of
monopolization of power sector by the developers of UMPPs. It has
been suggested to the Committee that to encourage competition UMPPs
should be asked to sell certain percentage of their capacity in the
open market. Also that there should be a provision to buy back/take
over of the plant in case the developers resort to some sort of blackmail,
etc. The Ministry of Power has informed the Committee that the
Electricity Act provides for sufficient powers to the Regulatory
Commission to issue directions to the licencee. The Committee,
however, feel that this aspect needs to be gone into and desire that

38


specific powers may also be provided to the State Governments to
deal with such situations.

The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the view of the
Ministry of Power that in case of failure of developer as per provision
of Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), lenders will have the option to
step in his shoes, to run the plant. The Committee, desire that specific
provisions should be made in PPA/LoI as to what action the
Government/Regulatory Commission shall be authorized to take in
case the promoters of the project fei to perform as per the agreement.
The Committee further desiregthat a report on the status of
development of all UMPPs; reasons for delay in their development, if
any, and the penalties imposed in case of delays should be furnished
to the Committee every 6 months by the Government.

The Committee feel that since the projects will be set up in States
and State utilities are the procurers of power generated from these
projects, there can be a provision in the contract that in case the
developer fails to develop the projects as per the provision of PPA,
the respective State Governments would be entitled to take over the
project and run it and refer the matter to the concerned Regulatory
Commission for final settlement.

Reply of the Government

Theoretically, monopolization of power sector by the developers of
UMPP is ruled out due to the fact that developers neither have control
over escalation of prices (as levellized tariff has been decided upfront
for the entire project life of 25 years) and nor they have control over
supply as they have to adhere to supply of contracted capacity to the
designated states as per the Power Purchase Agreement signed upfront.
Furthermore, Section 60 of the Electricity Act empowers the appropriate
Regulatory Commission to issue directions to a licensee or a generating
company if such licensee or generating company enters into an
agreement or abuses its dominant position or enters into a combination
which is likely to cause or causes an adverse effect on competition in
electricity industry. Non-compliance of the directions under the Act is
a punishable offence under section 146 of the Act.

UMPPs are being developed under Case-2 of the Competitive
Bidding Guidelines for long term procurement of the electricity. Clause
5.4(i) of the Guidelines provides that the term of contract should
coincide with life of the project and this period has been suggested as
25 years for coal based projects. As the bidding process is for long
term procurement it will not be feasible to incorporate a provision for
open market sale. It will also be in the interest of the procurers that
the developer is committed to a long term PPA as he is being provided
with the fuel and water linkages by the procurers.

39


Article 14.3.4 of the PPA provides for a penalty of 20% on the
capacity charge payable by the procurer in case of Seller Event of
Default by the project developer.

Section 11 of the Electricity Act already empowers the Appropriate
Government to direct a generating company regarding operation and
maintenance of any generating station in extraordinary circumstances.

Article 4.6 of PPA already provides for penalties to be imposed on
the developer if he fails to commence supply in time. Further, Article
14.3.4 provides for penalties in case the project developer defaults
during operations of the project.

The provision for ‘buyout’ for the project was consciously dropped
at the time of formulation of the SBDs taking into account the fact
that buyout would put heavy financial burden on the procuring States
because of their liability to compensate the developer. Moreover,
determination of such compensation would involve the determination
of project cost which is difficult to reconcile with the concept of tariff
based bidding.

Article 17 of the PPA already provides that tariff related disputes
would be referred to the Regulatory Commission and other disputes
would be referred to the Arbitrator. This arrangement was settled after
indepth consultations with the investor community.

Any further provision for discretionary intervention would
significantly increase the risk perception of the developer and would
affect whole exercise of investment mobilization. It is to be borne in
the mind that it is the project developer who is investing/mobilizing
huge sums of money in the order of Rs. 16000 to Rs. 18000 crores for
every UMPP.

Current Status

The position indicated above is self-explanatory. No further action
is required.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 3.7.9)

Development of UMPPs at some sites would involve displacement
of the local people. The Committee note that it has been provided in
the tender document that every developer will meet the requirement
of National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy while putting his
cost together. The cost of R&R is to be decided by respective State
Governments and the same will be borne by the developer. The
Committee further note that packages for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs

40


have been finalized by the respective State Governments. However,
the Committee note the provision in PPA that any change in R&R
package is to be adjusted in tariff under ‘Change in Law’ in PPA. The
Committee feel that this provision can be misused and the major part
of R&R expenditure can be adjusted in tariff by the corrupt officials
and the developers. Hence, it is suggested that a limit of say 5 to 7%
should be placed to which extent the R&R cost can be adjusted in
tariff. If the expenditure exceeds this limit, it should be borne by the
State Government and the developer. The Committee also desire that
for the remaining projects R&R studies should be done in advance as
soon as the sites are finalized so that accurate estimates can be given
to the developers at the time of bidding itself.

Reply of the Government

In case of UMPPs, it is to submit that R&R study is conducted
upfront and the draft R&R package alongwith the cost estimates for
the same is prepared in consultation with the State Government based
on the National/State Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policies. The
same is provided to all the bidders at least 30 days before the bid
submission date. The bidders have to take the same into account while
finalising their tariff bids. Since, these are estimates only, PPA provides
that any changes in the cost of R&R due to any subsequent changes
in the R&R policy(ies) either by the Central or State Government shall
be considered as Change in Law. However, Article 13.1.1 of the PPA
provides for adjustment of only change in the cost of implementation
of R&R package. The components of the R&R package intimated in
the RfP are not to be changed. The responsibility for establishing the
impact on account of anything covered under change in law is that of
developer and PPA provides for a minimum threshold level beyond
which developer can seek compensation. Thus, Article 13.2(a) of PPA
provides that change in law provision would come into play only if
the additional cost burden exceeds Rs. 50 crore. Therefore, the
present provisions already have an element of burden sharing to some
extent.

Placing any additional burden on the developer in the form of
contingent liability as changes in R&R package, would increase the
risk perception of the developer and has potential of increasing quoted
tariffs.

Current Status

The position indicated above is self-explanatory. No further action
is required.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
G dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

41


Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 3.7.10)

The Committee note that due care has to be taken of the
environment impact of such large UMPPs. These thermal stations are
likely to generate huge amount of ash and large carbon dioxide
emissions. The Ministry of Power has stated that since these UMPPs
shall be using super-critical technology and imported coal with less
ash content, the environment impact will be duly taken care of. The
Committee desire that there should be strict compliance of
environmental norms and ash disposal should be decided in advance
of the generation in each case. The Committee further desire that the
use of fly ash in cement industry, building of roads etc. and other
projects should be encouraged.

Reply of the Government

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) studies are being
carried out for the UMPPs and Draft Environment Management plans
based on these studies are provided to the bidders so that they could
take the same into account while bidding. State of art equipment is
being envisaged to control the pollutants from the UMPPs within the
norms stipulated by Central Pollution Control Board/MOE&F.
Supercritical technology with higher steam parameters proposed to be
adopted for the UMPPs will result in higher thermal efficiency thereby
reducing green house gas emission. The SPVs are obtaining the
environment clearance from MOE&F based on the detailed EIA Studies.
The ash from these UMPPs is envisaged to be utilized in cement
plants, brick manufacturing, building of roads, bridges and other
applications as per the stipulations of MOE&F. The selected developer
is required to strictly comply with the stipulations made by MOE&F
in their clearance as well as the norms of emission prescribed by
CPCB/MOE&F.

Current Status
The position indicated above is self-explanatory. No further action
is required.
[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]
Recommendation (51, No. 13, Para No. 4.5.10)

The Committee observe that the ‘Host States’ have demanded a
major share from the power allocated from UMPPs in the States. The
Ministry while on its part has assured that major allocation of power
is made to the host State only, the Committee, however, note that
there is no particular formula for allocation of power and it is done
on the basis of consensus arrived at in consultation with the State

42


Governments. The Committee feel that it leaves a lot of scope for bias.
The Committee recommend that a formula be devised by the Ministry
according to which the host State should get a reasonable share of the
power generated from UMPP located therein. This formula be devised
by taking into consideration various factors like power shortages in
the State, status of infrastructure for evacuation of power, etc. The
Committee strongly feel that the allocation on the basis of a formula
should be completely objective leaving no scope for any grievance
from the States. The Committee further want that the involvement of
the State Governments should be maintained by the Centre in the
whole process of development of UMPPs.

c

Il.

Reply of the Government

A definite formula for allocation of power to different States
is being followed in the case of Central Generating Stations
(CGS) only. UMPPs are not CGSs, and it has been found
that the practice of deciding the allocation on the basis of
consensus is working well. In this connection, it may be
added that the UMPPs are large sized projects involving
very high levels of investment by the project developers. It
is therefore essential that the payment capability of the States
procuring power from a particular project should inspire
confidence in the prospective bidders, otherwise the bidding
interest will be adversely impacted at the initial stage itself.
At a later stage (as has already been mentioned in para I
above of this Ministry’s response to the earlier
Recommendation No. 2.10.19), this factor would adversely
impact on the efforts to achieve financial closure of the
project.

Regarding the Committee’s recommendation that the
involvement of the State Governments should be maintained
by the Centre in the whole process of development of
UMPPs—kind attention is drawn to this Ministry’s response
to the earlier Recommendation Nos. 2.10.20 and 4.5.8.

Current Status

1६ may be seen that a formula is being used only for allocation of
power from Central Generating Stations (CGSs). UMPPs, not being
(0685, are outside the purview of formula driven allocations.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.10.20)

The Committee had expressed concern in their 20th Report on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2007-08 as
regards the coming up of UMPPs on time was concerned as was
envisaged by the Ministry of Power earlier. While taking review of
the functioning of the Ministry of Power similar concerns have also
been reported to be expressed by the Prime Minister in regard to
meeting targets by the Ministry of Power in the setting up of UMPPs.

Thus, the Committee feel deeply concerned with the pace of
progress in the development of UMPPs. Initially the Government had
announced four UMPPs in the Budget for the year 2006-07, with the
intention to award these projects before December, 2006. Out of these,
the Government was able to stick to the deadline with regard to only
two projects, namely Sasan and Mundra. Both of these projects were
awarded before the target of ३15५ December 2006—though further
progress on Sasan Project suffered due to the controversy regarding
the validity of the award of the project. The remaining two projects—
one in Andhra Pradesh and another in Orissa were scheduled for
being awarded by 30th April 2007. The submission date for RfP for
Andhra Pradesh project has been postponed and regarding the project
to be developed in Orissa, the site is yet to be finalised.

Later five more projects have been added to the list. However the
way in which their development is progressing leaves much to be
desired. In most of the cases selection of site is the main reason for
delay. There are agitations by local people in Karnataka and
Maharashtra and certain technical problems in Tamil Nadu. The
Committee feel that the State Governments should have been associated
with the selection of sites in the beginning itself to avoid any last
minute disagreement on the sites. The Committee desire that the sites
for UMPPs should be finalized at the earliest so that these projects
can come up within 12th Plan as envisaged and promised. The site
for UMPPs should be selected only after the State Government has
agreed to the same.

44


The Committee observe that in PPA for Mundra Project 64 months,
that is more than five years, have been given to the developers for
commissioning the first unit of the power project and the last unit
would be commissioned after 88 months, that is after more than seven
years from signing the PPA. The Committee feel that in the present
age of fast development it should not take such a long time for setting
up of these projects.

The Committee further note that this time schedule also depends
on time taken in obtaining necessary clearances and acquisition of
land for the project; time taken in bidding process and time schedule
submitted by the bidder in his bid. There is no time limit fixed within
which clearances shall be available and the land shall be acquired. In
addition to this, it has been stated that time fixed for start of various
units would be calculated from signing of PPA. The Committee,
therefore, feel that such an open ended fixation of completion schedule
will not serve any purpose. The Committee thus desire that exact
dates/periods should be provided for setting up of each project at the
time of issue of Letter of Intent and penalties should be provided in
case of default so that the projects can be set up in a time-bound
manner.

The Committee further desire that there should be proper
coordination between the Central and State Governments so that the
issues involved in the various projects can be resolved and more so,
in future the coordination between the Central and State Governments
should begin right from the conceptual stage of the project itself.
Considering the urgent need of power, the Committee strongly
recommend that these projects should become fully operational by all
means in 12th Plan itself. Recently constituted National Power Project
Management Board should also, in particular, be assigned the
responsibility to ensure the timely completion of all these projects. For
this, it is very important that this Board should be sufficiently
empowered to take project related decisions and also it must be ensured
that these are implemented without any bottlenecks from any quarters.

Reply of the Government

I. The Committee has given recommendations for involving
the State Governments in selecting/finalizing sites for the
UMPPs, having consultations with them before announcing
the project, having proper coordination between the Centre
and the State Governments and involving the States in the
whole process of development of UMPPs in para Nos. 2.10.20,
4.5.8 and 4.5.10.

45


46

It is submitted that the scheme of developing UMPPs has following
mechanisms for active involvement of the concerned State Governments:

6)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Involvement of the State Government agencies has been
ensured from the initial stage itself. Probable sites as
identified by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) in
consultation with CMPDI, NRSA and Railways/sites as
proposed by the States, are visited by a team of officers
from CEA, PFC, State Utilities, State Revenue Department,
State Pollution Control Board, State Irrigation Department
and State Maritime Boards (in case of coastal sites).

On the basis of the inputs provided by the above mentioned
State agencies a likely site is identified by CEA.

Thereafter, CEA holds meetings with senior State
Government officials at the level of Chief Secretaries/
Principal Secretary (Energy) to obtain their specific
confirmation about the availability of land and water for
the identified likely site.

This is followed by a formal request to the State Government
for making available land and water.

The State agencies also continue to be involved at different
stages of the process. The representative of the Power
Utilities who are getting to procure major share of electricity
from the project are nominated by the concerned
State Governments on the Board of the Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV) formed for a particular UMPP. The Board of
the SPV takes final decision at various stages of the bidding
process for the particular UMPP.

The representative of the State Power Utilities are also
consulted in finalization of the project specific bidding
documents.

The representative of the State Power Utility in whose area
a project is located is nominated as the lead procurer in the
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). After signing of the PPA,
the lead procurer is the representative of all the procurers
to coordinate/interface with the developers of the project.

After award of the project, a monitoring committee is
constituted for every UMPP to review and facilitate
resolution of issues arising during implementation of the
project. These committees are co-chaired by a Member of
the Central Electricity Authority and the Principal Secretary /
Secretary (Energy) of the concerned State Government.


However, the observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been
noted and all efforts will be made to improve the level of coordination
with the State agencies.

Current Status

All efforts are being made to improve the level of coordination
with the State agencies.

Identification of sites is continuing to be done in consultation with
the State agencies. Regarding the need for early finalization of sites
for the UMPPs in close coordination with the State Government
agencies, it is stated that the Union Minister of Power had convened
a meeting with the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Chhattisgarh on 4th August 2008. As a result
of the detailed discussions, the State Government of Tamil Nadu
confirmed the project site at Cheyyur alongwith development of a
captive port site near Paramankeni village; the State Government of
Maharashtra confirmed the project site at Munge in Sindhudurg Distt.
alongwith development of a captive port site near Achra creek; and
the State Government of Orissa confirmed the project site at Bedabahal
in Sundergarh Distt. alongwith water linkage for which modalities
would be finalised later by the State Government. The detailed
discussions during the meeting however revealed that setting up of a
UMPP each in Karnataka and Chhattisgarh would require further
examination with regard to suitability of identified sites, availability of
water and other related factors. It was therefore not possible at this
stage to proceed further in respect of these two UMPPs. Further action
will now be taken in respect of the three identified sites in
Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Orissa.

Il. Regarding the stipulated timelines set for the development of
UMPP, the Competitive Bidding Guidelines provide in clause 5.6(v)
that the procurer shall provide the maximum period in the RfP within
which the selected bidder must commence supply of electricity after
the PPA being effective. According to the guidelines, this period shall
ordinarily not be less than 4 years in those cases where supply of
electricity is called for long term procurement. Long term procurement
is defined as a period of 7 years and above. Format 3 of Annexure 6
of RfP in SBDs accordingly requires the procurer to indicate the outer
limit of the COD of the first unit. However, Article 3.1.2 (viii) of the
PPA is SBDs gives option to the selected bidder to prepone his schedule
of commissioning of various units.

47


The time period for commissioning of units in case of UMPPs was
kept on higher side in view of the following:

¢ These will be the first large sized super critical unit to be
set up in the country.

* PPA provides for penalties in the form of liquidated
damages if the project developer is not able to commence
supply of electricity within the scheduled time.

* There was a need to have an appropriate risk mitigation
mechanism in the form of a reasonable time for
commissioning in order to encourage more number of
bidders to compete in the first set of the UMPPs.

The Competitive Bidding Guidelines have been amended in Sept.’07
and one of the amendments relate to the time table for the bidding
process. The amended guidelines now provide for specific milestones
regarding acquisition of land, environmental clearance, fuel
arrangement, water linkage, forest clearance, provision of data for
preparation of project report. Various milestones are required to be
completed before the different stages in the bidding process are taken
up with the objective of ensuring timely commencement of the supply
of electricity after award of the project.

The Letter of Intent is required to be issued after the selection of
the bidder and therefore the various schedule for development in
commissioning of the project become certain by that stage. Signing of
the PPA or the date of PPA becoming effective in the case PPA has
been signed before hand by SPV, has to be the reference point for
contractual obligations. This is so because during the bidding process,
there are no contractual obligations as the other party is yet to be
selected. The bidding guidelines provide for a period of 30 days for
signing of PPA after the issue of Letter of Intent.

The PPA in SBDs already has provisions for penalties in case of
delays in setting up of the projects. Article 3.3 of the PPA deals with
penalties in case of delays in achieving the financial closure. Article
4.6 of PPA deals with liquidated damages to be imposed for delays in
providing contracted capacity.

Current Status

Contractual obligations in respect of commissioning schedule are
spelt out in the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). PPA also
incorporates the penalty clauses in cases of non-adherence to the
specified schedule.

48


M/s. Sasan Power Limited and M/s. Coastal Gujarat Power Limited
have since revised the commissioning schedules of their units at
Sasan UMPP and Mundra UMPP which is given below. As per revised
schedules, two units each at Sasan UMPP and Mundra UMPP are
expected to be commissioned in 11th plan itself.

For Sasan UMPP (6 x 660 MW)

Unit Months from Schedule COD as Revised schedule
No. _ the date of worked out from of COD indicated
PPA signing date of signing by SPL
(7.8.2007) of PPA

1 69 07 May, 2013 Dec. 2011

a 76 07 Dec., 2013 Mar. 2012

3. 83 07 July, 2014 Jun. 2012

4. 90 07 Feb., 2015 Sept. 2012

5. 97 07 Sept., 2015 Dec. 2012

6. 104 07 April, 2016 Mar. 2013

For Mundra UMPP (5 x 800 MW)

Unit Months from Schedule COD as Revised schedule
No. _ the date of worked out from of COD given by
PPA signing the date of signing M/s CGPL
(22.4.2007) of PPA
1. 64 22 Aug. 2012 Sept. 2011
2. 70 22 Feb. 2013 March 2012
3. 76 22 Aug. 2013 July 2012
4. 82 22 Feb. 2014 Nov. 2012
5. 88 22 Aug. 2014 March 2013

Ill. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that these
projects should become fully operational by all means in the 12th Plan
itself—the bidding process in respect of the Sasan, Mundra and the
Krishnapatnam projects is already over and the SPVs have also been
transferred to the selected project developers. These projects are
therefore scheduled for commissioning in the 12th Plan. In respect of

49


the Tilaiya UMPP, the RfQ stage is over and the bids are currently
under evaluation. In respect of the other UMPPs in Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Chhattisgarh, necessary clearances
are awaited from the respective State Governments, aiter which the
bidding process will be initiated.

Current Status

All the three UMPPs where bidding process has been completed,
in accordance with the PPA are envisaged to be operational during
the 12th Plan.

IV. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that the
recently constituted National Power Project Management Board should
also, in particular, be assigned the responsibility to ensure the timely
completion of all these projects—a Power Project Monitoring Panel is
now being set up instead of the Board. The Panel would be responsible
for monitoring of all the power projects in the country. However, in
order to ensure successful implementation of these projects after their
award, Joint Monitoring Committees (JMCs) have been constituted: for
Sasan and Mundra UMPPs. JMCs are chaired by Member (Thermal),
CEA and co-chaired by Principal Secretary (Energy) of concerned host
State. Other members of JMCs include (a) representatives of procuring
States, (b) representative of developer, and (c) representative of PFC
(till fulfillment of commitments of procurers given under RfP).

Current Status

The National Power Project Management Panel has since been set-
up. As far as the UMPPs are concerned, the meetings of the
Joint Monitoring Committees of the three UMPPs already awarded are
being held regularly.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 22-25 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Paragraph No. 2.10.23)

The Committee observe that all the Ultra Mega Power Projects
which have been envisaged by the Government are thermal projects.
The Committee note that there is a huge hydro power potential in our

50


country — which yet remains to be exploited. Moreover, use of coal for
power generation should be done keeping in mind the future
requirement of coal for other purposes as well. Hence, the Committee
feel that a policy for hydro Ultra Mega Power Projects should also be
formulated by the Government on top priority. In the recently held
Conference of Chief Ministers, the Prime Minister had asked the Union
Power Minister to set up a Task Force on hydro power to lend special
focus on this area. The Committee desire that this Task force be also
assigned the task of working out the modalities for the development
of hydro based Ultra Mega Power Projects. Development of UMPPs
based on hydel power can greatly benefit the North-Eastern region of
the country—which abounds in the hydel potential.

Reply of the Government

Even though it has been permitted under the provisions of the
Tariff Policy and Electricity Act, 2003, tariff based bidding has not
been undertaken so far for hydro projects in the country. This is largely
due to the high level of uncertainty arising out of construction risks
‘on account of adverse geological conditions, delays in land acquisitions,
rehabilitation and resettlement (R&R) issues, law and order problems,
natural calamities etc. These risks cannot be anticipated with enough
confidence so as to enable tariff-based bidding. The risks get further
compounded prior to even the preparation of DPRs. The problems are
particularly acute in the case of projects in the Northeast, where apart
from high geological risks there is also the higher transmission costs
associated, as the power has to be evacuated over long distance to the
deficit regions in the North and the Western parts of the country.

In view of the above difficulties, the Ministry of Power had duly
circulated a proposal on 30th April, 2007 for revision of policy on
development of hydro electric projects. As per this proposed policy,
through the tariff based bidding would remain the most desirable
option, since the hydro projects construction involves huge risk and
uncertainty as explained above, it had therefore been proposed to
provide them with the option of regulated tariff under section 62 of
the Electricity Act, 2003 where tariff is fixed by the regulator under
cost plus norms, if all other conditions like transparency in allocation
of sites etc. are complied with.

The Task Force (constituted in pursuance of the Conference of
Chief Ministers held on 28th May, 2007) in its first meeting held on
12.12.2007, considered both the proposal on revision to the hydro policy
as proposed by the Ministry of Power as mentioned above, as well as

51


setting up of Mega Hydel Projects on the lines of UMPPs. There was
a broad general consensus in the Task Force on the proposal of the
Ministry of Power to extend to the Hydro Electric Projects being
developed by private developers, the benefits of fixation of tariff under
Section 62 of the Electricity Act, 2003 at par with the projects being
developed by CPSUs/PSEs. The new Hydro Policy since has been
approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 3.1.2008.

On the issue of development of Mega Hydel Project on the lines
of UMPPs, the Task Force was of the opinion that the State
Governments be asked to identify the potential sites for setting up of
Mega Hydel Projects and propose their implementation through an
SPV on the lines of UMPPs. This is necessary since, as water and
water power are State subjects under the Constitutional provisions,
the consent of State Governments needs to be obtained for development
of such hydro power schemes through tariff based competitive bidding
on the lines of Ultra Mega Power Projects.

Current Status
The New Hydro Policy has since been notified on 31.03.2008.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 29 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (51, No. 6, Para No. 3.7.6)

The Committee note that under the Payment Security Mechanism
for UMPPs in case of default by any procurer there is a clause of
third party sale. As per this clause other procurers would have the
first right to buy power share for which payment default has occurred.
However, in case the other procurers are unwilling to buy default
power, the same would be sold in the all India market through
prevailing ‘open access’ in transmission either directly or through
traders. The Committee, however, feel that for selling it in the market
there is need for the speedy and proper implementation of ‘open access’
in States as envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003. Further, in order
to avail the ‘open access’—both for Intra and Inter-State open access,
without any infrastructural bottlenecks, the transmission system
(national grid) needs to be suitably strengthened and congestion points
be removed. Powergrid is stated to be carrying out the open access

52


system study. The transmission system will be augmented accordingly
to ensure evacuation of power from these UMPPs. The Committee
desire that this study should be completed within a specific time frame
so that the transmission system is ready by the time the first unit of
UMPPs becomes operational. Further the States, particularly, the States
procuring electricity from the UMPPs should be able to provide open
access by 2009 as per the Electricity Act, 2003. To achieve this goal,
the Committee recommend that all efforts in this direction be made
on in a mission mode manner.

The Committee further observe that for successful implementation
of such a payment security arrangement, it is essential to speed up
the pace of electricity reforms in the States. The Committee feel that
improving the commercial viability of the power sector in the States
is very important for the success of such a payment security
arrangement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concrete steps
be taken in this direction urgently.

Evacuation of power from UMPPs is another area which need
attention from the beginning itself as it also needs large investments.
The Committee note that Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd (PGCIL)
has been assigned this job. The Committee desire that advance planning
and provision of funds should be done by PGCIL in consultation with
CEA so that there are no bottlenecks in evacuation of power. The
Committee are of the considered opinion that the private investment
should be encouraged in this sector. At the same time, the Committee
feel that State distribution utilities should be encouraged to take up
transmission and distribution network in their respective States.

Reply of the Government

The Electricity Act (Section 42) provides that open access shall be
made available latest by January’09 to all the consumers who demand
more than one MW of electricity. In order to build a consensus for
accelerated implementation of the provisions of the Act relating to
open access, the CM’s Conference on power sector held in May’07,
resolved inter-alia that the States commit themselves to operationalizing
‘open access’ in the transmission and distribution sectors and resolve
to issue policy directives to regulators, if necessary, to appropriately
restructure cross subsidy surcharge, wheeling charges and other charges,
with a view to augment the quantum of power flowing into the grid
in the prevailing environment of shortages. The Ministry of Power
also organized an interaction with the Forum of Regulators on
5th November’07 to follow up on the decision of the CM’s Conference.

53


The SERCs have committed themselves to accelerate the implementation
of the open access.

Open access in inter-state transmission is already implemented and
is by and large satisfactory. Constraints in the inter-states transmission,
in the inter-region as well as intra-regional system, which were at a
significant level till a few years ago, have been generally addressed
and further strengthening of National Grid System is under way with
the program being implemented in a mission mode. A number of
transmission schemes linked with evacuation from various generating
stations and system strengthening schemes have been planned during
the XI Plan time frame and are in various stages of implementation.
The inter-regional transmission capacity is also planned to be increased
from the present level of about 17000 MW to about 37700 MW by the
end of XI Plan.

Regarding putting in place power evacuation system inline with
the commissioning schedule of various units associated with the UMPP
Projects it is to state that studies for evolving the transmission system
for the evacuation of power from Sasan UMPP, Mundra UMPP and
Krishnapatnam UMPP have been completed. Feasibility Report/Detailed
Project Report (FR/DPR) for transmission system for Sasan and Mundra
has been prepared and is in process of investment approval. FR/DPR
for transmission system for Krishnapatnam is under preparation. The
implementation schedule of the transmission system is firmed up
matching with the commissioning schedule of generating units to avoid
any bottlenecks in evacuation at the time of commissioning of
generating units. The transmission network has been planned with
margins to take care of any need for diverting power from UMPP to
other procurers or selling it in the all India market through open
access or trading in case of default by any procurer.

As suggested by Hon’ble Committee improving the commercial
viability of the power sector in the States is of crucial importance in
the context of payment security arrangement. Issue related to improving
the commercial viability of the state utility is being discussed in every
possible forum. In the Chief Minister’s Conference held on 28th May,
2007, inter-alia following resolution was adopted:

“The Conference recognizes that the current level of AT & C losses
constitute a grave threat to the viability of the power sector
and the distribution segment, which is currently losing about
Rs. 47,000 crores per annum, is the weakest link in the power
system; and resolves that the States commit themselves to achieve

54


and sustain drastic reduction in the overall AT&C losses through
the next five years, and at least to a level of 15% in the APDRP
project areas as has been demonstrated by the participating States
in 163 towns and cities. Towards this end, the States with
appropriate assistance from the Centre would establish the
necessary baseline data and IT applications for energy accounting
and auditing, besides ensuring a resolute elimination of electricity
theft, which is negating various investments and initiatives for
power sector reforms. It is further reiterated that where free or
subsidized power is provided to a section of consumers, the State
Government shall ensure upfront payment of the same to the
utilities.”

Current Status

Studies for evolving the transmission system for the evacuation of
power from Sasan UMPP, Mundra UMPP, Krishnapatnam UMPP and
Tilaiya UMPP have been completed and the system has been finalized
in respect of Sasan UMPP, Mundra UMPP and Krishnapatnam UMPP.
FR/DPR for these three transmission schemes have been prepared and
are in the process of investment approval. The implementation schedule
of the transmission system is firmed up matching with the
commissioning schedule of generating units to avoid any bottlenecks
in evacuation at the time of commissioning of generating units.

The transmission system for Tilaiya UMPP is in the process of
being firmed up after deliberations with the various beneficiaries in
the meeting of the Committee on Power System Planning, headed by
Member (Power Systems), CEA, of the concerned regions.

The transmission network has been planned with adequate margins
to take care of any need for diverting power from UMPP to other
Pprocurers or selling it in the all India market through open access or
trading in case of default by any procurer.

For 11th Plan period, based on the generation capacity addition
under central sector and other generation projects for which
transmission system is required to be built by the PGCIL including
Ultra Mega Power Projects, an investment of about Rs. 55,000 crore is
planned by PGCIL. PGCIL has already initiated actions to mobilize
suitable mix of funds from domestic and international markets, which
shall be availed on year to year basis, depending upon the requirement.
Project implementation would not suffer on this account. Equity
contribution by PGCIL shall be deployed as per requirement during
implementation of the projects.

55


With regard to transmission system in respect of UMPPs, it has
been decided that this will be implemented by the PGCIL as the Central
Transmission Utility.

[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 36 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 4.5.8)

The Committee observe that development of Ultra Mega Power
Projects require support and coordination between the various players
involved i.e., the Central Government, State Governments, PFC, project
developers, Consultants, etc. Lack of support from any of these players
can lead to delay in the development of these projects and as such
can derail capacity addition programme and, in turn, economic growth
of the country as envisaged—because power is the key driver for any
growth agenda set for the country.

The Committee further observe with concern that the Ministry of
Power is facing some problems in finalisation of sites in States such
as Orissa, Karnataka and Maharashtra. Though the Ministry has stated
that the State Electricity Boards and State Companies are involved
while the site is selected, the Committee, however, feel that the
involvement of the State Governments has just been a formality. Central
Electricity Authority (CEA) which had a major role in selection of
sites did not seem to have given a serious thought before selecting
project sites. As stated by the Government of Orissa that the
Government of India/CEA had “just intimated” to the State
Government about the identification of site. It implies that the State
Government was not involved in identification of site. Similarly, the
Government of Chhattisgarh has stated that no formal consultations
with the State Government were held. Regarding the site in
Maharashtra, the statement of the Ministry that it was just one of the
probable sites and not the final one, raises questions as to the manner
in which the Central Government has gone about the selection of sites
for the UMPPs. The Committee feel that since the State Governments
have better knowledge of the feasibility of making a particular land
and other resources available for the development of power projects—
also considering the environmental and other aspects—the State
Governments should be involved in the development process of UMPPs
right from the conceptual stage. This, in turn, will ensure that the

56


Projects are not unnecessarily held up due to land and other related
disputes. Further, the sites should be formally announced only when
the finality in this regard has been reached—after the due consultation
Process—with the respective State Government.

The Committee understand that in view of the local issues involved
in the setting up of UMPP at Tadri, the Central Government is
considering certain alternative sites for the purpose which is in line
with what the Committee also felt after their visit at the proposed site
for UMPP at Tadri. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Power takes an urgent action in the matter so that the UMPPs can be
established both in Maharashtra and Karnataka at the earliest, at the
alternative sites.

Reply of the Government

I. It is well recognized that development of UMPP requires
support and coordination between the various players
involved particularly the State Governments. Keeping this
in view a coordinated approach is being adopted for the
development of UMPPs. The project specific Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV) formed under PFC are responsible for carrying
out various developmental activities on behalf of the
procurers which include appointment of consultants to
undertake preparation of project reports, preparation of
Environmental Impact Assessment Reports, preparation of
bidding documents, carrying out bidding process, acquisition
of land, getting clearances regarding water and environment
& forests etc. The Boards of SPVs includes officials of the
PEC, the representatives of the distribution companies of
the major power procuring States. CEA is providing the
technical support to the SPVs in formulation of project
reports and other feasibility studies. Power Grid Corporation
of India (PGCIL) is providing support in formulating the
transmission system for evacuation of power. State
Governments are being involved right from the beginning
ie. in site identification, land acquisition, water allocation,
R & R Plan, participation in various Committees for
undertaking the competitive bidding process, facilitation of
signing of the Power Purchase Agreement and Payment
Security Mechanism.

Il Kind attention of the Committee is drawn also to this
Ministry's response given under the earlier Recommendation

57


No. 2.10.20. However, despite involvement of the State
agencies, and despite repeated efforts and constant follow
up, the States of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Chhattisgarh and Orissa have not been able to provide
required clearances for the sites. Accordingly, the bidding
process for the UMPPs in these States will be initiated only
after ihe requisite clearances are given by the States.

Current Status

As given against ‘current status’ under para-I of Recommendation
No. 2.10.20.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 22-25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 4.5.12)

The Committee observe that projects at Karnataka and Maharashtra
have been held up due to some objections from the local people of
the area. The people of Tadri in Karnataka are against the development
of Ultra Mega Project there because of this being an ecologically
sensitive area and also in view of the fact that this area already has
four hydroelectric power plants and one nuclear plant. The local people
also have a fear of losing their livelihood. Now the Government of
Karanataka has constituted an Expert Committee on 28.05.2006
consisting of MP, MLAs and other stakeholders, PFC and Government
of Karnataka KPCL, etc. to examine various issues involved. In one of
the meetings of the Committee, it is learnt that CEA/PFC/Government
of Karnataka had proposed that a study be carried out to assess impact
of the power plant on the environment by a reputed consultant.
However no decision in this regard has so far been taken. The
Committee desire that the Expert Committee expedite the process so
that clear picture in regard to the development of project emerges.
The Committee feel that engaging a consultant to carry out a study,
as proposed by CEA/PFC/Government of Karnataka should also be
considered by the Expert Committee. In case if it comes out that the
development of power project will have an adverse effect on the
environment, an alternative site be finalised at the earliest. Similarly
in case of Maharashtra where the local people have raised certain
environmental issues relating to the growing of Alphanso Mangoes,

58


the Committee desire that the consultant appointed for carrying out
environment studies should submit its report at the earliest. Considering
the importance of these projects, the Committee strongly recommend
that these projects should not be unduly held up and finalised at the
earliest in the larger interest of the country.

The Committee also desire that before announcing any site for
UMPP, it should be ensured that there is a broad consensus amongst
the various stakeholders for a particular site. The cases of generation
of opposition after the announcement of sites as that of Tadri in
Karnataka and Girye in Maharashtra should not be allowed to happen.
The Committee desire that all the local issues should be decided in
advance by State Governments, before offering a site to set up UMPP.

Reply of the Government

I. As brought out in the Standing Committee’s report itself a
Committee had been constituted by the State Government to go
into various issues in connection with the proposed site at Tadri.
The report of the Committee is still awaited. Meanwhile Govt. of
Karnataka vide its communication dated 6th September, 2007 had
requested Govt. of India to establish two UMPPs in the State.
While it had been suggested to retain the site of Tadri, a second
site at Ghataprabha in Belgaum District had also been suggested.
Ministry of Power in its communication dated 23.10.2007 had
made it clear that it would be difficult to go head with the
establishment of a UMPP at Tadri if the issue related to local
agitation is not resolved. Clearance for the second site of
Ghataprabha has also been sought to process the case further.
Govt. of Karnataka has yet to respond on these issues.

Il. Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for taking steps to
resolve the issues as far as the UMPP in Maharashtra is
concerned, considering the local agitation the development at
Girye has not been taken up.

However, subsequently the State Government suggested an
alternative site near Dighe port in Raigarh District. This site was visited
by CEA/PFC team in June 2007 alongwith State Government officials.
But the site was found to have constraints in regard to CRZ
Regulations. Recently one more site has been suggested by the State
Government near Kasarde village in Sindhudurg District. This site has
also been visited by CEA/PFC team alongwith State Government
officials. The Govt. of Maharashtra has been requested by CEA to
furnish the details of land and the water availability data with regard

59


to the site. Some details have since been furnished but additional
details are awaited. Efforts are being made to obtain these details as
early as possible.

Current Status
Ministry of Power has been taking up the issue regarding urgent
finalization of sites with the concerned States. Response as given against
‘current status’ under para-I of recommendation 2.10.20 may also please
be seen.

[Ministry of Power O.M.No.12/15/2006-P&P,
dated 11.2.2008 & 20.08.2008]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)

60


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED

-NIL-
New DétHi; GURUDAS KAMAT,
कान हा OO 27, 2009 Chairman,

Magha 7, 1930 (Saka Standing Committee on Energy.

61


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON
27TH JANUARY, 2009 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1150 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Jesudasu Seelam — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Smt. Susmita Bauri

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

awe on

Rajya Sabha

Dr. Bimal Jalan
Shri Prakash Javadekar
Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha
10. Shri Shivpratap Singh
ll. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary-II

2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Jesudasu Seclam, a Member of the Committee, under Rule 258(3)
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, to
act as Chairman for the sitting. The acting Chairman welcomed the

62


Members of the Committee to the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration/adoption the following draft Reports and adopted
the same without any amendment/modifications:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Draft Report on the subject “Role of CERC and SERCs in
the Protection of Interests of Consumers”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on recommendations contained
in the 22nd Report of the Committee on the subject “Ultra
Mega Power Projects”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 25th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-09.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2008-09.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

ON ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:

Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 8, 12, and 14

Total

Percentage

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to persue in

view of the Government's replies:
SL. Nos. 2, 5, 6, 11 and 15

Total
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 6, 11 and 15

Total
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the final replies of the Government
are still awaited:

SI. No. Nil

Total

Percentage

15

33.3%

33.3%

33.3%

Nil


—_——__ न

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www. parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”

SS — ७७ ३७ >>2>>2322333333333333