STANDING COMMITTEE

1 7 ON ENERGY
(2006-2007)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants 2006-07]

SEVENTEENTH REPORT

सयमेब जयत

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)


SEVENTEENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2006-2007)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2006-07]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2006

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 165

Price : Rs. 36.00

© 2006 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-2007) .....

INTRODUCTION

Cuapter I

Cuapter II

Cuarter IIT

CHapter IV

Carter V

IL.

CONTENTS

Report.......

Recommendations /Observations that have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration...

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ....

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 23.11.2006 ....

Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 13th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) ....

PacE

(iii)

(v)

12

19

20

26

27

(i)


a 7 FF

10.
i.
12.
13.
14.
15:
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2006-07)

Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

(ii)


(iv)

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
Bl.

Rajya Sabha

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudasu Seelam

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Keshubhai S. Patel

Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
Shri Veer Pal Singh. Yadav

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Dr. Bimal Jalan

Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary
4, Smt. Neena Juneja — Senior Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventeenth Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their 13th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

2, The Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
was presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd May, 2006 and was laid in
Rajya Sabha on the same day, Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
21st September, 2006.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 23.11.2006.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee
is given at Appendix-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Dei; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 24, 2006 Chairman,
Agrahayana 3, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


न मम hale -
Af. 2m हा
te ee oe
ome . में॥ जहीं.. नम
जहा. ७४. ५ ५ , a Se
7 a “a= .4@
fm Ee का ee (2
pe ee ee हा
7 oe Ese -: =

7
oe 7
- =
7 i om, 7 a ==
7. =o = a



CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources.

2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
17 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry furnished the Action
Taken Replies to the recommendation contained therein on 21st
September 2006.

3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SLNo. 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14 Total : 9
Chapter—II

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to persue in view of the Government’s replies:

SLNo. Nil Total : 0
Chapter—III

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

SLNos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 15, 16 and 17 Total : 8
Chapter—IV

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

SL.Nos. Nil Total: 0

Chapter—V


4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time
along with reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee note that the name of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources has been changed to Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy vide Ministry’s circular dated 20.10.2006.
Accordingly, at all places in the Report ie. in the recommendations
of the Committee as well as the replies of the Government the name
of the Ministry has been changed. The Committee will now deal
with action taken by the Government on some of their
recommendations.

Non-Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (SI. Nos. 2 & 3, Para Nos. 1.14 & 1.15)

6. The Committee found that there was a shortfall in utilisation of
funds was seen in almost all the major programmes of the Ministry
ie. Village Electrification, Energy Recovery from urban and Industrial
Waste and Solar Energy, etc. The Committee also noted that there was
another unhealthy tread of utilising a major portion of Budgetary outlay
during the last two quarters of the financial year by the Ministry. The
Ministry had given various reasons for non-utilisation of funds which
did not justify the slow pace and under utilisation of funds by the
Ministry. One of the factors responsible therefor, as stated by the
Ministry, was that the States were not sending their utilisation
certificates in time and due to that also there appeared to be uneven
utilisation of funds. Further the Ministry added that it was difficult to
monitor the projects executed in the States. To overcome these problems
the Ministry had stated that for implementation of Renewable Energy
Programmes at the district level, District Advisory Committees had
been set up in districts. These Committees were headed by the District
collector with Project Director, DRDA as Member Secretary and also
comprised of the district level functionaries of Departments of industry,
power, forest, renewable energy, agriculture and horticulture, NIC and
NGOs, social workers, doctors, lawyers, engineers, scientists, Rotarians,
two representatives of the concerned MPs, etc. Senior scientists of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy had been assigned various
States/UTs for maintaining close liaison for purpose of review,
monitoring, implementation and coordination of programmes/ projects

2


of the Ministry. The Committee noted that the reasons advanced by
the Ministry for non-utilisation were administrative in nature, for which,
corrective action should have been taken in advance.

7. The Committee further noted the steps being taken by the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy to ensure proper utilisation
of funds, and desired to be apprised of the results of these measures
during the first six months of the current financial year and periodically
thereafter. The Committee recommended that the States which did not
submit utilisation certificates should be subjected to certain penalties
like stoppage of release of funds, etc. Under utilisation and uneven
utilisation of funds allocated to a Ministry/Department was a serious
matter and all efforts should be made in this regard to tackle this
problem. The main reasons for curtailing funds at RE stage by the
Ministry of Finance is the inability of the Ministry to spend the amount
allocated during the first two quarters of the year. The Committee
trusted that the Ministry would take all corrective steps in this regard
to avoid such situation in the current financial year, ie., 2006-07.

8. To this the Ministry has replied:

“While it is reiterated that implementation of this Ministry’s
programmes/schemes continues to remain heavily dependent upon
State agencies, the recommendation has been noted.”

9. As regards recommendation of the Committee that the Ministry
should take all corrective steps in regard to avoid such situation in
the current financial year, the Ministry has replied “The
recommendation has been noted”.

10. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry has
not provided any details of the steps taken by them to implement
the Committee’s recommendations. It appears that the Ministry has
not analysed the results of the setting up of District Advisory
Committee and assigning of various States and Union Territories to
senior scientists of the Ministry for monitoring programme
implementation and expenditure in the States. The Ministry has also
not categorically stated as to whether any steps for effective
monitoring of the expenditure made by the States under major
programmes of the Ministry and also steps like stoppage of funds
etc. to the non-performing States have been initiated. The Committee
once again reiterate that the Ministry should put in place some
innovative monitoring mechanisms to ensure that the funds allocated
to the States are utilized timely and properly. The Committee are
also of the view that the better performing States under various

3


programmes of the Ministry should be given incentives. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry should adopt some corrective
steps so that funds allocated to the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy are used extensively in the first two quarters of the financial
year so that Finance Ministry do not have to curtail its funds
due to non-utilisation thereof. The Committee trust that the
Ministry would be able to make judicious use of their funds during
2006-07.

Solar Energy Programme
Recommendation (SI.No. 5 & 6, Para No. 2.20 & 2.21)

11, The Committee noted that as the estimated cost of generation
of grid interactive SPV power was around Rs. 20 kwh and hence the
programme was discontinued. Due to high cost, the utilities in the
States have not shown much interest in the grid interactive solar power
projects. The Ministry had further informed that the removal of subsidy
on grid interactive solar photovoltaic power would not have any
adverse effect on the over all progress of the solar photovoltaic
programme of the country as the main objective of such programmes
was technology awareness. The Ministry, however, continued to provide
support for development of other solar systems/devices. The Committee
was however very unhappy to note poor performance in regard to
this programme in the North-Eastern States. The targets for distribution
of solar lanterns and solar street lights could not be achieved in the
financial year 2005-06. The Committee emphasized as the Solar Energy
Programme of the Ministry was an ambitious programme and as such
it should be continued in right earnest.

12. The Committee further noted that basic user friendly projects
of the Ministry viz. solar traffic lights, street lighting, solar water
lighting programmes should be pursued vigorously as they helped in
saving grid connected electricity. The Committee also desired that
equipment like solar lanterns should be distributed in large numbers
in villages/hamlets not having any grid connectivity and such
important programmes of larger public interest should in no case be
allowed to be stalled for lack of co-ordination in the decision making
organs of the Government.

13. The Ministry in it’s reply has stated:

“The Commission for Additional Sources of Energy has
recommended that renewable electricity interventions should not


be made in electrified or to be electrified areas as the same would
tantamount to ‘double dipping’, i.e. providing benefit twice over
for the same service with consequent wastage of scarce national
resources. In this regard, the Commission also noted that there
was no necessity for enhancing comfort level of households through
provision of subsidized renewable back-up electricity systems/
devices in such areas. Alongside, the need to supplement electricity
supply in electrified or to be electrified areas through renewables
or otherwise has been felt by the Commission.”

14. The Ministry further replied:

“Tt may be mentioned that under the Rural Electrification Policy
of the Government notified on 23 August 2006, SPV home-lighting
systems would not qualify for recognizing a village as having been
electrified since the same would not be in a position to provide
for the minimum life line consumption of 1kWh/household /day.
Hence, SPV lighting in remote villages can be considered only as
an interim solution.”

15. The Committee were of the view that the solar energy
programme of the Ministry was an ambitious programme and should
be continued in right earnest. The Committee had also specifically
pointed out that there was poor performance under this programme
in the North Eastern States and targets for distribution of solar
lanterns and streetlights could not be achieved. The Committee feel
that SPV lighting in remote villages can only be considered as an
interim solution though according to the Rural Electrification Policy
of the Government notified on 23rd August, 2006, ‘SPV home lighting
systems could not qualify for recognizing a village as being
electrified’. The Committee, however, feel that until the time
electricity reaches these remote villages, solar lanterns would provide
at least some relief to the population living in those areas where it
was not possible to provide grid interactive power, i.e, the areas
like North-east, Sunderbans etc. The Committee also reiterate that
projects on solar traffic lights, street lights and solar waster heaters
should be perused more vigorously and funds and loans may be
made available for these schemes easily as after initial capital
investment, subsequent cost of electricity generated thereby is almost
negligible. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
recommendations made by the Commission for Additional Sources
of Energy and the Government's reaction thereto.


Biomass Power Co-Generation
Recommendation (SI.No. 12, Para No. 2.38)

16. The Committee in their 11th Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the sixth Report on
Demands for Grants (2005-06) had desired that targets for Biomass/
co-generation should be enhanced in the 10th and 11th plan periods.
The Committee reiterated their earlier recommendation to this effect
as well. The Committee desired that ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for India’
should be finalised at the earliest and private sector should be
encouraged to make investment in this field. The Committee further
desired that the private players may also be granted some fiscal and
other benefits. The Committee further desired to be informed of the
recommendations made by the Committee set up to accelerated growth
of bagasse Cogeneration in the cooperative sector and Government's
reaction thereto.

17. The Ministry has replied:

“The matter regarding development of the bio-energy sector is
engaging attention of the Working Group on Non-Conventional
Energy Sources for the 11th Plan. Action Plans will be drawn once
the 11th Plan proposals of this Ministry are approved.”

18. The Committee have recommended in their 11th Report on
Action Taken on 6th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) and
again in their 16th Report on Action Taken on 8th Report on Biomass
Power Co-generation Programme—An Evaluation that the targets for
utilisation of biomass for energy production should be enhanced.
The Committee once again stress on the fact that if 10 per cent of
the power is to come from renewable sources during the 10th and
11th plan periods, we must make maximum use of biomass for
energy production. The Committee feel that for this purpose Bio
Resource Atlas of India should be prepared and put up on the
website of the Ministry at the earliest. The Committee would also
like to be informed of the points of action proposed to be taken in
the biomass field by the working group on Non-Conventional Energy
Sources for the 11th Plan, their suggestions and recommendations in
the formulation of 11th Plan proposals of the Ministry. The same
should be made available to the Committee at the earliest.

Bio-Fuels
Recommendation (SI.No. 13 & 14, Para No. 2.46 & 2.47)

19. The Committee noted that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy was involved in the Project on Bio-fuels in co-ordination with

6


various other Ministries. The role of the Ministry was mainly envisaged
in developing technologies for conversion of vegetable oils to bio-fuels
and develop specifically designed bio-diesel engines. The Committee
also noted that the Ministry had taken up a scheme on Bio-fuel Pilot
Demonstration Project initially in one village each in Karnataka, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand with the objective of
providing energy for lighting, agricultural operation and other
community, requirements such as drinking water. The Nodal Ministry
for the Bio-diesel project is the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee felt that all the Ministries should act in proper coordination
with unity of purpose to fulfil the objective of development of
Bio-fuels. The Committee were happy to note that some State
Governments are operating their vehicles on Bio-diesels and oil
companies had agreed to purchase bio-diesel at Rs. 25 per litre. It had
also been stated to be the most preferred alterative to petrol and diesel
particularly in the transport sector.

20. The Committee further noted that the project on Bio-diesel
requires coordinated efforts of the various Ministries i.e. Rural
Development, Petroleum and Chemicals, Panchayati Raj, Environment
& Forests etc. It required a launching of a Mission with a special
focus on Jatropha caucas/other oil yielding plants to be planted on
large scale to produce Bio-diesel from non-edible oils. The Committee
recommended that the State Governments should be actively involved
in assessing the potential of growing non-edible oil seeds for producing
Bio-diesel. The Committee desired the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy should continue its R&D activities to develop technologies
which can run Bio-diesel in transport vehicles, for lighting, in pump-
sets, gensets to increase their efficiency. Accordingly they recommended
that all the funds required for the same may be made available to the
Ministry.

21. In response to the recommendation, the Ministry has replied:

“The subject of Bio-fuels has been allocated to various Ministries/
Departments of the Government as per Cabinet Secretariat
Notification No. 1/22/1/2006-Cab dated 12 July 2006. The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been allocated the following
subjects:

(i) National Policy on bio-fuels;

(ii) Research, development and demonstration on transport,
stationary and other application of bio-fuels;


(iti) Setting up of a National Bio-fuels Development Board and
strengthening the existing institutional mechanism; and

(iv) Over coordination concerning bio-fuels.
Ministry /Department-wise remaining allocation is as under:
Ministry of Environment & Forests:
* Bio-fuel plantations in forests and wastelands;
* Environmental issues concerning bio-fuels.
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas:

¢ Blending and blending prescriptions for bio-fuels and
standards for such blending;

¢ Marketing, distribution and retailing of bio-fuels and its
blended products.

Ministry of Rural Development:
¢ National Mission on bio-fuels;

¢ Bio-fuel plants production, propagation and commercial
plantation of bio-fuel plants.

Department of Science & Technology:

* R&D for development of indigenous technologies concerning
bio-fuel production, processing, standardization and
applications;

* R&D for utilization of by-products to develop value added
chemicals.

Department of Biotechnology:
¢ R&D programme on bio-diesel.”
22. The Ministry has further replied:

“While the mandate for launching a Mission on bio-fuels has been
allocated to the Ministry of Rural Development, this Ministry would
be focusing on design and development of bio-fuel systems for
transport, portable and stationary applications. Detailed Action Plan
will be drawn once 11th Plan proposals of this Ministry are
finalized.”


23. The Committee note that the Cabinet Secretariat vide
Notification No. 1/22/1/2006 dated 12th July, 2006, the subject of ‘bio-
fuels’ has been allocated to various Ministries/Departments of the
Government. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has been
allocated the subjects in relation to development of bio-fuels like
(i) National Policy on bio-fuels; (ii) Research, development and
demonstration on transport, stationary and other application of bio-
fuels; (iii) Setting up of a National Bio-fuels Development Board
and strengthening the existing institutional mechanism; and (iv) Over
coordination concerning bio-fuels. The Committee do not appreciate
vertical and horizonatal distribution of the subject bio-fuel. The
Committee, therefore, are of the considered opinion that the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy should take up this matter with the
Cabinet Secretariat for a relook so that the subject of ‘Bio-fuels’ is
entrusted to only one Ministry.

24. The Committee have been further informed that detailed
action plan on Bio-fuels would be drawn once 11th Plan proposals
of the Ministry were finalised. The Committee note that the Ministry
has been entrusted with the most important and a major task of
forming national Policy on Bio-fuels and coordination concerning
the same. This by itself is quite a comprehensive task apart from
the task of R&D demonstration projects on the transport, stationary
and other application of Bio-fuels. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Ministry should at the earliest from the National Policy on
Bio-fuels as entrusted to them and also take up work on Design
and Development of bio-fuels systems for transport, portable and
stationary applications so that the mission on bio-diesels can be
accomplished with coordinated efforts from other Ministries.

Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial Waste
Recommendation (SI.No. 15, Para No. 2.53)

25. The Committee once again reiterated their earlier
recommendation made in 8th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject ‘Biomass Power/Cogeneration-An Evaluation’ that the Ministry
should prepare a time bound programme in consultation with State
Governments, major Municipal Bodies, Government Institutions and
Private developers to know the quantity and quality of urban wastes
in all the major cities. The Committee noted that concerted efforts
were being made by the Ministry to formulate projects in 16 cities for
energy recovery from MSW and these projects could only be supported
once stay on subsidy for projects is vacated by Apex Court. Report of

9


Expert Committee constituted in this regard on the directive of Supreme
Court had already been submitted to the Court. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry should pursue the case earnestly in
order to get the stay vacated. The Committee further recommended
that the feasibility to set up Waste to Energy plants in all the major
metropolitan cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, etc. be
worked out to make available grid interactive power available from
the renewable sources like waste products, etc.—as recommended in
their 11th Report on Action Taken on the sixth report on Demands for
Grants (2005-06).

26. The Ministry has replied:
“The recommendation has been noted.”

27. The Committee note that despite their recommendations in
their earlier reports (11th, 13th and 16th Report) on waste to energy
projects of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, the Ministry
has merely stated that it has ‘noted the recommendation of the
Committee’. The Committee once again desire that action should be
initiated towards the setting up of waste to energy plants in all
major metropolitan cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.
The Committee further stress that utilisation of urban waste will
not only provide an alternate source of energy but also help in
proper disposal of waste material in the cities-where dumping of
wastes has become a major problem as a health hazard. The
Committee desire that action on the same may be initiated forthwith
and they may be apprised of the same at the earliest.

Wind Energy
Recommendation (SI.No. 16 & 17, Para No. 2.65 & 2.66)

28. The Committee were surprised to note that Rs. 3 crore (BE)
earmarked for R&D in Wind Energy Sector in 2005-06 with the broad
aim of indigenising design and manufacture of Wind turbine by 2012,
had to be scaled down at RE stage for C-WET as sufficient R&D
proposals could not be generated and due to non-setting up of Wind
demonstration projects. The Committee were unable to accept these as
valid reasons to scale down the allocations. It showed slackness on
the part of the Ministry to handle the Wind Power projects. The
Ministry was asked to make all out efforts so that funds allotted under
BE are optimally utilized. The Committee further found to their utter
surprise that C-WET did not have any rule in designing indigenous
equipment for harnessing wind energy and its role was limited to

10


—s

—

wind resource assessment, testing and certification, training and
commercial services.

29. The Committee were also of the strong view that a specific
agency needed to be appointed/set up to look into R&D aspects of
indigenization of wind turbines and all related equipment required for
harnessing wind energy, for which, the funds had already been
allocated, as equipment being used presently for the purpose was
imported. In line with this, the Committee further desired that
indigenisation should be taken up by the Ministry in a fast track
mode.

30. To this, the Ministry replied:

“There is an inherent conflict of interest in the two roles of testing
& certification, and research & development since manufacturers
would not like to submit detailed design information and drawings
to a Testing & Certification agency, which is also engaged in R&D.
Accordingly, the Sub-Group on Research, Design & Development
for the 11th plan is addressing the issue.”

31. The Ministry has further stated:

“The Sub-Group on Research, Design & Development for the
1ith Plan of this Ministry is addressing the issue of indigenous
design, development and manufacture of MW-scale wind turbines
for low wind regimes.”

32. The Committee were of the view that a strong agency was
required to be set up to look into R&D aspects of indigenisation of
wind turbines and all related equipment required for harnessing
wind energy for which allocation had already been made. Although
the Ministry have stated that the sub-group on Research, Design
and Development for the 11th Plan is addressing the issue of
indigenous design, development and manufacture of MW-scale wind
turbines for low wind regimes, the Committee, once again reiterate
that steps for indigenising the equipment required for harnessing
wind energy need to be taken up in a fast track mode and special
attention must be paid to the R&D aspects of indigenisation of wind
turbines which are being imported at present making it more
expensive to set up the wind power projects.


CHAPTER IT

RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (SI.No. 1, Para no. 2.18)

The Committee are concerned to note that during 2004-05, the
utilisation of fund was Rs. 218.06 crore against Rs. 373.10 crore (RE)
and in 2005-06 upto 28.02.2006, the utilisation of fund was Rs. 213.79
crore against RE Rs. 316.74 crore and Rs. 603.64 crore has been allocated
for 2006-07. The Committee observe that expenditure-by the Ministry
in the First quarter, Second, Third and Fourth quarter upto 28.02.2006
was Rs. 9.55 crore, Rs. 35.31 crore, Rs. 91.21 crore and Rs. 77.72 crore
respectively during 2005-06. Due to uneven quarterly expenditure, the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission has been reducing the Gross
Budgetary support since 2002-03.

Reply of the Government

The recommendation has been noted. An amount of Rs. 38.50 crore
has already been utilized during the first quarter of 2006-07 i.e., April
to June 2006.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated: 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 2.9)

The Committee note that hydrogen as a form of energy has the
potential to provide a clean, convenient and affordable fuel for meeting
future needs. It is envisaged by the Ministry that hydrogen will be
available in the future for stationary, transport, portable and commercial
applications. However, the transition to a hydrogen economy requires
solutions to many challenges—scientific, technological and economic.
The Committee note that Rs. 20 crore has been earmarked for new
R&D activities in this field, out of a total of Rs. 41 crore kept aside
for research and development in different sectors for the Ministry as
a whole. The Committee are of the view that hydrogen is a future
fuel of the world and more funds for R&D in the field are required
to be earmarked. The Committee note that the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy desire to increase the allocation to R&D and propose
to go to the Ministry of Finance again for the same. The Committee,

12


therefore, recommend that the matter of more funds for R&D should
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning by the Ministry
at the earliest so that it could get the enhanced funds at RE stage. The
Committee further desire that all out efforts should be made to carry
out research in this field as this fuel have a wide range of applications
for power generation and vehicular transport as also in other fields.
The Committee hope that with the endorsement of National Hydrogen
Energy Road Map document by the Hydrogen Energy Board,
advancements in this field shall take place more rapidly. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the developments in this field from time-
to-time.

Reply of the Government

The Planning Commission has constituted a Working Group for
the formulation of 11th Plan proposals for the Non-Conventional Energy
Sector under which four Sub-Groups have been constituted, one of
which relates to Research, Design and Development (RDD) in New
and Renewable Energy, chaired by Dr. A. Ramachandran, former
Secretary, DST and co-chaired by Shri A.V. Singh, former Defence
Secretary and former Secretary, MNES. This Sub-Group is covering the
areas recommended by the Committee. Once the 11th Plan proposals
of this Ministry are approved, a detailed Action Plan for RDD in New
and Renewable Energy, including Hydrogen Energy will be drawn up.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated: 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 2.22)

The Committee find that a budgetary provision of only Rs. 11 crore
for 2006-07 for the R&D and related activities at solar energy centre.
To a specific query whether allocated fund is adequate to meet the
requirement of the projects, no reply has been furnished in this regard.
The Committee feel expenditure on R&D activities for such an
important projects should be more. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Ministry should take steps to enhance the fund at RE stage, if
need be. The Committee further note that the Government is supporting
R&D in the solar photovoltaic (PV) technology, the aim of which is to
reduce the cost of solar cells, modules and systems, support industry
to indigenously produce critical materials like silicon etc. As stated by
the Ministry continued R&D efforts in the above areas are expected to
bring down the cost of generation of solar energy and make it
competitive in the next 15-20 years.

13


Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated: 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 2.23)

The Committee note with great concern that the solar programme
has already been delayed and the Ministry’s has been unable to bring
down the cost of solar photovoltaic materials which was candidly
admitted by the Secretary. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Ministry should make vigorous R&D efforts to bring down the cost of
silicon and develop other materials for use in the solar programme.
The Committee would like the Ministry to lay special emphasis on
photovoltaic research programmes and the Committee be apprised of
the same.

Reply of the Government

As stated in reply to recommendation at serial No. 4, the Sub-
Group on Research, Design & Development in New and Renewable
Energy is addressing issues relating to making SPV systems/devices
more affordable and grid-interactive SPV power generation more cost-
competitive. However, it might be stated that there is also an ongoing
global effort in this regard and there are no clear signals as to the
time-frame in which solar technologies are likely to become
commercially viable on a large scale.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated: 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (51.90. 9, Para No. 2.35)

The Committee note that of the total theoretically feasible potential
of 16,000 MW, 26% i.e. 359 MW of Bio-mass grid interactive power
and 66 MW Bio-mass gasification has already been achieved. Around
14.5% of the total estimated potential of 3500 MW of Bagasse co-
generation has been harnessed through 508 MW of Bagasse co-
generation in sugar mills. Projects aggregating 858 MW are already
under implementation. As stated by the Ministry, it may not be feasible
to harness, the entire theoretical potential on account of problems
associated with collection and transportation of agro-residues to the
centralized power plant locations. The Committee were informed by
the Ministry the Bagasse based co-generation are facing certain
problems like inability of the co-generative sugar mills to generate
bankable projects and many old sugar mills have small crushing

14


capacities that are lower than the minimum economic capacity specified
by the Government.

Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 2.36)

The Committee find that the Bagasse based co-generation units
are also facing some difficulties in getting subsidy/clearances for setting
up of co-generation units in the sugar mills and many of the sugar
producing factories have put up applications for getting clearances.
The Committee have been informed that many agencies are involved
in giving clearances tot he sugar producing factories for setting up
Bagasse based co-generation. The State Regulatory Commissions are
involved in fixing tariff and the State Electricity Boards in buying of
electricity from sugar mills. The Committee recommend that the
clearance procedures for the co-generation projects should be simplified
and the State Electricity Boards should be persuaded to enter into
long term power purchase agreements with the sugar mills to ensure
the success of Biomass Cogeneration projects.

Reply of the Government

As would be appreciated, clearances for setting up cogeneration
projects are not required from the Union Government. However, State
Governments have been moved to simplify procedures. Regarding tariff
issues, it would be appreciated that since they fall in a quasi-judicial
domain with the setting up of Regulatory Commissions in States, this
Ministry has no direct role in the matter.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.37)

The Committee note that the financial and physical targets under
10th Plan for Biomass Power/Cogeneration programme is Rs. 125 crore
and 700 MW respectively. Achievement of targets as on 31.12.2005 are
Rs. 35.97 crore and 486.23 MW. The Committee are surprised that the
Ministry has utilized about 30% of the allocated fund even after the
elapse of 4 years of 10th Plan, how it will be able to fully utilize the
fund within 10th Plan when only one year is left. Although the

15



Secretary was confident that the Ministry will achieve the targets, yet
the Committee in the absence of any concrete proposal in this regard
find it difficult to subscribe to his optimism. Needless to mention that
the matter is required to be taken up more seriously than done hiterto.

Reply of the Government

Against a target of 700 MW for biomass combustion/bagasse
cogeneration for the 10th Plan, the achievement during the first four
years of the Plan i.e. up to 31.3.2006 is 530 MW. Further, projects with
an installed capacity of about 1000 MW are under various stages of
implementation in different States. Consequently, the 10th Plan target
of 700 MW is likely to be achieved in full. As regards utilization of
funds, expenditure is likely to be around Rs. 80 crore on this
programme during the 10th Plan.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Recommendation (351 No. 13, Para No. 2.46)

The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy is involved in the Project on Bio-fuels in co-ordination with
various other Ministries. The role of the Ministry is mainly envisaged
in developing technologies for conversion of vegetable oils to bio-fuels
and develop specifically designed bio-diesel engines. The Committee
also note that the ministry had taken up a scheme on Bio-fuel Pilot
Demonstration Project initially in one village each in Karnataka, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand with the objective of
providing energy for lighting, agricultural operation and other
community requirements such as drinking water. The Nodal Ministry
for the Bio-diesel project is the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee feel that all the Ministries should act in proper coordination
with unity of purpose to fulfil the objective of development of Biofuels.
The Committee are happy to note that some State Governments are
operating their vehicles on Bio-diesels and oil companies have agreed
to purchase bio-diesel at Rs. 25 per litre. It has been stated to be the
most preferred alternative to petrol and diesel particularly in the
transport sector.

Reply of the Government

The subject of Bio-fuels has been allocated to various Ministries/
Departments of the Government as per Cabinet Secretariat Notification
No. 1/22/1/2006-Cab dated 12 July 2006. The Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy has been allocated the following subjects:

16


(i) National Policy on bio-fuels;

(ii) Research, development and demonstration on transport,
stationary and other application of bio-fuels;

(iii) Setting up of a National Bio-fuels Development Board and
strengthening the existing institutional mechanism; and

(iv) Over coordination concerning bio-fuels.
Ministry /Department-wise remaining allocation is as under:
Ministry of Environment & Forests:
¢ Bio-fuel plantations in forests and wastelands;
¢ Environmental issues concerning bio-fuels.
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas

¢ Blending and blending prescriptions for bio-fuels and
standards for such blending;

° Marketing, distribution and retailing of bio-fuels and its
blended products.

Ministry of Rural Development:
e National Mission on Bio-fuels;

¢ Bio-fuel plants production, propagation and commercial
plantation of bio-fuel plants.

Department of Science & Technology:
¢ R&D for development of indigenous technologies concerning
bio-fuei production, processing, standardization and

applications;

¢ R&D for utilization of by-products to develop value added
chemicals.

Department of Biotechnology:
* R&D programme on bio-diesel.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see para Nos. 23 and 24 of Chapter I of the Report)

17


Recommendation (51. No. 14, Para No. 2.47)

The Committee further note that the project on Bio-diesel requires
coordinated efforts of the various Ministries i.e. Rural Development,
Petroleum and Chemicals, Panchayati Raj, Environment & Forests etc.
It requires a launching of a Mission with a special focus on Jatropha
caucas/other oil yielding plants to be planted on large scale to produce
Bio-diesel from non-edible oils. The Committee recommend that the
State Governments should be actively involved in assessing the
potential of growing non-edible oil seeds for producing Bio-diesel. The
Committee desire the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should
continue its R&D activities to develop technologies which can run Bio-
diesel in transport vehicles, for lighting, in pump sets, gensets to
increase their efficiency. Accordingly they recommend that all the funds
required for the same may be made available to the Ministry.

Reply of the Government

While the mandate for launching a Mission on Bio-fuels has been
allocated to the Ministry of Rural Development, this Ministry would
be focusing on design and development of bio-fuel systems for
transport, portable and stationary applications. Detailed Action Plan
will be drawn once 11th Plan proposals of this Ministry are finalized.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see para Nos. 23 and 24 of Chapter I of the Report)


CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE

COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

—Nil—

19


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY COMMITTEE

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 1.14)

A shortfall in utilisation of funds was seen in almost all the major
programmes of the Ministry i.e. Village Electrification, Energy Recovery
from Urban and Industrial Waste and Solar Energy, etc. The Committee
also noted that there was another unhealthy trend of utilising a major
portion of Budgetary outlay during the last two quarters of the financial
year by the Ministry. The Ministry had given various reasons for non-
utilisation of funds which did not justify the slow pace and under
utilisation of funds by the Ministry. One of the factors responsible
therefore, as stated by the Ministry, is that the States were not sending
their utilisation certificates in time and due to this also there appeared
to be uneven utilisation of funds. Further the Ministry added that it
was difficult to monitor the projects executed in the States. To overcome
these problems the Ministry had stated that for implementation of
Renewable Energy Programme at the district level, District Advisory
Committees had been set up in districts. These Committees are headed
by the District collector with Project Director, DRDA as Member
Secretary and also comprised of the district level functionaries of
Departments of industry, power, forest, renewable energy, agriculture
and horticulture, NIC and NGOs, social workers, doctors, lawyers,
engineers, scientists, Rotarians, two representatives of the concerned
MPs, etc. Senior scientists of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy have been assigned various States/UTs for maintaining close
liaison for purpose of review, monitoring, implementation and
coordination of programmes/projects of the Ministry. The Committee
note that the reasons advanced by the Ministry for non-utilisation
were administrative in nature, for which, corrective action should have
been taken in advance.

Reply of the Government

While it is reiterated that implementation of this Ministry’s
programmes/schemes continues to remain heavily dependent upon
State agencies, the recommendation has been noted.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
20


Comments of the Committee
(Please see para Nos. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 1.15)

The Committee note the steps being taken by the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy to ensure proper utilisation of funds, the
Committee would still like to be apprised of the results of these
measures during the first six months of the current financial year and
periodically thereafter. The Committee recommended that the States
which do not submit utilisation certificates should be subjected to
certain penalties like stoppage of release of funds, etc. Under utilisation
and uneven utilisation of funds allocated to a Ministry /Department is
a serious matter and all efforts should be made in this regard to
tackle this problem. The main reasons for curtailing funds at RE stage
by the Ministry of Finance is the inability of the Ministry to spend the
amount allocated during the first two quarters of the year. The
Committee trust that the Ministry would take all corrective steps in
this regard to avoid such situation in the current financial year, ie.,
2006-07.

Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.20)

The Committee note that as the estimated cost of generation of
grid interactive SPV power is around Rs. 20 kwh and hence the
programme has been discontinued. Due to high cost, the utilities in the
States have not shown much interest in the grid interactive solar power
projects. The Ministry had further informed that the removal of subsidy
on grid interactive solar photovoltaic power will not have any adverse
effect on the over all progress of the solar photovoltaic programme of
the country as the main objective of such programmes was technology
awareness. The Ministry, however, continued to provide support for
development of other solar systems/devices. The Committee is however
very unhappy to note poor performance in the North-Eastern States.

21


The targets for distribution of solar lanterns and solar street lights
could not be achieved in the financial year 2005-06. The Committee
recommend that the Solar Energy Programme of the Ministry is an
ambitious programme and it should be continued in right earnest.

Reply of the Government

The Commission for Additional sources of Energy has
recommended that renewable electricity interventions should not be
made in electrified or to be electrified areas as the same would
tantamount to ‘double dipping’, 1.०. providing benefit twice over for
the same service with consequent wastage of scarce national resources.
In this regard, the Commission also noted that there was no necessity
for enhancing comfort level of households through provision of
subsidized renewable back-up electricity systems/devices in such areas.
Alongside, the need to supplement electricity supply in electrified or
to be electrified areas through renewables or otherwise has been felt
by the Commission.

It may be mentioned that under the Rural Electrification Policy of
the Government notified on 23 August 2006, SPV home-lighting systems
would not qualify for recognizing a village as having been electrified
since the same would not be in a position to provide for the minimum
life line consumption of 1kWh/household/day. Hence, SPV lighting in
remote villages can be considered only as an interim solution.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 6, Para No. 2.21)

The Committee note that basic user friendly projects of the Ministry
viz. solar traffic lights, street lighting, solar water lighting programmes
should be pursued vigorously as they helped in saving grid connected
electricity. The Committee also desired that equipment like solar
lanterns should be distributed in large numbers in villages/hamlets
not having any grid connectivity and such important programmes of
larger public interest should in no case be allowed to be stalled for
lack of co-ordination in the decision making organs of the Government.

Reply of the Government
Same as given in reply to Recommendation No. 5.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
22


Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.38)

The Committee in their 11th Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the sixth Report on
Demands for Grants (2005-06) had desired that targets for Biomass/
co-generation should be enhanced in the 10th and 11th plan periods.
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation to this effect as
well. The Committee desired that ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for India’
should be finalised at the earliest and private sector should be
encouraged to make investment in this field. They may also be granted
some fiscal and other benefits. The Committee may also be informed
of the recommendations made by the Committee set up to accelerate
growth of bagasse Cogeneration in the cooperative sector and
Government's reaction thereto.

Reply of the Government

The matter regarding development of the bio-energy sector is
engaging attention of the Working Group on Non-Conventional Energy
Sources for the 11th Plan. Action Plans will be drawn once the 11th
Plan proposals of this Ministry are approved.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.53)

The Committee once again reiterate their earlier recommendation
made in 8th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Biomass
Power/Cogeneration-An Evaluation’ that the Ministry should prepare
a time bound programme in consultation with State Governments,
major Municipal Bodies, Government Institutions and Private
developers to know the quantity and quality of urban wastes in all
the major cities. The Committee note that concerted efforts are being
made by the Ministry to formulate projects in 16 cities for energy
recovery from MSW and these projects can only be supported once
stay on subsidy for projects is vacated by Apex Court. Report of Expert
Committee constituted in this regard on the directive of Supreme Cou rt

23


has already been submitted to the Court. The Committee recommended
that the Ministry should pursue the case earnestly in order to get the
stay vacated. The Committee further recommended that the feasibility
to set up Waste to Energy plants in all the major metropolitan cities
like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, etc. be worked out to make
available grid interactive power available from the renewable sources
like waste products, etc. as recommended in their 11th Report on Action
Taken on the sixth report on Demands for Grants (2005-06).

Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 27 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 2.65)

The Committee are surprised to note that Rs. 3 crore (BE)
earmarked for R&D in Wind Energy Sector in 2005-06 with the broad
aim of indigenising design and manufacture of Wind turbine by 2012,
had to be scaled down at RE stage for C-Wet as sufficient R&D
proposals could not be generated and due to non-setting up of Wind
demonstration projects. The Committee is unable to accept these as
valid reasons to scale down the allocations. It shows slackness on the
part of the Ministry to handle the Wind Power projects. The Ministry
should make all out efforts so that funds allotted under BE are
optimally utilized. The Committee further find to their utter surprise
that C-WET does not have any rule in designing indigenous equipment
for harnessing wind energy and its role is limited to wind resource
assessment, testing and certification, training and commercial services.

Reply of the Government

There is an inherent conflict of interest in the two roles of testing
& certification, and research & development since manufacturers would
not like to submit detailed design information and drawings to a
Testing & Certification agency, which is also engaged in R&D.
Accordingly, the Sub-Group on Research, Design & Development for
the 11th plan is addressing the issue.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see para No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report)
24


Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 2.66)

The Committee are of the strong view that a specific agency
needs to be appointed/set up to look into R&D aspects of
indigenization of wind turbines and all related equipment required for
harnessing wind energy, for which, the funds had already been
allocated, as equipment being used presently for the purpose are
imported. In line with this, the Committee further desired that
indigenisation should be taken up by the Ministry in a fast track
mode.

Reply of the Government
The Sub-Group on Research, Design & Development for the 11th
Plan of this Ministry is addressing the issue of indigenous design,
development and manufacture of MW-scale wind turbines for low wind
regimes.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/3/2006-P&C Dated : 21/09/2006]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report)

25


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

—Nil—
New Deut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 24, 2006 Chairman,
Agrahayana 3, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

26


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY HELD ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM NO. 62, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Prof. Chander Kumar

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

7. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Rajya Sabha

on

aoe

9. Shri Bimal Jalan

10. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
11. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

13. Shri Motilal Vora

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar a= Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
Draft Seventeenth Report on Action Taken on the ~scommendations
contained in the 13th report of the Standing Commit. 2 on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Reiewable Energy
for the year 2006-07.
2. The Committee then adopted the draft Reoort with some
modifications as suggested by the Members of the ( smmittee.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairma. to finalise the
Report and to present/lay the same to both the Hou: s of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

27


28

APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON

(0)
(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)
Total number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have

been accepted by the Government:

Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 & 14 Total : 9
Percentage 53%

Recommendations/Observations which the

Committee do not desire to pursue in view

of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. Nil Total : 0
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of

which the replies of the Government have

not been accepted by the Committee and

which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 15, 16 & 17 Total : 8
Percentage 47%

Recommendations/Observations in respect of

which the final replies of the Government

are still awaited:

Sl. No. Nil Total 0
Percentage