STANDING COMMITTEE

| ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Implementation of Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP)’]

FIFTEENTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2006 /Sravana, 1928 (Saka)


FIFTEENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth. Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Implementation of Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP)']

Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.8.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.8.2006

TARA जयन

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 160

Price : Rs. 50.00

© 2006 By Lox Sabra SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

PAGE
ComPositiON OF THE CommiTTee 2005-2006 .... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...... il
Cuarter IT Recommendations /Observations which have been
accepted by the Government 13
Cuarter Il. | Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies 20
Carter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration .... 33
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ... 41
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 31.7.2006 43
Il. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 9th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) .. 45

(i)



> 5

Ke ००5 = = Sail = 7
- ome = शी _ छ हुआ
7 7 en =
जी ee re om ply
7 +n eee aT 7
"ir. a a ee
rie

ol EF a =

= Pr) La ant - 7
7 el ae sire JE
ee वे... a

7 es ei a को हॉमी। विज व वा एन
ः : ris : 7a =
७७७४७ डे cede“ ae anal -_=
“अमन अर आम aro bente ः
बम nn

a

tb wt

हि व peak = a eee
= CE 2 ee | a. eae =

7 जा बाग. ate ace " ot

SF eS ges ete” ol, i =e i
Ane ie ee 2 = छा

7 a = -c Seto es ome
: ca)

- 7 i) =
पु मन ae
Z : - =

a
ca)
- bs -
a
zz =


10.
i.
12.
13.
14.
15,

16.

17,
18.
9;
20.
Pa

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary

Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Dr. Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

Shri Khiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam.

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkataswamy

Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

“Expired on 14th April, 2006.

(iii)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
**23. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
24, Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
26. Shri Bimal Jalan
27. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar
30. Shri Motilal Vora

31. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
SECRETARIAT

. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
. Shri Shiv Kumar Under Secretary
Committee Officer

. Shri Manoj Pahuja — Executive Assistant

५ Smt. Juby Amar

af ON ep

“Ceased to be Member of the Committee wef. 2nd April, 2006, consequent upon his
retirement from Rajya Sabha.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
9th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject
“Implementation of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (APDRP)” of the Ministry of Power.

2. The Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 25th August 2005. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 219 November 2005.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 31.7.2006.

4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New छा; GURUDAS KAMAT,
July 31, 2006 Chairman,
Sravana 9, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

v)



CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject
“Implementation of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (APDRP)” of the Ministry of Power.

2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.08.2005
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
13 Recommendations /Observations.

3. Action taken notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
51. Nos. 5, 7, 8, 9 and 12
Total : 05
Chapter-II

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

Sl. Nos. 6 and 10
Total : 02
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the

replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 11
Total : 05
Chapter-IV

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Sl. No. 13
Total : 01
Chapter-V


4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time
along with reasons for their non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations:

Slow progress of APDRP and role of key players
Recommendation (SI.No. 1, Para No. 2.31)

6. The Commitiee in their Ninth Report had observed that the
APDRP is an ambitious Programme aimed at strengthening and up-
gradation of the Power Sub-transmission and Distribution System in
States with basic objectives like reduction of AT&C losses, bringing
about commercial viability, reducing outages and interruption and
increase of consumer satisfaction. The Committee in their
recommendation desired that Ministry of Power should obtain
evaluation study reports for the States where there was a slow progress
of work and the States where very small number of projects were
being undertaken to know the reasons for poor response of such States.
The Committee also desired that after obtaining reports regarding
completion of project report, Ministry of Power should make necessary
efforts to attract more projects from States during the remaining period
of the Current Plan. The Committee strongly recommended that
Advisors-cum-Consultants should also be given a responsibility to
persuade and help the State Electricity Boards/Utilities in preparing
more and more schemes under this fully funded Programme of the
Central Government. The Committee further desired that Ministry of
Power should take initiatives at the highest level to enhance the
Estimates at the RE stage so that the programme might not suffer due
to paucity of funds.

7. The Ministry in its reply has stated:

“The Ministry of Power is closely monitoring the APDRP projects
and insisting the States to complete the projects in time. All State
Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities are required to submit monthly
progress report in respect of progress of execution of APDRP
projects, funds utilisation etc. In addition, the Steering Committee
under the chairmanship of Secretary (Power), Ministry of Power
and State level Distribution Reforms Committees, reviews the


progress of works under APDRP and proper utilisation of funds
released under APDRP from time to time. Secretary (Power) and
other senior officers of the Ministry of Power also reviews the
progress of the projects sanctioned during their visit to the States
and convening meetings with the States/SEBs/Utilities officers. In
the review meetings, the reasons for slow progress are identified
and States are requested to take remedial measures to speed up
implementation of APDRP projects. Regional Review meetings for
all the regions were held by Secretary (Power) in the recent past.

The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Standing
Committee for awarding more States to the evaluating agencies
for evaluation. The recommendation of the Committee that reasons
for slow progress of work in certain States and very small number
of projects being undertaken by such States shall be kept in view
while formulating the scope of work.

Need for ensuring effective implementation of APDRP during the
remaining part of the Tenth Plan to cover all the District
Headquarters by end of Tenth Plan so as to achieve the primary
objectives of APDRP has been emphasized. A model DPR is being
prepared drawing experience from the implementation of projects
already sanctioned under APDRP. National Thermal Power
Corporation (NTPC) and Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
(PGCIL) have been advised to prepare model DPR and persuade
the SEBs/Utilities to prepare DPR of the District Headquarters
which have not been covered so far.

The Ministry of Power has requested Ministry of Finance to
enhance the allocation under APDRP for the year 2005-06 so that
implementation of APDRP does not suffer for want of adequate
funds.”

8. The Committee note that the Ministry has not replied to the
recommendation of the Committee regarding obtaining more projects
under APDRP from the States from where small number of projects
were being executed and have not indicated reasons for the same.
The Committee would, therefore, like to reiterate their earlier
recommendation. APDRP is a very ambitious programme for the
up-gradation of Power sub-transmission and distribution system in
States and if implemented with sincerity and seriousness, it has all
the potential to transform the energy sector in the country. The
Committee would further like to see a well laid out plan of action
for the programme for the remainder of 10th Plan. Since the

3



allocation for the fiscal 2006-07 has actually been finalised, the
Committee would appreciate if they are apprised how for Ministry
of Power has succeeded in persuading the Ministry of Finance to
enhance allocation under APDRP for the year 2006-07 as also how
far these funds would suffice in achieving the targets earmarked
during the last fiscal of 10th Plan.

Delay in release of funds by States to Utilities
Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.32)

9. The Committee in their recommendation desired that the
Government should ask the Advisor-cum-Consultants (AcCs) to assist
the SEBs/Utilities with more interest by imparting them adequate
training and support for an early execution of projects and strongly
recommended that Government should develop a better mechanism
for an early release of funds to the SEBs/Utilities after approval of
Projects and availability of funds with State Governments. The
Government should take strict action against the States who do not
release the funds to utilities within one week of the said amount
being credited to the State Government account. As per APDRP
guidelines, the equivalent amount of APDRP funds with 10% penal
interest should be adjusted against the next instalment of Central Plan
Assistance to be released to that State Government. The Committee
also suggested that the Government should convince the States to
release APDRP funds so that the problem relating to diversion of
APDRP funds by the States may be avoided without any further delay.
The Committee felt that the Ministry should keep a strong vigil on
the various steps taken by the State Governments to improve their
distribution network, etc. to make APDRP a success.

10. In its reply the Ministry of Power responded:

“Role of AcCs: The AcCs are in constant touch with all the SEBs/
Utilities to help them at every stage of project i. right from helping
them in preparing DPRs to execution of the project. The
performance of AcCs vis-a-vis the progress of work in each State
is monitored in regular meetings. However, as per recommendation
of the Standing Committee, AcCs have been advised to play more
active role to avoid delay. As regards training of State Government
officials is concerned, the AcCs may not be in a position to impart
training. Training of State Government officials has been taken up
separately under Distribution Reforms, Upgrades and Management


(DRUM) and nearly 1800 personnel have already been trained.
There is a target of training about 25,000 personnel under DRUM.

Release of funds: The funds under APDRP are released based on
financial progress of implementation of the projects sanctioned, as
per scheme guidelines. Further funds are released to the State
Government based on the utilisation of funds both APDRP and
counter part by the SEBs/Utilities. As and when SEBs/Utilities
fulfil the above conditions, the recommendations of release of funds
are made to the Ministry of Finance for release of funds against
sanctioned projects. There is no delay in release of the funds by
the Ministry of Finance.

Monitoring: All State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities are required
to submit monthly progress report in respect of progress of
execution of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (APDRP) projects, funds utilisation etc. In addition,
the Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary
(Power), Ministry of Power and State level Distribution Reforms
Committees, reviews the progress of works under APDRP and
proper utilisation of funds released under APDRP from time to
time. Secretary (Power) and other senior officers of the Ministry of
Power also review the progress of the projects sanctioned during
their visit to the States and convene meetings with the States/
SEBs/Utilities officers. In the review meetings, the reasons for slow
progress are identified and States are requested to take remedial
measures to speed up implementation of APDRP projects. Regional
Review Meetings for all the regions were held by Secretary (Power)
in the recent past. Moreover, further funds under APDRP are
released based on financial progress of implementation of the
projects sanctioned, as per scheme guidelines. Further funds are
released to the State Governments based on the utilisation of funds
both APDRP and counter part by the State Governments/SEBs/
Utilities. The implementation of APDRP schemes is also being
monitored by Advisor-cum-Consultants (AcCs) appointed under
APDRP. Project Review Meetings are held at different levels by
the AcCs ‘and with various executing agencies to expedite the
completion. During such meetings, reasons for slow progress are
identified & action taken to mitigate the causes.

Penal interest: Adequate provision already exist for release of funds
to State Power Utility within a week and penal interest against
diversion of funds.”


वा, The Committee note that training of State Governments
officials has been taken up by Distribution Reforms Upgrades ‘and
Management (DRUM) and nearly 1800 personnel have been trained
so far against a target of 25000 officials, which is not to the
satisfaction of the Committee. The Committee would like to be
informed about steps taken and time span to achieve the aforesaid
target. The Committee would like the Ministry to carry out a study
to find out State-wise, in how many cases diversion and delay in
releasing the funds have occurred and steps taken in this regard.
The Committee desire that any diversion should be taken very
seriously and immediate corrective steps should be taken.

Changing the base year under APDRP
Recommendation (51 No. 3, Para No. 2.33)

12. The Committee in their recommendation had noted that to
motivate the SEBs/utilities to reduce their cash losses, State
Governments are incentivised upto 50% of the actual cash loss reduction
by SEBs/Utilities as grant. As the year 2000-01 was being considered
the base year for calculation of loss reduction in subsequent years.
The Committee did not agree with the rationale given by the
Government, behind considering the year 2000-01 as the base year.
The Committee observed that some States namely Andhra Pradesh,
Delhi, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Sikkim, Uttar
Pradesh and Uttaranchal had shown reduction in commercial losses
initially but increase in subsequent years. The Committee also desired
that incentives being given under APDRP should not be given on the
basis of reduction in losses starting from year 2000-01 and they felt
that the loss reduction in the preceding year should be taken as basis
for grant of incentive for cash loss reduction in the next year.

13. The Ministry of Power in its reply has stated:

“The process of Distribution Reforms and grant of additional
financial assistance for upgradation of sub-transmission and
distribution system in the country was started by the Government
of India in form. of Accelerated Power Development Programme
(APDP) during the year 2001-02. Therefore, the year preceding to
start of distribution reforms and commencement of APDP i.e.
2000-01 has been designated as the base year for calculation of
loss reduction for incentivising SEBs/Utilities. Expert Committee
on State Specific Reforms, headed by Shri Deepak Parekh, had
also recommended 2000-01 as reference year for incentive purpose.
Fixation of a base year for the purpose of granting incentive under
APDRP ensures (i) bringing all the utilities on a uniform platforms.


(ii) avoid any manipulation on accounts for claiming benefit.
Therefore, it is felt that the recommendation of the Standing
Committee for taking into consideration the loss reduction in the
preceding year as the basis for grant of incentive for cash loss
reduction in the next year may not be insisted.”

14. The Committee are not at all convinced with the logic
advanced by the Ministry in regard to retaining 2000-01 as the base
year for the purpose of granting incentives under APDRP. In the
opinion of the Committee, the present system of 2000-01 being the
base year for calculation of incentive leaves a lot of scope for
manipulation as the utilities can show that the losses have reduced
in comparison to 2000-01, whereas the actual reduction as compared
to immediately preceding year would have been minimal or the
losses may have in fact increased. Keeping 2000-01 as the base year
does not motivate the utilities to reduce their losses every year. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the loss reduction in the preceding
year should be taken as basis for grant of incentive for cash loss
reduction in the next year as this, in fact, can encourage the Utilities
to reduce their commercial losses every year.

Penal action on non-performing States
Recommendation (SI. No. 4, Para No. 2.34)

15. The Committee noted that States were given incentives in the
form of grants upto 50% of the cash loss reduction by SEBs/Utilities
and out of Rs. 40,000 crore earmarked for APDRP for 10th Plan, 50%
ie, Rs. 20,000 crore had been allocated for the incentive component
only. The Committee felt that if States could be rewarded for
performance in the form of incentives, there must be some provisions
for penal action in case of non-performance. The Committee
recommended that a provision of penal action on the States if not
utilizing at least the 50% of allocated funds within one year of release
of APDRP fund and matching fund by financial institutions, be added
in MoU to make them more responsible and determined to implement
the projects in a time-bound manner.

16. In its reply, the Ministry of Power has stated:

“Although due care is taken for early utilization of the funds
released under APDRP, it is not feasible to impose a uniform
condition for all cases to utilize the 50% of the allocated funds
and matching counter part funds by financial institutions within
one year of release of funds due to:

(a) varying nature of projects involved requiring different modes
for their execution.


(b) varying nature of established procedure of State Government
concerned.

Provision of penal action may deter the State Governments from
availing the assistance under APDRP.”

17. The Committee are not satisfied by the over cautious stance
of the Ministry with regard to provision of penal clauses to improve
funds utilisation under APDRP. Penal action need not always act as
a deterrent for the State Governments for availing the assistance
under the programme. On the contrary, the Committee feel that it
can spur the State Government to perform more diligently and
achieve targets notwithstanding the prevailing conditions. Such penal
clauses may also motivate the better functioning States to further
improve utilisation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that a
provision of penal action on the States if not utilizing at least the
50% of allocated funds within one year of release of APDRP fund
and matching fund by financial institutions, be added in MoUs to
make the States more responsible and determined to implement the
projects in a time-bound manner.

Protecting interests 07 the consumers
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 3.15)

18. The Committee had desired that through Tripartite MoU/MoA
the State Governments should be given responsibility to ensure that
assistance received by the private DISCOMs under APDRP be intimated
to SERC so that additional benefits/relief are passed on to the
consumers. The Conumittee recommended that concerned State
Governments should te asked to represent the consumers and contest
the cases on their behalf of protect their interests if there was any
proposal of tariff revis:on from private DISCOMs. The Committee also
recommended that SECs may, too, be suggested to invite comments
of State Governments along with public at the time when any matter
relating to tariff revision by DISCOMs comes before them and desired
that State Governmen‘s should launch an awareness programme to
educate the consumers about various remedies available to them under
the Electricity Act, 2003, The Committee further desired that if need
be, statutory instructions be issued to SERCs to protect the interests of
the consumers as per the Electricity Act, 2003.

19. In its reply, the Ministry responded:

“The assistance received by the private DISCOMs under APDRP
including grant-in-aid along with quantifiable benefits expected


from such investment are to be intimated to SERC so that
additional benefits/reliefs are passed on to consumer over and
above what DISCOMs are obliged to provide under extant
agreement/orders of regulations. They have been again directed to
follow the said provision scrupulously and inform this of the same.

The Electricity Act, 2003 provides for publication of application
field by the generating company or licensee for determination of
tariff in manner as may be specified by the Appropriate
Commission. The Commission is required to issue tariff order after
considering all objections and suggestions received from the public.
All the SERCs follow this statutory provision.

As per the Electricity Act, 2003, one of the factors which would
guide the SERCs in the determination of tariff is safeguarding of
consumer's interest and at the same time, recovery of the cost of
electricity in a reasonable manner.

The National Electricity Policy calls upon the Central Government,
State Governments and Regulatory Commissions to facilitate
capacity building of consumer groups an their effective
representation before the Regulatory Commission. All the State
Governments have been requested to implement the National
Electricity Policy.”

20. The Committee are not at all impressed with the reply of
Ministry that as per the Electricity Act, 2003, one of the factors,
which would guide SERCs in determination of tariff is safeguarding
of consumer’s interest in determination of tariff and the provision
of publication of application, field by generating company etc., would
duly protect the consumers’ interests.

The Committee, therefore, feel that in consonance with the
various provisions in the Act and the Policy in the matter, the State
Governments should make serious and meaningful intervention in
the interest of the consumers in all the relevant fora. The Committee
feel that what is lacking is the true implementation of all these
provisions. Keeping the interest of consumers in mind, the Committee
cannot but reiterate their earlier recommendation that State
Governments should launch an awareness programme to educate the
consumers about various remedies available to them under the
Electricity Act, 2003. Moreover, concerned State Governments should
pe asked to represent the consumers and contest the cases on their
behalf to protect their interests, if there is any proposal of tariff
revision from private DISCOMs. In addition, SERCs may, too, be

9



suggested to invite comments of State Governments along with public
at the time—when any matter relating to tariff revision by private
DISCOMs comes before them. The Committee further desire that
the Government should pursue this vigorously to ensure that SERCs
and State Governments act as per the true spirit of the provisions of
Electricity Act, 2003 and National Electricity Policy.

Consumer Indexing
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 4.31)

21. The Committee were informed that the consumer indexing helps
in identification of overloading of equipments, helps in better load
management and better maintenance of equipments thereby improving
quality and reliability of power supply. The Committee in their
recommendation had felt that consumer indexing would no doubt help
in identifying all these problems but without making any investment
nothing can be achieved. The Committee desired that year-wise targets
should be fixed and implementation be ensured in a time-bound
manner.

22. The Ministry of Power in its reply stated:

“Under APDRP, fuads are being sanctioned for strengthening and
renovation of sub-transmission and distribution by way of
providing, inter-alia, (i) setting up of new sub-stations
(ii) augmentation of existing sub-stations, renovation and
modernization of existing sub-stations (iii) augmentation of 11kV
and LT lines and (iv) additional transformers/replacing old
transformer upto the level of 33 kV.

Consumer indexing can be implemented by State Governments
concerned and no targets can be fixed by Central Government in
this regard. However, all the States/Utilities have been requested
to take up the job of consumer indexing on priority basis intimating
them about the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee on
Energy. AcCs appointed under APDRP have also been advised to
help and monitor the progress in this regard on regular basis.”

23. In the view of the Committee, the power sector reforms are
meant finally for the benefit of consumers only. The Consumer
Indexing is the sure shot way of identifying problem areas in any
locality or user's place as to what is afflicting the quality and quantity
of power supply. Any number of reforms without proper emphasis
on Consumer Indexing will not yield the desired results. The

10


Committee fail to understand the reluctance of the Ministry in
according Consumer Indexing the priority and attention it deserves.
The micro planning and implementation of reforms in power sector
hinge on Consumer Indexing. Once this is done, investment should
then be brought in for improving the power distribution
infrastructure accordingly. The fruits of reforms in power generation
cannot reach the consumers without similar reforms in the power
distribution side. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that year-wise
targets should be fixed and their implementation be ensured in a
time-bound manner.

Strengthening the monitoring mechanism under APDRP
Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No. 5.11)

24. The Committee observed that through review meeting, the
progress of works under APDRP was monitored. The pace with which
the projects were being executed by SEBs/Utilities made it clear that
there were serious deficiencies in the system of monitoring and there
was an urgent need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism. The
Committee in their recommendation felt that there was a need for
analyzing various factors by Ministry of Power to ensure the proper
implementation of APDR Programme and the Ministry should analyze
orders issued by various SERCs to see whether the benefits of funds
provided by the Ministry had been really passed on to the consumer
or not. If it was not done, the Ministry should ask State Governments
to issue necessary instructions to SERCs under the Electricity Act, 2003.
The Committee observed that no targets seems to have been fixed for
providing additional transformers and for providing proper wiring etc.
in the areas covered by APDRP. The Committee also felt that this is
a serious matter, which raised a question mark on the usefulness of
the Scheme.

25. The Ministry in its reply stated:

“An in-depth study into the implementation of APDRP, the benefits
accrued by the projects vis-a-vis expected benefits from the
programme, the progress of implementation of activities committed
by the Utilities under MoU and MoA and the progress on
achievement of benchmark parameters committed under MoA, has
been entrusted to five independent agencies for evaluation of
APDRP. The independent agencies were also asked to suggest
changes required in scheme for improvement and better results.
The independent agencies have since submitted their reports.
Remedial action with regard to implementation of APDRP,

an]



utilization of funds released under APDRP and monitoring would
be taken to make APDRP more effective and useful for the public.

Under APDRP, funds are being sanctioned for strengthening and
renovation of sub-transmission and distribution by way of
providing, inter-alia, (i) setting up of new sub-stations (ii)
augmentation of existing sub-stations, renovation and modernization
of existing sub-stations (iii) augmentation of 11kV and LT lines
and (iv) additional transformers/replacing old transformer upto
the level of 33 kV. However, to avail funds under APDRP the
SEBs/Utilities have to prepare DPR and submit to.the AcC
concerned for scrutiny. The projects under APDRP are sanctioned
on merits as per the extant APDRP guidelines. No target for
providing additional transformers and proper wiring can be fixed
at Central Government level.”

26. Being concerned with improper implementation of the scheme,
the Committee had desired that there was a need to strengthen the
monitoring mechanism to ensure the proper implementation of APDR
Programme. In this regard, the Committee had suggested that the
Ministry should analyze the orders issued by various SERCs to see
whether the benefits of the funds provided by the Ministry had
been really passed on to the consumers or not. The Committee note
that an in-depth study into the implementation of APDRP, the
benefits accrued by the projects vis-a-vis expected benefits from the
programme, the progress of implementation of activities committed
by the Utilities under MoU & MoA and the progress on achievement
of benchmark parameters committed under MoA was entrusted to
five independent agencies for evaluation of APDRP, who have since
submitted their reports.

The Committee would like to know the guidelines issued to
them for the evaluation and the ambit and scope of the evaluation;
outcome of the study; the action taken by the Ministry in response
thereto; and the ground impact of such action taken on the
performance of Utilities under APDRP. Further, the Committee
reiterate that the orders issued by various SFRCs be analyzed by the
concerned State Governments at the earliest and Committee be
apprised whether the benefits accrued-by using APDRP funds, have
actually been passed on to the consumers or not.

12


CHAPTER IL

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendations (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.35)

The Committee note that Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has
been formulated, keeping the overall objective of reforms in the
distribution sector wherein SEBs/Utilities have to commit to certain
benchmark parameters to be achieved by them in next three years at
the State level and at the Circle level. Under MoA signed by all the
States, they have been asked to formulate suitable policy for handing
over parts of distribution system on management contract or on lease
to local bodies, franchises, consumer cooperatives, local institutions,
users’ associations, etc. to promote bulk consumers. The franchisee

- receives power supply at one point and is responsible for operation
and maintenance of the network and collection of the revenue. The
remuneration to franchisee depends on the collection made in his area
as a percentage of revenue collection. As much as franchisee collects,
he receives proportionately more commission under the franchisee
system accountability of employees is more and results in reduction in
AT&C losses. Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat have also initiated the
process. Bangalore Electricity Supply Corporation Limited (BESCOM)
has appointed 952 nos. Micro Feeder Franchisee (MFF) in BESCOM
area. This has shown 33% increase in revenue collection than the target.
The Committee note that in most of the States the metering work has
been completed. The Committee desire that all the States may now be
asked to formulate and implement the policy regarding handing over
part of distribution system of management contract or on lease to
local bodies, franchisees, consumer cooperatives, local institutions, users’
associations, etc. within three months time as per the provisions of
MoA signed by them.

Reply of the Government

Adequate provisions exist in the Electricity Act, 2003, the National
Electricity Policy and the Memorandum of Agreements (MoAs) entered
under APDRP about franchising the distribution of electricity. All the
States/Utilities have been requested to follow this condition regarding
handing over part of distribution system of management contract or
on lease to local bodies, franchisees, consumer cooperatives, local
institutions, users’ associations, etc.

[Ministry's F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
13



Recommendation (51. No. 7, Para No. 3.14)

The Committee are anguished to note that recently a heavy power
tariff hike for power consumers of Delhi was announced. The
Committee have come to know the fact that in one of the areas,
regulated by TATA, there was no reason for revision in hike, rather
tariff could be brought down because they had reduced losses by 15
to 20 per cent. But just to avoid the anomaly between tariffs of two
DISCOMs areas, power tariff was revised at the request of poorly
performing DISCOM. The Committee deplore this illogical type of
approach of State Government/Delhi State Electricity Regulatory
Commission and find it against the objectives of APDRP. The
Committee do not find any justification in this decision due to which
consumers of a distribution company which is doing its job well have
to pay more due to poor performance of other company. Both
DISCOMs have taken initiatives under APDRP but with different
results. The Committee, therefore, desire that State Government should
fight on behalf of people of areas serviced by NDPL (TATA) for
providing a reduction in tariff so that the other DISCOM may be
pressurized to make more sincere efforts to reduce AT&C losses in
future. The Committee do not find anomaly in fixing different tariff
on the basis of different type of performances of two DISCOMS as
being done in Maharashtra. The State Governments should also permit
open access in distribution to develop a healthy competition amongst
distribution companies.

Reply of the Government

Policy directions have been issued under Delhi Electricity Reform
Act, which are statutory in nature and binding on the State Regulatory
Commission. Para 14 of the Policy Directions issued vide letter No.
F. 11/118/2001/Power/2889 dated 22nd November, 2001 reads as follows:

“The reorganisation of Delhi Vidyut Board will result in three
separate distribution licensees. The Government, as a matter of
policy, has decided that retail tariffs for the three distribution
licensees shall be identical till the end of 2006-07, 1.6., consumers
of a particular category shall pay the same retail tariff irrespective
of their geographical location.”

The above Policy Directions regarding the retail tariff were issued
to ensure that there is a smooth transition while undertaking reforms.
Just to illustrate, in case such directions were not issued at the very
outset, the tariff increase in East Delhi, the poorest area, would have
been the highest. These directions are binding on the DERC as per
legal provisions.

14


Introducing open access in distribution is statutory function of the
SERC. Fifth proviso to sub-section 2 of section 42 of the Electricity
Act, 2003, provides that the State Commission shall, not later than five
year from the date of commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2003 (i.e. by January, 2009) by regulations, provide such open
access to all consumers who require supply of electricity where the
maximum power to be made available at any time exceeds one
megawatt. The National Electricity Policy stipulates that the SERCs
shall notify regulations by June 2005 to enable open access to the
distribution networks as provided in the law.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.15)

The Committee specifically note that APDRP funds, are being given
to private agencies for strengthening and upgradation of the sub-
transmission and distribution system. The Committee are deeply
concerned to note that in spite of investing such a large chunk of
money, the benefits are nowhere to be seen. On the contrary, private
agencies are regularly hiking the tariff. As per the rule, the private
DISCOMs should inform the SERCs about the funds received under
APDRP so as to enable SERCs while passing orders about fixation of
tariff, to ensure that additional benefits/relief received under APDRP
are passed on to consumers. The Committee recommend that the
Government should ensure that the benefits gained by private
DISCOMs are passed on to the consumer. The Committee desire that
through Tripartite MoU/MoA the State Government should be given
responsibility to ensure that assistance received by the private DISCOM
under APDRP is intimated to SERC so that additional benefits/relief
are passed on to the consumer. The Committee strongly recommend
that concerned State Governments should be asked to represent the
consumers and contest the cases on their behalf to protect their interests
if there is any proposal of tariff revision from private DISCOMs. The
Committee also recommend that SERCs may too be suggested to invite
comments of State Governments along with public at the time when
any matter relating to tariff revision by DISCOMs comes before them.

The Committee further desire that State Governments should launch
an awareness programme to educate the consumers about various
remedies available to them under the Electricity Act, 2003, The
Committee further desire that if need be, Statutory instructions be
issued to SERCs to protect the interests of the consumers as per the
Electricity Act, 2003.

15



Reply of the Government

The assistance received by the private DISCOMs under APDRP
including grant-in-aid along with quantifiable benefits expected from
such investment are to be intimated to SERC so that additional
benefits/reliefs are passed on to consumer over and above what
DISCOMs were obliged to provide under extant agreement/orders of
regulations. They have been directed to follow the said provision
scrupulously and inform this of the same.

The Electricity Act 2003 provides for publication of application
field by the generating company or licensee for determination of tariff
in manner as may be specified by the Appropriate Commission. The
Commission is required to issue tariff order after considering all
objections and suggestions received from the public. All the SERCs
follow this statutory provision.

As per the Electricity Act, 2003, one of the factors which would
guide the SERCs in the determination of tariff is “safeguarding of
consumer’s interest and at the same time, recovery of the cost of
electricity in a reasonable manner.

The National Electricity Policy calls upon the Central Government,
State Governments and Regulatory Commissions to facilitate capacity
building of consumer groups an their effective representation before
the Regulatory Commission. All the State Governments have been
requested to implement the National Electricity Policy.

[Ministry’s # No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 9, Para No. 4.29)

The Committee note that under APDRP, the concerned States have
to install feeder meters Static/High precision consumer meters. The
Committee observe that out of 31 States and Union Territories 100%
feeder metering has been completed in 20 States whereas 100%
consumer metering has been completed in 7 States/UTs only. The
Committee note that these feeders provide the metering at the point
of bulk deliveries in the distribution system and these are of paramount
importance for carrying out energy audits. If feeder metering work is
completed, it can be traced that from which feeder meters losses are

16


taking place. Only then, States can focus attention on it to detect the
theft to improve the distribution losses. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Government should give top priority to
complete feeder metering work in all States. For this purpose, they
must identify the specific problems relating to each State and prepare
a State specific programme in consultation with each State Government
and Advisor-cum-Consultant for completion of metering work in the
shortest possible time. They must apply all the possible methods to
persuade the States having low level of consumer metering, like ban
on allocation of extra power out of allocated quota. The Committee
are, however, surprised to note that some of the private sector
distribution companies in Delhi are replacing the old meters with the
new meters. The mandate under APDRP is to provide meters where
these are not available and not for replacing the already available
meters with the consumers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Government should examine this aspect and issue directions to avoid
wasteful expenditure. The Committee desire that AcCs should also
keep a vigil on the quality of meters being replaced. The Committee
also desire that the States which have completed the metering work
may be asked to introduce computerized billing as well as spot billing
through Meter Reading Instrument (MRI).

Reply of the Government

Feeder Metering: While the focus of Government is on completion
of the feeder metering in all States at the earliest, the suggestion of
the Standing Committee to complete feeder metering work and to
identify the specific problems relating to each State and prepare a
State specific programme in consultation with each State Government
and Advisor-cum-Consultant for completion of metering work in the
shortest possible time has been noted.

Consumer Metering: Section 55 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides
that no licensee shall supply electricity, after the expiry of two years
from the appointed date, except through installation of correct meters
in accordance with the regulations to be made in this behalf by the
Authority (CEA). Draft Regulations prepared by CEA lay the standards
of meters including the time for periodical testing. Rule 57(4) of the
Electricity Rules 1956 also prescribed that every supplier shall examine/
test and regulates all meters before the installation at the consumer
premises.

National Electricity Policy envisages use of modern information
technology systems by the utilities on a priority basis, after considering

17



cost and benefits, to facilitate creation of network information and
customer data base which will help in management of load,
improvement in quality, detection of theft and tampering, customer
information and prompt and correct billing and collection. The Policy
also emphasis on consumer indexing and mapping in a time bound
manner. Support is being provided for information technology based
systems under the Accelerated Power Development and Reforms
Programme (APDRP).

[Ministry’s 8 No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 4.32)

The Committee note that under APDRP, States are encouraged to
adopt turnkey concept for execution of the projects. Since the schemes
sanctioned under APDRP have to be implemented in a very short
time-frame so that benefits of the investments are perceptible and
confidence is generated in the financial institutions. Adoption of turnkey
concept is otherwise sensible also as it makes it possible to bind the
contractor in terms of work completion schedule, overall cost and
equipment performance. But the Committee find that SEBs/Utilities in
some States are finding it difficult to implement the projects on turnkey
basis and getting these done on departmental basis as they have a
large work force with them. The Committee feel that Advisor-cum-
Consultants who have been assigned the task of monitoring the
execution of projects should provide assistance to resolve all the
problems related to the implementation of the projects. The Committee
desire that adequate ways and means be devised as per the need of
the each State so that there is rational utilization of available man-
power and at the same time there are no inordinate delays in the
implementation of the projects. The Committee also desire that target
date should be fixed within which AT&C losses are to be completely
wiped off so that all the States can be motivated to achieve the targets
by whatever method of execution of contracts, they desire to do.

Reply of the Government

(i) Man-power: The concern of the Standing Committee for
rational use of man-power has been brought to the notice
of Advisor-cum-Consultant and they have been advised to
take necessary action.

(ii) To wipe-off completely the AT&C losses: The Ministry has
noted the concern expressed by the Standing Committee to
wipe out completely the AT&C losses but it is stated that


the same cannot be wiped-off completely as some amount
of technical losses are inherent in the system and are due
to energy dissipated in the conductors and equipments uses
for transmission, transformation, sub-transmission and
distribution of power. However, the endeavour of the
Government is to reduce the AT&C losses to 15% in five
years in the urban and high density consumption areas.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]

19


CHAPTER वा

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.13)

Under APDRP Private DISCOMs are also eligible for availing
APDRP funds. Accordingly, DISCOMs in four States—Delhi, Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Orissa have been granted funds. The total cost of
the projects sanctioned is Rs. 2438.81 crore out of this APDRP cost is
Rs. 1219.41 crore. But the Committee have serious reservations in the
release of APDRP funds and utilization of funds by DISCOMs. In
Maharashtra (BSES), out of Rs. 275.37 crore not a single paise has
been released by the Government. Similarly very small amount of
APDRP fund has been released for DISCOMs of Orissa. Whereas in
Delhi out of Rs. 946.46 crore of project Rs. 863.23 crore has already
been utilized by the DISCOMs (BSES &. NDPL) including
Rs. 105.51 crore of Government of India Fund. The Committee take a
specific case of Delhi where power distribution is being done by Private
DISCOMs other than in NDMC areas. BSES and North Delhi Power
Ltd. have already used APDRP fund of 105.51 crore to strengthen
their Power Distribution System out of Rs. 473.23 crore of APDRP
cost. But the results are not at all impressive. The AT&C losses in
Delhi have not declined in the proportion of the investments made.
The position regarding availability, quality and reliability of Power to
consumers has also not shown any improvement. Still more alarming
is the fact that the financial losses of Utilities in Delhi have increased
from Rs. 733 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 1,774 crore in 2003-04. Moreover,
the DISCOMs have replaced the earlier consumer meters with fast
running meters and are regularly hiking the tariffs thus increasing the
woes of the consumers. The recent hikes of tariff has brought the
public on roads. The Committee are surprised to note that these private
DISCOMs have neither shown any tangible results even after using
cheaper Government funds under APDRP, nor these private players
have passed on any benefit to consumers. The State Government of
Delhi has not been able to persuade BSES and NDPL to work according
to terms and conditions of mechanism under the Tripartite agreement
signed between the utilities, State Government and Central Government.
Since funds under APDRP are given by the Government, it is the

20


duty of the Government to ensure that these are properly utilized
and benefits reach to consumers. Hence, the Committee strongly
recommend that Government should analyse the justifications of funds
being given to private DISCOMs and sort out the issues relating to
fast running meters, steep tariff hikes and reasons-for no reduction in
T&D losses in Delhi. In view of results in Delhi and other DISCOM
operated areas, the Committee strongly recommend that if similar
trends continue in future and private DISCOMs are not able to produce
the desired results after using cheap APDRP funds, the Government
should seriously consider to exclude them from providing financial
assistance under APDRP. It is learnt DERC has sanctioned tariff hike
to BSES and TATAs without TATAs (NDPL) asking for the same, as
they were able to manage at the same rates. This is indeed surprising,
as consumers under TATAs are sufferers for no reason—Government
must intervene and restrain power of DERC and investigate the same
in Delhi and SERC’s elsewhere, if such orders have been issued and
why.

The Committee note that in some of the States there are delays in
release of APDRP funds to Utilities/DISCOMs. The Committee desire
that this should be taken up by the Ministry of Power with the
concerned State Governments to ensure that timely release of the money
to the Utilities so that timely execution of the project is ensured.

Reply of the Government

(i) Ministry of Power had sanctioned projects worth Rs. 946.46
crores for projects submitted by Utilities of Delhi under Accelerated
Power Development Reforms Programme (APDRP) and Ministry of
Home Affairs (MHA) has released Rs. 105.51 crores to the Government
of National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi during the year 2002-03
for onward release to respective DISCOMs.

The details of the projects sanctioned and the funds released are
as follows:—

(Rs. in crores)

SLNo. Name of the Total Project APDRP Funds released by
project cost Cost Governments of India

1 2 3 4 5

1, ST&D project in East & 294.66 147.33

West Delhi (BSES)

21


1 2 3 4 5

2. ST&D project in South 187.75 93.875 Rs. 105.51 crores
Delhi (BSES) during 2002-03
3. ST&D project in Central 142.95 71.475
Delhi (BSES)
4... ST&D project in North- 193.10 96.55
West Delhi (NDPL)
5. ST&D project in North 128.00 64.00
and North-West Delhi
(NDPL)
Total 946.46 473.23 105.51

The matter regarding allocation of funds under APDRP for release
to DISCOMs in Delhi has been taken up by the Ministry of Power
and the Government of NCT of Delhi with the Ministry of Finance
who are of the view that assistance for investment purpose is provided
under APDRP only to the SEBs/Utilities. Ministry of Finance has
further stated that distribution entities in Delhi were privatised with
clear stipulations that further investments in distribution network would
be obligation of the privatised power utilities. Hence, the funds to
DISCOMs to Delhi could not be further released, as Ministry of Finance
has not agreed to make allocations for the same in the budget.

The comments of the Government of NCT of Delhi on the issue
have been received. The Government of NCT of Delhi has referred to
the definition of the ‘Utility’ under Section 2 (75) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 which reads that “Utility” means the electric lines or electrical
plant, and includes all lands, buildings, works and materials attached
thereto belonging to any person acting as a generating company or
licensee under the provisions of this Act. Thus, Delhi Government has
stated that the DISCOMs being distribution licensees, get covered under
the definition of Utility given in the Electricity Act. The Government
of NCT of Delhi has also referred to Rule 5 of the Delhi Electricity
Reform (Transfer Scheme) Rules, 2001 and expressed that there is no
provision in the transfer scheme which prevents the DISCOMs from
receiving funds from Government for investment for upgradation of
the distribution network and reduction of losses. They have referred
to Clause 4.5 of the Shareholder’s Agreement as will in support of
this.

22


The points raised by Government of NCT of Delhi has been
examined in the Ministry of Power and are found tenable. Moreover,
the Deepak Parekh Committee recommended that funds under APDRP
should also be made available to private DISCOMs. The Monitoring
Committee of APDRP in its meeting held on 16.7.2002 under the
chairmanship of Minister of Power had decided that the benefits of
APDRP should be given to those States where the distribution system
has been handed over to the private utilities, as long as the States and
the Distribution Utilities agree to pass on the benefits to the consumers.
Ministry of Power has requested Ministry of Finance for release of
funds to private distribution companies in Delhi under APDRP.

The recommendation of the Committee to exclude the private
DISCOMs of Delhi from APDRP, if they do not produce desired results
will be kept in view, when the Ministry of Finance agrees to make
provision of funds in the Budget of Government of NCT of Delhi.

(ii) As regards position of availability, reliability and quality of
power the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC) has
informed that there has been improvement in the quality of supply
and also in providing facilities to consumers as follows:

* Load shedding which was about 3% in 2001-02 the year
preceding privatization has come down to about 0.84% in
2004-05.

¢ The distribution transformer failure rate has been reduced
to less than 1% today from 15% at the time of privatization.

° There has been sufficient addition to the infrastructure such
as power transformers, EHV cables, installation of
distribution transformers, installation of 11 kV feeders,
installation of shunt capacitors etc.

° There has been a steady improvement in the PLF of the
generating units in Delhi. The PLF in 2001-02 was 46.93%
and in 2004-05, it was 65.53%.

¢ Transmission losses of Delhi Transco Limited has been
reduced from 3.84% during 2002-03 to 1.3% during 2004-05.

° The average response time for attending to breakdowns has
improved considerably.

¢ Number of options available for payment of bills have
increased manifold.

23


(iii) There has been a reduction in Aggregate Technical &
Commercial (AT&C) loss levels for all the three DISCOMs. Details of
the targets fixed and achieved are tabulated as under:

BSES Rajdhani BSES Yamuna North Delhi Power Ltd.

Opening level 48.10 57.20 48.10
as per DERC

Year “Target level Achieved Target level Achieved Target level Achieved

2002-03 4755 47.40 56.45 56.45 47.60 47.79
2003-04 46.00 45.06 54.70 54.29 45.35 44.86
2004-05 42.70 40.64 50.70 50.12 40.85 33,79

(iv) Regarding determination of tariff, it is submitted that under
the Electricity Act, 2003, it is one of the functions of the State Electricity
Regulatory Commission to determine the tariff for generation, supply,
transmission and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail as
the case may be, within the State.

Revenue to the distribution licensee can come only from three
streams: (i) tariff, (ii) Government support, and (iii) improvement in
efficiency gains i.e. reduction in AT&C losses. In order to avoid
consumer tariff shock, the Govt. of NCT of Delhi had agreed at the
time of privatisation to provide transitional reform loan support of
Rs. 3452 crores to Delhi Transco Ltd. for the first five years as reduction
in losses is feasible over a reasonable period. The earmarked transitional
reform loan support of Rs. 138 crores for 2005-06 to Delhi Transco
Ltd. is being provided by the Delhi Government. Transitional Loan
Support of Rs. 3314 crores has already been released during first three
years.

Similarly, DISCOMs were also required to reduce AT&C losses
which have been met by the DISCOMs. As a part of privatisation
package an average increase in tariff during the first five years of
10%, 10%, 10%, 5% and 3% during the years 2002-03, 3003-04,
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07, respectively was envisaged as per
projections. As against the above projections there was no tariff increase
in 2002-03; only 5% increase in 2003-04; 10% during 2004-05 and nearly
6.6% during 2005-06. In fact, against envisaged cumulative tariff increase
of 40% during the first four years, the actual tariff increase has only
been about 23%. Considering that Delhi had a very high AT&C loss
level in 2001-02 of more than 50% before privatisation which have

24


now been reduced to about 40% (on average), the losses are still high
compared to other States. However, tariff of Delhi is still comparable

with other States including Mumbai where AT&C losses are less than
15%.

The losses can not be reduced overnight and a reasonable transition
is to be provided otherwise there would be huge financial losses or
tariff shock.

(v) As regards tariff hike in Delhi it needs to be pointed out that
as a part of the privatisation package policy directions were issued by
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi in the year 2001
under Delhi Electricity Reform Act. These directions are statutory in
nature and binding on the State Regulatory Commission. Para 14 of
the Policy Directions issued vide letter No. F. 11/118/2001/Power/
2889 dated 22nd November, 2001 (copy enclosed) reads as follows:

“The reorganisation of Delhi Vidyut Board will result in three
separate distribution licensees. The Government, as a matter of
policy, has decided that retail tariffs for the three distribution
licensees shall be identical till the end of 2006-07, i.e, consumers
of a particular category shall pay the same retail tariff irrespective
of their geographical location.”

This policy direction was given prior to enactment of Electricity
Act, 2003 and the same is saved by the provisions of section 185 of
the Electricity Act, 2003.

(vi) The power sector is becoming self-sustainable in Delhi and a
budgetary outgo which was nearly Rs. 1000 crores to Rs. 1200 crores
in 2001-02 will reduce to around Rs. 200 crores to Rs. 300 crores (that
also mainly amount required for capital expenditure for Transco and
Genco).

(vii) In the case of Delhi, it would not be correct to say that the
commercial losses have increased overall, so far as the distribution
segment is concerned. The commercial losses shown in the report
perhaps pertain to Delhi Transco Limited, and have to be understood
in the context of the reform package. As a part of the reform package
Govt. was to make available to Transmission Company an amount of
approx. Rs. 3450 cr. during the period 2002-03 to 2006-07 as loan to be
repaid by the Transmission Company to the Government in a manner
agreed to between the Transmission Company and the Government.
The Transmission Company will use the loan to bridge the gap between
its revenue requirement and the bulk supply price which it may receive

25


from the distribution licensees. The terms & conditions of the loan
between the GNCTD and DTL have yet to be finalised. The loss on
the balance sheet to DTL essentially reflects the difference between the
purchase price of power and bulk supply price being received from
the DISCOMs. As the transitional loan support of Rs. 3450 crore is not
being treated as subsidy that is why it is being shown as a loss.
However, if this amount is treated as subsidy, the majority of the
losses will be wiped out. Similarly interest on power sector reforms
loan has also been taken as interest due to Government as a prudent
accounting policy. It needs to be pointed out that this loss was always
anticipated during the first five years of the unbundling, having regard
to the role of Transco as the channel for disbursement of transitional
assistance.

(viii) Regarding complaint about faulty and defective meters DERC
has informed following:

* Metering and Billing Regulations were introduced by the
Commission in August, 2002. These regulations give details
regarding procedures to be followed by the utilities for
providing new connections, replacement of defective meters,
treatment of fines, pilferage of electricity etc. The Metering
and Billing Regulations were also partially amended in
January, 2003 whereby the Commission had introduced a
provision of compensation to consumers in case of repeated
levy of “arrears” for bills already paid. The Metering and
Billing Regulations also have provisions for imposition of
penalties for specific violations by the utilities.

¢ The Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC) had
set up a Committee in August, 2003 to look into the various
complaints being received in the Commission regarding
faulty meters. The Committee had submitted: its report and
it was observed that more than 91% of the meters recorded
consumption levels within the prescribed limits given in
the Indian Electricity Rules. About 2% of the meters were
found to be slow and 0.5% were faster than the prescribed
limit. About 5% of the meters, however, were found to be
defective (seemingly due to design features) and they
belonged to particular brand. The performance of the
remaining brands were found to be satisfactory.

* The Commission had issued guidelines to the DISCOMs
regarding meter testing on the basis of which a fresh drive
was initiated by the DISCOMs during July/August, 2004.

26


The following table summarises the results:

Company Total Meters Meters Meters Meters
meters within fast slow defective
tested limits

BYPL 2055 1891 al 24 139

BRPL 3151 2978 4 15 154

NDPL 1027 947 41 19 10

Total 6,233 5826 46 58 303

* Despite the meter testing drive conducted by the DISCOMs,
public complaints regarding fast running of meters continued
and, therefore, the Commission directed the DISCOMs to
undertake testing of meters with the assistance of an
independent third party. Accordingly, BSES have tied-up
with the Central Power Research Institute (CPRI). Any
consumer may lodge a request with BSES and get this meter
test through the CPRI. In addition to getting the meters of
individual consumers tested, the BSES is also using the
services of CPRI for getting meters procured by the BSES
tested on a sample basis. The NDPL, at present, is
undertaking testing of meters using CPRI’s assistance.

* The DERC will be shortly introducing a fresh meter testing
drive in association with the Bureau of ‘Indian Standards
(BIS).

(ix) The private distribution companies have already been operating
in various parts of the country, namely Calcutta Electric Supply
Company (CESC) in Kolkata, Dishergarh Power Supply Co. Ltd.
(West Bengal), Ahmedabad Electricity Company Limited in Ahmedabad,
Surat Electricity Company Limited in Surat, Tata Power Company and
the Reliance Energy in Mumbai, Noida Power Company in Greater
Noida and Tata Tea Company in Munnar (Kerala). These companies
have been functioning smoothly over a period of time.

In the area serviced by Noida Power Company Ltd., LT distribution
losses in targeted villages have reduced to 6% and collections have
improved to 95%. T&D loss of Torrent Power, AEC Ltd. (TPAL,
Ahmedabad) is 12.63% and Torrent Power SEC Ltd., (TPSL, Surat) is
11.11% in 2004-05. These private distribution licenses in Ahmedabad
and Surat are working in the State since 80 years.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]

27


Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 4.30)

APDRP envisages to arrest the increasing AT&C losses of the
utilities and bring it below 15%. The Committee are perturbed to note
that with three years into the scheme and utilisation of around 50% of
the sanctioned funds, the AT&C losses of most of the Utilities are still
in the range of 40-50%. In fact there are 14 Utilities in which AT&C
losses are above 50%. The achievements of Private DISCOMs are still
worse-6 out of 10 have losses above 40%. What the Committee find
shocking is the fact that these are the achievements of some Utilities
who have exhausted around 90% of their sanctioned funds such as
the Private DISCOMs of Delhi—NDPL and BSES. In many cases
Commercial Losses have gone up inspite of increasing tariff every
year and utilising APDRP funds. Further, in most of the cases AT&C
losses have not come down. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government should undertake an indepth study to understand the
exact problem involved in achieving desired targets reducing AT&C
losses and take tough measures with the help of SEBs/State
Governments. The Committee also note that the rate of conviction in
most of the States is very low as compared to the theft cases detected.
For example, in Gujarat out of 48510 cases only 7 have been convicted
whereas in M.P. 271094 cases not a single person has been convicted.
The Committee are of the view that to bring AT&C losses to the level
of 15% a proper strategy is required. The Committee, therefore, desire
that States should be asked to strictly implement the provisions of the
Sections 107 and 108 of the Electricity Act 2003 to reduce losses on
account of power theft. If required, necessary amendments in Central/
State laws may be done by Union/State Governments.

The Committee expressed their shock when it was informed that
DISCOMs follow the practice of loading their T&D losses on the honest
consumers. The Committee express their concern over this practice
and would like the Ministry of Power to make necessary changes in
the laws/rules to ensure that such a practice is not continued as firstly
it is unfair for the honest consumer, who is made to pay for T&D
losses which is not his concern. And most importantly, the Committee
feel that since thrust of APDRP is to reduce T&D losses, this system
of billing would never encourage DISCOMs to reduce their losses as
in any case they are assured of their returns by loading the honest
consumers.

Steps in this direction must be taken immediately.

28


Reply of the Government

The Private distribution companies have already been operating in
various parts of the country, namely Calcutta Electric Supply Company
(CESC) in Kolkata, Dishergarh Power Supply Co. Ltd. (West Bengal),
Ahmedabad Electricity Company Limited in Ahmedabad, Surat
Electricity Company Limited in Surat, Tata Power Company and the
Reliance Energy in Mumbai, Noida power Company in Greater Noida
and Tata Tea Company in Munnar (Kerala). These companies have
been functioning smoothly over a period of time.

Distribution has been fully privatised only in Delhi and Orissa. In
the remaining part of the country distribution is still in the hands of
SEBs/State owned companies.

According to the Report on the Performance of The State Power
Utilities published by Power Finance Corporation the AT&C losses in
most of the state during 2003-04 were more than 50%.

As against this in the area serviced by Noida Power Company
Ltd. LT distribution losses in targeted villages have reduced to 6%
and collections have improved to 95%. T&D loss of Torrent Power,
AEC Ltd. (TPAL, Ahmedabad) is 12.63% and Torrent Power SEC Ltd.,
(TPSL, Surat) is 11.11% in 2004-05. These private distribution licenses
in Ahmedabad and Surat are working in the State since 80 years.

According to OERC, the AT&C losses of four distribution licensees
namely Central Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Ltd. (CESCO),
North Eastern Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Ltd. (NESCO),
Western Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Ltd. (WESCO), Southern
Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Ltd. (SOUTHCO) are as under:

AT&C Loss 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
NESCO 52.25 50.36 42.96 39.55
WESCO 47.30 46.18 40.60 36.52
SOUTHCO 49.76 51.56 45.71 41.76
CESCO# 55.04 51.10 49.37 44.96

#CESCO is being run through an Administrator appointed by Regulatory Commission
as AES, the US Company which took over management after privatisation failed to
perform satisfactorily.

29


© Tariff

There has been no spurt in tariff since Ist February, 2001 in Orissa
for the year FY 2005-06, the existing tariff has been reduced in
uppermost slab of domestic consumers.

As the part of privatisation package, DISCOMs in Delhi were given
targets for reduction of AT&C losses over a period of five years.
DISCOMs have not only met these targets but have exceeded them as
is evident from the table below:

(Figures in %)

BSES Rajdhani BSES Yamuna North Delhi Power Ltd.
Opening level 48.10 57.20 48.10
as per DERC
Year Target Achieved Target ~— Achieved ~~ Target Achieved
2002-03 47.55 47.40 56.45 56.45 47.60 47.79
2003-04 46.00 45.06 54.70 54.29 45.35 44.86
2004-05 42.70 40.64 50.70 50.12 40.85 33.79

In fact all the DISCOMs have exceeded their targets and the target
achievement is very high in case of NDPL. The loss reduction in the
case of NDPL in 2004-05 is nearly 11% which perhaps the highest in
India.

It is not correct to say that DISCOMs in Delhi have exceeded 90%
of their sanctioned APDRP fund as only Rs. 105.51 crores, the first
trench, has been disbursed to DISCOMs against totally sanctioned
amount of Rs. 473.23 crores.

The Electricity Act, 2003 has stringent provisions to check theft of
electricity. The National Electricity Policy states that the States and
distribution utilities should ensure effective implementation of these
provisions of the Act and to set up Special Courts. It lays emphasis
on implementation of modern information technology systems by the
utilities on a priority basis, after considering cost and benefits, to
facilitate creation of network information and customer data base which
will inter-alia, help in detection of theft and tampering. High Voltage

30


Distribution System has also been envisaged in the policy as an effective
method of prevention of theft as well as reduction of technical losses,
improved voltage profile and better consumer service.

The Electricity Rules, 2005 prescribe the procedure for investigation
of cognizable offences related to theft of electricity by the Police. The
Electricity (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2005 issued by Central
Government under section 183 of the Act provides that the Electricity
Supply Code as specified by the SERCs under section 50 of the Act
shall also include method of assessment of electricity charges and
disconnection of supply in cases of theft of electricity pending
adjudication by the appropriate court.

National Electricity Policy requires the State Governments to
prepare a Five Year Plan with annual milestones to bring down AT&C
losses expeditiously. Community participation, effective enforcement,
incentives for entities, staff and consumers, and technological
upgradation should form part of campaign efforts for reducing these
losses. The policy requires Central Government to provide incentive
based assistance to States that are able to reduce losses as per agreed
programmes.

The State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERC) are required
to draw a time bound programme for segregation of technical and
commercial losses through energy audits. According to NEP energy
accounting and declaration of its results in each defined unit, as
determined by SERCs, should be mandatory not later than March 2007.
The NEP also envisages for drawl of an action plan for reduction of
the losses with adequate investments and suitable improvements in
governance. Standards for reliability and quality of supply as well as
for loss levels shall also be specified, from time to time, so as to bring
these in line with international practices by year 2012.

National Electricity Policy is for creation of conducive business
environment in terms of adequate returns and suitable transitional
model with predetermined improvements in efficiency parameters in
distribution business for facilitating funding and attracting investments
in distribution. The Policy envisages Multi-Year Tariff (MYT) framework
to minimize risks for utilities and consumers, promote efficiency and
rapid reduction of system losses. It would also bring greater
predictability to consumer tariffs by restricting tariff adjustments to
known indicators such as power purchase prices and inflation indices.

31


The losses cannot be reduced overnight and a reasonable transition
is to be provided otherwise there would be huge financial losses or
tariff shock.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]

32


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (SI.No. 1, Para No. 2.31)

The Committee observe that the APDRP is an ambitious Programme
aimed atr strengthening and upgradation of Power Sub-transmission
and Distribution System in States with basic objectives like reduction
of AT&C losses, bringing about commercial viability, reducing outages
and interruption and increase of consumer satisfaction. This programme
has an outlay of Rs. 40,000 crore during Tenth Five Year Plan. The
Committee note that as against the Budget Estimates of
Rs. 10500 crore an amount of Rs. 6496.34 crore only has been spent
during the first three years of the Tenth Five Year Plan. Ministry of
Power has a Budget Estimates of only Rs. 630 crore for the year
2005-06. However, they have requested for a Revised Estimates (RE)
of Rs. 4939 crore from the Ministry of Finance during this year. The
Committee are perturbed to observe the present trend of very poor
Budget allocation and very low utilization of funds allocated for APDRP
during first three years of current plan. The Committee are aware that
most of the States need strengthening and upgradation of Power Sub-
transmission and Distribution System to control and reduce their huge
losses. But, the Committee are surprised to note that inspite of attractive
funding system and provisions of incentives, the States are ‘not showing
the expected interest in this Programme. The Committee are happy to
note that Ministry of Power has taken up APDRP evaluation study by
independent agencies like 350, Hyderabad, TERI, IIM Ahmedabad,
SBI Capitals and TCS to evaluate the projects where more than 50%
work has been completed and Reports are expected by this time. The
Committee also desire that Ministry of Power should obtain similar
reports for the States where there is a slow progress of work and the
States where very small number of projects being undertaken to know
the reasons for poor response of such States. In these studies Advisor-
cum-Consultants should also be associated in submitting projects under
APDRP. The Committee desire that after obtaining these reports
Ministry of Power should make necessary efforts to attract more projects
from States during the remaining period of the Current Plan. The
Committee strongly recommend that Advisors-cum-Consultants should

33


also be given a responsibility to persuade and help the State Electricity
Boards/Utilities in preparing more and more schemes under this fully-
funded Programme of the Central Government. The Committee also
desire that Ministry of Power should take initiatives at the highest
level to enhance the Estimates to Rs. 4939 crore at the RE stage so
that the programme may not suffer due to paucity of funds.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry of Power is closely monitoring the APDRP projects
and insisting the States to complete the projects in time. All State
Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities are required to submit monthly
progress report in respect of progress of execution of APDRP projects,
funds utilisation etc. In addition, the Steering Committee under the
chairmanship of Secretary (Power), Ministry of Power and State level
Distribution Reforms Committees, reviews the progress of works under
APDRP and proper utilisation of funds released under APDRP from
time to time. Secretary (Power) and other senior officers of the Ministry
of Power also reviews the progress of the projects sanctioned during
their visit to the States and convening meetings with the States/SEBs/
Utilities officers. In the review meetings, the reasons for slow progress
are identified and States are requested to take remedial measures to
speed up implementation of APDRP projects. Regional Review meetings
for all the regions were held by Secretary (Power) in the recent past.

The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Standing
Committee for awarding more States to the evaluating agencies for
evaluation. The recommendations of the Committee that reasons for
slow progress of work in certain States, and very small number of
projects being undertaken by such states shall be kept in view while
formulating the Scope of work.

Need for ensuring effective implementation of APDRP during the
remaining part of the Tenth Plan to cover all the District Headquarters
by end of Tenth Plan so as to achieve the primary objectives of APDRP
has been emphasized. A model DRP is being prepared drawing
experience from the implementation of projects already sanctioned
under APDRP. National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and Power
Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) have been advised to prepare
model DPR and persuade the SEBs/Utilities to prepare DPR of the
District Headquarters which have not been covered so far.

The Ministry of Power has requested Ministry of Finance to
enhance the allocation under APDRP for the year 2005-06 so that
implementation of APDRP does not suffer for want of adequate funds.

[Ministry’s FE. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]

34


Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.32)

The Committee also analysed the sanctioned projects under this
programme and find that only 568 projects have been sanctioned by
the Government so far. Total cost of these sanctioned projects is
Rs. 19488.75 crore, out of which, APDRP component is Rs. 11469.14 crore.
Out of this, only Rs. 5540.76 crore have been released by the
Government and the counterpart fund drawn is only Rs. 2943.37 crore.
The Committee note that in some States namely Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya, Manipur, Orissa, Tripura
in spite of the availability of adequate funds, utilisation of the same
is very low. The main reasons for poor utilisation of funds as stated
by the Ministry is that there is poor response from suppliers/
contractors. The other reason is that there is inordinate delay in transfer
of APDRP funds by the State Governments to SEBs/Utilities due to
diversion of funds for other purposes. The Committee note that the
main responsibility assigned to Advisor-cum-Consultants (AcCs) under
this programme is to facilitate Utilities in preparation and execution of
projects. Delays in execution shows that AcCs are not carrying out
their responsibilities properly. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Government should ask the AcCs to assist the SEBs/Utilities with
more interest by imparting them adequate training and support for an
early execution of projects. The Committee also strongly recommend
that Government should develop a better mechanism for an early
release of funds to the SEBs/Utilities after approval of Projects and
availability of funds with State Governments. The Government should
take the strict action against the States who do not release the funds
to utilities within one week of the said amount being credited to the
State Government account. As per APDRP guidelines, the equivalent
amount of APDRP funds with 10% penal interest should be adjusted
against the next instalment of Central Plan Assistance to be released
to that State Government. The Committee suggest that the Government
should convince the States to release APDRP funds so that the problem
relating to diversion of APDRP funds by the States may be avoided.
without any further delay. The Committee feel that the Ministry should
keep a strong vigil on the various steps taken by the State Governments
to improve their distribution network, etc. to make APDRP a success.

Reply of the Government

Role of AcCs: The AcCs are in constant touch with all the SEBs/
Utilities to help them at every stage of project ie. right from helping

35


them in preparing DPRs to execution of the project. The performance
of AcCs vis-a-vis the progress of work in each State is monitored in
regular meetings. However, as per recommendation of the Standing
Committee, AcCs have been advised to play niore active role to avoid
delay. As regards training of State Government officials is concerned,
the AcCs may not be in a position to impart training. Training of State
Government officials has been taken up separately under Distribution
Reforms, Upgrades and Management (DRUM) and nearly 1800
personnel have been already been trained. There is a target of training
about 25,000 personnel under DRUM.

Release of funds: The funds under APDRP are released based on
financial progress of implementation of the projects sanctioned, as per
scheme guidelines. Further funds are released to the State Government
based on the utilisation of funds both APDRP and counterpart by the
SEBs/Utilities. As and when SEBs/Utilities fulfil the above conditions,
the recommendations of release of funds are made to the Ministry of
Finance for release of funds against sanctioned projects. There is no
delay in release of the funds by the Ministry of Finance.

Monitoring: All State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities are required
to submit monthly progress report in respect of progress of execution
of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP)
projects, funds utilisation etc. In addition, the Steering Committee under
the chairmanship of Secretary (Power), Ministry of Power and State
level Distribution Reforms Committees, reviews the progress of works
under APDRP and power utilisation of funds released under APDRP
from time to time. Secretary (Power) and other senior officers of the
Ministry of Power also reviews the progress of the projects sanctioned
during their visit to the States and convening meetings with the States/
SEBs/Utilities officers. In the review meetings, the reasons for slow
Progress are identified and States are requested to take remedial
measures to speed up implementation of APDRP projects. Regional
Review meetings for all the regions were held by Secretary (Power) in
the recent past. Moreover, further funds under APDRP are released
based on financial progress of implementation of the projects
sanctioned, as per scheme guidelines. Further funds are released to
the State Governments based on the utilisation of funds both APDRP
and counterpart by the State Governments /SEBs/Utilities. The
implementation of APDRP schemes is also being monitored by Advisor-
cum-Consultants (AcCs) appointed under APDRP. Project Review
Meetings are held at different levels by the AcCs and with various
executing agencies to expedite the completion. During such meetings,
reasons for slow progress are identified & action taken to mitigate the
causes.

36


Penal interest: Adequate provision already exist for release of funds
to State Power Utility within a week and penal interest against
diversion of funds.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.33)

The Committee note that to motivate the SEBs/utilities to reduce
their cash losses, State Governments are incentivised upto 50% of the
actual cash loss reduction by SEBs/Utilities as grant. The year 2000-
01 is considered the base year for calculation of loss reduction in
subsequent years. The Committee do not agree with the rationale given
by the Government, behind considering the year 2000-01 as the base
year. The Committee observe that some States namely Andhra Pradesh,
Delhi, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Sikkim,
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal have shown reduction in commercial
losses initially but increase in subsequent years. In Gujarat, for example,
the cash losses were Rs. 3920 crore in 2000-01 (base year) but declined
to Rs. 3102 crore and Rs. 2250 crore in the years 2001-02 and 2002-03
respectively. But it again increased to Rs. 3020 crore in 2003-04. It has
also come to the knowledge of the Committee that in Ajmer DISCOM
after completion of 100 percent metering, the revenue collection has
come down. By observing these trends, the Committee have very
serious doubts about the actual impact of utilization of APDRP fund.
on strengthening and upgradation of sub-transmission and distribution
system in States. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should treat these specific cases as test cases, examine
them seriously, find the lacuna in implementation process and take
corrective measures so that such results may not appear in future. The
Committee, also desire that incentives being given under APDRP should
not be given on the basis of reduction in losses starting from year
2000-01. The Committee feel that the loss reduction in the preceding
year should be taken as basis for grant of incentive for cash loss
reduction in the next year.

Reply of the Government

The process of Distribution Reforms and grant of additional
financial assistance for upgradation of sub-transmission and distribution
system in the country was started by the Government of India in

37


form of Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) during
the year 2001-02. Therefore, the year preceding to start of distribution
reforms and commencement of APDP i.e. 2000-01 has been designated
as the base year for calculation of loss reduction for incentivising SEBs/
Utilities. Expert Committee on State Specific Reforms, headed by
Shri Deepak Parekh, had also recommended 2000-01 as reference year
for incentive purpose. Fixation of a base year for the purpose of
granting incentive under APDRP ensures (i) bringing all the utilities
on a uniform platform, (ii) avoid any manipulation of accounts for
claiming benefit. Therefore, it is felt that the recommendation of the
Standing Committee for taking into consideration the loss reduction in
the preceding year as the basis for grant of incentive for cash loss
reduction in the next year may not be insisted.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51 No. 4, Para No. 2.34)

The Committee note that States are given incentives in the form of
grants. upto 50% of the cash loss reduction by SEBs/Utilities. Out of
Rs. 40,000 crore earmarked for APDRP for Tenth Five Year Plan, 50%
ie., Rs. 20,000 crore has been allocated for the incentive component
only. During the last three years Rs. 955.58 crore has been given as
incentives to the States. The Committee find it strange that there is no
system of penalizing the States in case of non-utilization of funds. The
only provision regarding non-utilization of funds under APDRP is “the
release of APDRP funds after Ist tranche is subject to utilization of
earlier released funds alongwith equal amount of counterpart fund”.
The Committee feel that the Government have taken a very light
approach towards the States. If States can be rewarded for performance
in the form of incentives there must be some provision for penal
action in case of non-performance. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that a provision of penal action on the States if not utilizing
at least the 50% of allocated funds within one year of release of APDRP
fund and matching fund by financial institutions, be added in MoU to
make them more responsible and determined to implement the projects
in a time-bound manner.

Reply of the Government

Although due care is taken for early utilization of the funds
released under APDRP, it is not feasible to impose a uniform condition

38


for all cases to utilize the 50% of the allocated funds and matching
counter part funds by financial institutions within one year of release
of funds due to:

(a) varying nature of projects involved requiring different modes
for their execution.

(b) varying nature of established procedure of State Government
concerned.

Provision of penal action may deter the State Governments from
availing the assistance under APDRP.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 4.31)

The Committee further note that under the scheme stress is being
laid only on Metering and not much has been done to strengthen
distribution system by way of providing additional transformers and
new wiring, etc. to improve the quality/voltage of power supplied. In
fact, these are the areas which really require private investment. But
unfortunately no specific targets have been fixed area-wise either by
the Ministry of Power or by the State Governments. While explaining
the Concept of Consumer Indexing, the Committee have been informed.
that Consumer Indexing helps in identification of Overloading of
equipments, helps in better load management and better maintenance
of equipments thereby improving quality and reliability of power
supply. The Committee, however, feel that Consumer Indexing will no
doubt help in identifying all these problems but without making any
investment nothing can be achieved. The Committee desire that year-
wise targets should be fixed and implementation be ensured in a time-
bound manner.

Reply of the Government

Under APDRP, funds are being sanctioned for strengthening and
renovation of sub-transmission and distribution by way of providing,
inter-alia, (i) setting up of new sub-stations (ii) augmentation of existing
sub-stations, renovation and modernization of existing sub-stations
(iii) augmentation of 11kV and LT lines and (iv) additional
transformers/replacing old transformer upto the level of 33 kV.

39


Consumer indexing can be implemented by State Governments
concerned and no targets can be fixed by Central Government in this
regard. However, all the States/Utilities have been requested to take
up the job of consumer indexing on priority basis intimating them
about the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee on Energy.
AcCs appointed under APDRP have also been advised to help and
monitor the progress in this regard on regular basis.

[Ministry’s F. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 23 of Chapter I of the Report)

40


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (91, No. 13, Para No. 5.11)

Under APDRP there is an elaborate system of monitoring the
implementation of projects which involves the Central Government,
the State Governments (including DRCs and SERCs) and the Advisor-
cum-Consultants. The Committee observe that through review meeting
the progress of the work is monitored. Nine meetings of the Steering
Committee have been held so far. The pace with which the projects
are being executed by SEBs/Utilities makes it clear that there are serious
deficiencies in the System of monitoring. SEBs/Utilities are facing many
problems such as lack of experience in the execution of projects on
turnkey basis, delay in getting the funds from the State Governments,
non-availability of equipments/contractors to execute the works. These
and many such problems are all reasons why the’ schemes have failed
to take off in some States such as Assam, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh,
etc. How the progress of the work is monitored through the review
meetings is not at all clear to the Committee, because no tangible
results seem to have come out of the implementation of APDRP
schemes in States. Work in installing feeder meters and consumers
meters is very slow and the AT&C losses of power utilities are still
very high. A mere decline in AT&C losses from 39.01% in 2001-02 to
37.98%, in 2003-04 is not at all impressive. Further, though the financial
losses of 2 out of 5 regions has declined during the last three years,
but in some of the States in these regions, the losses have in fact
increased. More surprisingly, the programme is not able to facilitate

- the improvement in availability, quality and reliability of power to the
consumers rather, sufferings of the consumers have increased in general.
They are facing the problems of defective meters, inflated bills and
frequent tariff hikes. Analyzing of all these results makes it clear that
there are lots of problems at all stages of APDRP staring from funding
to implementation and monitoring. The fact that this all is so in spite
of an elaborate monitoring mechanism in place implies that there is
an urgent need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism. In addition,
the Committee feel there is a need for analyzing various factors by
Ministry of Power to ensure the proper implementation of APDR
Programme For example, the Ministry should analyze orders issued
by various SERCs to see whether the benefits of funds provided by

4


the Ministry have been really passed on to the consumer or not. If it
is not done, the Ministry should ask State Governments to issue
necessary instructions to SERCs under the Electricity Act, 2003. No
targets seems to have been fixed for providing additional transformers
and for providing proper wiring etc. in the areas covered by APDRP.
The Committee feel that this is a serious matter and raises a question
mark on the usefulness of the Schemes.

Reply of the Government

An in-depth study into the implementation of APDRP, the benefits
accrued by the projects vis-a-vis expected benefits from the programme,
the progress of implementation of activities committed by the Utilities
under MoU and MoA and the progress on achievement of benchmark
parameters committed under MoA, has been entrusted to five
independent agencies for evaluation of APDRP. The independent
agencies were also asked to suggest changes required in scheme for
improvement and better results. The independent agencies have since
submitted their reports. Remedial action with regard to implementation
of APDRP, utilization of funds released under APDRP and monitoring
would be taken to make APDRP more effective and useful for the
public.

Under APDRP, funds are being sanctioned for strengthening and
renovation of sub-transmission and distribution by way of providing,
inter-alia, (i) setting up of new sub-stations; (ii) augmentation of existing
sub-stations, renovation and modernization of existing’ sub-stations;
(iii) augmentation of 11kV and LT lines; and (iv) additional transformers/
replacing old transformer upto the level of 33 kV. However, to avail
funds under APDRP the SEBs/Utilities have to prepare DPR and
submit to the AcC concerned for scrutiny. The projects under APDRP
are sanctioned on merits as per the extant APDRP guidelines. No
target for providing additional transformers and proper wiring can be
fixed at Central Government level.

[Ministry’s के. No. 5/1/2005-APDRP dated November 21, 2005]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 26 of Chapter I of the Report)

New Devt; GURUDAS KAMAT,
July 31, 2006 Chairman,
Sravana 9, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

42


APPENDIX 1
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-2006) HELD ON 31.7.2006 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ’B’ PHA, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1545 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

2. Shri J.M. Aaron Raashid

»

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
. Shri M.K. Subba
. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

a ae

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

7. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
Rajya Sabha

8. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah

Ro}

10. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
11. Shri Motilal Vora
12. Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan न Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar न Under Secretary

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of
the Committee.

43


2. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—

(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 9th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Implementation of Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (APDRP)” of the Ministry of Power.

(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 8th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Biomass
Power/Co-generation Programme—An Evaluation” of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports with some
modifications.

4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise these
Reports and to present/lay the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

44


APPENDIX IL
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE NINTH
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)

ue
I.

Tl.

Tv.

Total Number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Recommendations Sl.Nos. 5, 7, 8, 9 and 12

Total
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies:
Recommendations SI.Nos. 6 and 10

Total
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have

not been accepted and which require reiteration:
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 11

Total
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the final replies of the Government
are still awaited:

Recommendations Sl. No. 13

Total

Percentage

13

05
38.46%

2

15.39%

38.46%

7.69%

45


=