STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands-for Grants of the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy for the year 2007-2008]

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)



TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2007-2008)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy for the year 2007-2008]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 1.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1.12.2007

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)



Price : Rs. 32.00

© 2007 By Lox SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Pace
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008) .... (iii)
INTRODUCTION (v)
PART I
REPORT
Carrer I Report... il
Cxapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ....... 9
Cuarter IIL Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies ..... 15
CuarTer IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration .. 17
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited eh
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 29th November, 2007... 22
Il. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 19th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (14th Lok Sabha)... Be 24

10)



No ae @

9०

10.
1.
iz,
13.
14.
15.
16.
7,
18.
19.
20.
aie

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2007-08)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Shri Kailash Baitha

Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri ७. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav

(ii)



(iv)

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

Rajya Sabha

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudasu Seelam

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Keshubhai S. Patel

Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Dr. Bimal Jalan

Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri 1.5. Chauhan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Under Secretary
4. Shri Manoj Pahuja — Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 24th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 19th
Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

2. The 19th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2007. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
16th October, 2007.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 29th November, 2007.

4, An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the 19th Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New DELHI; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 29, 2007 Chairman,
Agrahayana 8, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)



CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2007-08.

2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2007
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained
18 Recommendations /Observations.

3. Action taken notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government, These have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

Sl. No. 1, 3, 6, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pressure in view of the Government's replies:

Sl. No. 4, 7 and 14

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

Sl. No. 2, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Nil

4. The Committee desire that utmost importance should be given
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reasons, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time
along with reasons for their non-implementation.


5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

A. Utilisation of Allocated Funds
Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 1.13)

6. The Committee noted that the main reasons specified by the
Ministry for a lower actual expenditure during the year were on
account of the fact that progress in incurring expenditure in the Remote
Village Electrification Programme started suffering from 2003-04
onwards, when Finance Ministry raised the issue that Cabinet approval
had not been taken without taking cognizance of the fact that the
resolution under which the Commission for Additional Sources of
Energy (CASE) was formed, clearly spelt out that this Commission
had both appraisal and approval power within the allocated budget.
Similarly, problems were faced with programmes whose 10th Plan
outlay exceeded Rs. 50 crore. As per the subsidy scheme also for
small hydro, biomass, bagase cogeneration etc., the subsidy could not
be released. Another reasons specified by the Ministry for non-
utilisation of the funds was that REC (Rural Electrification Corporation),
the implementing agency for RGGVY had been unable to furnish lists
of remote villages and hamlets until late 2006-07. The Ministry had
further informed that R&D appraisal mechanism could be put in place
only in December 2006, because the entire issue of R&D had to be re-
examined due to certain reasons.

7. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:

“It is submitted that the issues relating to RVE programme are of
an ongoing nature and keep getting addressed as they crop up.
Approval for continuation of the Programme during the 10th Plan
period was duly obtained. The process of identification of remote
villages by REC has been further streamlined and around 8700
remote villages and hamlets have been identified by them so far.
States have been advised to expedite preparation of proposals for
these villages for consideration of this Ministry.”

8. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the reply of the
Ministry. The Ministry has not explained the reasons for non-release
of subsidy for small hydro, biomass, bagase cogeneration, etc. The
teasons given by the Ministry for low expenditure during the year
speak volumes of the lack of perspective planning by the
Government.

Zs


9, The Committee have noted that at last around 8700 remote
villages and hamlets have been identified by the REC under RGGVY
and the State Governments have been advised to expedite preparation
of proposals for these villages. The Committee hope that the Ministry
will now assign top priority to this matter and through persistent
follow-up ensure that not only are the proposals expedited by the
State Governments but REC also takes care of the execution part
without any delay. The Committee expect that the Ministry will go
all out for completion of electrification in all respects in these 8700
villages and hamlets during the current financial year.

10. The Committee further desire that proper planning be done
by the Government regarding proper implementation of various
schemes & programmes so that the allocated funds do not remain
unutilized.

B, Development of Small Hydel Power Projects
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 1.16)

11. The Committee were of the view that the Ministry should lay
special emphasis on development of small hydel power projects in the
North-East and Himachal Pradesh etc. where a lot of potential exists.
Small hydel power projects does not involve a lot of displacement of
people or disturb the eco-system of the area and could be developed
in a short time. The Ministry should carry out techno-economic
feasibility study to identify small hydel potential in various States on
canals like projects on Indira Gandhi Canal in Rajasthan, Punjab and.
Haryana.

12, The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:

“Under the Small Hydro Power (SHP) Programme of the Ministry,
States that desire to carry out further survey and investigations of
newer SHP sites and prepare a master plan for the development
of the sector can do so for which purpose upto Rs. 30 lakh is
provided. Furthermore, the level of subsidy provision for special
category states that include north-east region and Himachal Pradesh
is on the higher side. Investment in NER is not forthcoming
commensurate with potential on account of lack of investor
confidence.”

13. The Committee have noted that the Ministry provides fund
upto Rs. 30 lakh to the States, which desire to carry out further
survey and investigation of newer SHP sites and preparation of

3



master plan for the development of this sector. However, it appears
that mere financial incentive is not sufficient to prop up this core
sector. The Committee feel that the Ministry should play a more
proactive role in this matter. One of the alternatives could be getting
a national survey of prospective small hydro projects sites done
suo-moto by the Government. The Ministry can, thereafter, based on
this holistic perspective plan take up the matter with the concerned
State Government.

14, As regards the lack of investment in the NE Region due to
poor investor confidence, the Committee feel that the Ministry should
go all out in coordination with Union Home Ministry and the State
Governments to ensure a pro-investor climate in the Region in view
of its tremendous potential for power generation through SHP
particularly focusing the law and order situation as expenditure on
security adds up to the cost of project making its unviable.

९. Incentives for wind power generation
Recommendation (51, No. 8, Para No. 22.14)

15. While observing that 80% accelerated depreciation alongwith
concessional duties and tax holidays for 10 years on profits earned are
available to the wind power generators in the country to encourage
private participation, the Committee had noted that there was no direct
co-relation between the capacity installation of wind power and the
number of units generated. In this context, the Committee had desired
that though incentives and tax holidays were needed to be continued
in the wind energy sector, but at the same time these should have
been linked to the actual generation of power and its utilisation as
grid interactive power or as power for local use in villages and hamlets
near the actual sites. The Committee had recommended for devising
a mechanism to monitor the incentives alongwith the actual production
and utilization of wind power at the tail end.

16. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:

“While ideally linking incentives to output, i.e., generation appears
desirable, the same requires not only a high level of monitoring
but also the need to keep accounts for a fairly substantial length
of time, leading thereby to manifold increase in paper work and
requirement of manpower to administer such a scheme.
Notwithstanding this drawback, a case is being made out for
production-linked incentives in lieu of accelerated depreciation
benefit for wind power. In cases where capital subsidy is being


provided such as small hydro power and bio-power the same is
linked to attainment of the larger objective of deployment of quality
equipment that conforms to IEC standards or equivalent national
standards, where available. Hence, such targeted capital subsidy is
also required as it serves a purpose.”

17. The Committee observe that the Ministry has accepted the
recommendation of the Committee but have expressed a lot of
procedural apprehensions in effective implementation thereof. While
expressing their satisfaction over the submission of the Ministry that
a case was being made out for production linked incentives in lieu
of accelerated depreciation benefit for wind power, the Committee
observe that the Ministry should overcome all procedural and
administrative embargo to achieve the desired level of result in this
regard in the near future. The Committee would like to again
emphasize that the tax holidays and other incentives in the wind
power generation sector must be linked with the actual generation
of power and its utilization and for this purpose a suitable
monitoring mechanism must be evolved. The Committee trust that
the Ministry will come forward with a concrete proposal to effectively
implement their recommendations.

D. R&D in the field of Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.15)

18. The Committee also note that in the past very meagre
allocations had been made for R&D sector and even then the Ministry
has been unable to use all its funds for R&D and other related
programmes of wind energy. As there is an urgent need to tap the
wind resources in the low wind regimes, the Committee desire that
there is a long pending requirement to undertake more and more
R&D activities and develop WEGs for low wind regimes so that the
available wind energy potential in the country can be tapped
successfully to the fullest extent. The Ministry should also explore the
possibility of getting wind technology from abroad and also study the
different types of wind zones existing in India.

19. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:

“At the outset, it is submitted that because of excellent wind regime
prevalent in most parts of North America and Northern Europe,
their current design for Wind Electric Generators (WEGs) is
optimized for performance at wind power density greater than
300 W/m? at 50m hub height. Accordingly Europeans, who have

)


been the leaders in WEG design, have not focused attention on
the development and manufacture of WEGs for wind regimes less
than 300 W/m? at 50m hub height so far. The USDOE, it is learnt,
has sponsored a project for design and development of WEGs for
low wind regimes. Under the Indo-US Energy Dialogue an offer
has been made to the US side to involve this country in the said
Project but no favourable response has been received to date despite
Several initiatives from our end. Alongside, C-WET has been asked
to go ahead with the design and development of such WEGs in
collaboration or otherwise with other research institutions and
corporates in the field. It might be mentioned that the WEGs
manufactured in the country are based on licensed design, except
in the case of Suzlon which has its own design offices within and
outside the country.”

20. The Committee note that due to excellent wind regime
prevalent in most parts of North America and Northern Europe, the
countries in these regions have optimized greater power density
technologies. These are unfortunately not suitable to our low wind
regime situations. It is understood that the US Deptt. of Energy has
sponsored a project for design and development of Wind Electric
Generators (WEGs) for low wind regimes, however, the efforts made
by the Ministry till date to get India involved in this project have
yielded no results,

21. Apart from these offshore initiatives the Ministry has also
asked C-WET to go ahead with the design and development of such
WEGs either in collaboration or otherwise with other R&D
institutions and corporates in the field. In view of the immense
importance of wind energy, it is but imperative that WEGs suitable
to the low wind regimes prevalent in India be acquired/developed
indigenously. To this end the Committee would like the Government
to take up the matter regarding involving India in the US Deptt. of
Energy sponsored project, at the highest levels.

22. Apart from tapping this offshore source, the Committee would
also emphasise on development of WEGs indigenously at the earliest.
For this purpose they would expect the Ministry to render all possible
facilities and assistance to C-WET so that their efforts in developing
WEGs suitable to our requirements do not suffer from any
administrative or financial constraints. The Committee would like
the Ministry to work out a clearly laid out road map in consultation
with C-WET for the purpose and would like to be apprised about
the same at the earliest.

6


E, Implementation of Rural Electrification Programmes
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.24)

23, The Committee took note of the fact that a large amount of
work was to be undertaken for remote village lighting, village energy
security test projects, biogas projects, etc. in the 11th Plan period. The
Committee desired that adequate funds might be made available for
these small yet significant rural programmes so that the population
living in rural areas could take maximum benefit of the programmes
and schemes initiated by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

24, The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:
“The recommendation is noted.”

25. The Committee are highly dissatisfied with the reply of the
Ministry in the instant case. Merely noting the recommendation of
the Committee will not suffice. The remote village lighting, village
energy security test projects and biogas projects are small yet
significant minimum requirement of the rural areas, which deserve
far more than a non-chalant response from the nodal Ministry.

26. The Committee in their recommendation had desired that
adequate funds may be made available for remote village lighting,
village energy security test projects, biogas projects, etc., during 11th
Plan. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire
that the Ministry should ensure through proper monitoring that the
1ith Plan allocation for these programmes/schemes is fully utilized
for the benefit of the people living in rural areas.

E R&D in the field of Solar Power Generation
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para No. 2.50)

27. The Committee note that R&D activity in this country as well
as globally aim to make solar power more competitive in the near
future. An amount of Rs. 400 crore has been proposed in the solar
R&D in the 11th Plan which has the aim of making the Solar Energy
Centre an Institution of excellence. The Committee desire that a time
schedule should be drawn up to carry forward the research in identified
areas in this field so that it can be made economically viable and
made use of at mass level. The Committee desire that the latest
technology in the field of R&D should be adopted so that there is cost
effectiveness by increasing the number of users. The Committee also

7



desire that various IITs and other scientific institutions should also be
asked to take up research work in the solar energy field.

28. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:
The recommendation is noted.

29. The Committee are unhappy about this totally incomplete
response of the Ministry. The Ministry was supposed to take concrete
steps for fructification of the suggestions contained in this Report
and inform the Committee about the same. Earmarking a sum of
Rs. 400 crore, which is by no means a small amount to SEC for
R&D efforts in Solar Energy Sector ought to have been accompanied
by a clearly laid down plan of likely core areas and targets so that
achievements would have been accordingly calibrated.

30. The Committee would, therefore, like to have a more detailed
and specific response from the Ministry than its present inane one.
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the measures
being proposed by the Ministry to make Solar Energy Centre (SEC)
an Institution of Excellence. The Committee further desire to know
whether any IIT and other scientific institution have been approached
by the Ministry to take up research work in the field of Solar Energy
and what has been the response.


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (51, No. 1, Para No. 1.12)

The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a
downward trend in the utilisation of funds by the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy from the year 2003-04 onwards. Similarly, there
has been a trend of cutting the budget of the Ministry by the Ministry
of Finance at RE stage from the year 2003-04 onwards. Last year also
a similar trend was noticed in the expenditure of the Ministry. Against
a BE of Rs. 603.64 crore, the RE for same year stood at Rs. 386.57
crore. The actual expenditure up to February 2007 as informed by the
Ministry was Rs. 255.32 crore. The Committee note that the Ministry
failed to make adequate expenditure in the first and second quarter of
the financial year (Rs. 36.72 crore and Rs. 4.42 crore) resulting in a cut
at the RE stage.

Reply of the Government

It is submitted that RE. of Rs. 386.57 crore during 2006-07 was
fully utilized, During 2007-08 an amount of Rs. 114.81 crore has already
been utilized during the first two quarters, ie, April-September 2007.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 1.14)

The Committee, however, feel that the Ministry has taken too long
a period to resolve various problems which are only administrative in
nature. The Committee, therefore, desire that such problems should be
attended to within the financial year in which these are encountered.
The Committee hope that the expenditure position would improve in
the year 2007-08 as the obstacles encountered in the clearance and
approval of schemes by way of dismantling of CASE and direct
financial approval at the appropriate level by the Ministry of Finance
would prove an effective method to check expenditure and streamline
the procedures. The Committee feel that the rationalisation and
simplification of the programmes/schemes for the 11th Plan
commencing 2007-08 would help the Ministry in achieving both

9


physical and financial targets. The Committee also hope that
expenditure position would also improve by deputation of a zonal
officer in each State to facilitate processing of schemes and zonal
meetings to be chaired by Secretary, MNRE introduced in 2006-07 to
be made more periodic. The Committee hope that they will be able to
utilise all the funds allocated to the Ministry judiciously and
expeditiously in the year 2007-08.

Reply of the Government

The expenditure during the first two quarters of 2007-08 is
Rs. 114.81 crore. Further efforts are being made to utilize the entire BE
provision for the year.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No. 1.17)

At the same time the Committee desire that other areas should
not be totally neglected. The Committee desire that research and
development in all the areas should be continued to be done. The
Government should provide 100% subsidy for R&D activities and the
Ministry should ensure that the amount allocated is fully utilised in
identified key areas where research is required. The Committee also
desire that more research needs to be carried out on tidal projects.

Reply of the Government

During 11th Plan, Rs. 1500 crore has been proposed for Research,
Design and Development in New and Renewable Energy. Under the
existing scheme, corporate R&D can be supported upto the level of
50 per cent while that carried out in universities, national labs, etc. is
eligible for upto 90 per cent support.

The major R&D activities to be undertaken during the 11th Plan
are:

(i) Bio-energy, including Bio-fuels.
(ii) Hydrogen and Fuel Cells

(iii) Raising efficiency and lowering costs of Solar Photovoltaic
Cells

(iv) Raising efficiency and lowering costs of Solar Thermal
Energy systems/devices


(v) Wind Electric Generator Systems for low wind regime
(vi) Small Hydro Power
(vii) Geothermal Energy
(viii) Tidal Energy
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 10, Para No. 2.23)

The Committee note that the responsibility for identification of
villages and hamlets which are not to receive grid connectivity under
RGGVY has been entrusted to the Rural Electrification Corporation
(REC). The REC as so far identified 7496 villages/hamlets though some
are disputed by some State Governments. The Committee feel that in
view of the above no head way appears to have been made in the
Rural Electrification Programmes. The Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy rather than relying totally on REC for identification of villages
and hamlets which are not to receive grid connectivity under RGGVY,
should take up some sort of survey work of their own to identify
potential villages to be electrified through renewable energy. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry must take effective steps
for identification of inaccessible areas for electrification by renewable
energy. The Committee desire that apart from meeting the needs of
home lighting systems under this scheme, all out efforts should be
made to meet the other energy needs of such villages like cooking
and motive power through locally available resources.

Reply of the Government

It is submitted that the subject of rural electrification has been
allocated to the Ministry of Power (MoP) who have accordingly been
charged with the responsibility for providing grid access in rural areas
through RGGVY. This Ministry, therefore, cannot duplicate the efforts
of MoP or its agencies like REC to determine as to which of the
villages would receive grid-connectivity or not. It is only after REC
takes a decision not to provide grid access to a particular village or
hamlet that the same is communicated to this Ministry. It might be
mentioned that in some cases states are contesting REC’s decisions not
to provide grid-access, thereby complicating the process of provision
of renewable energy options to remote villages. As far as provision of
biogas plants for remote villages is concerned, the same has been
noted. It is submitted that till such time as bio-fuels prove their

ai}



technical viability and cost effectiveness for motive power, it may not
be possible to take up any major programme in this regard.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.25)

The Committee note that work has been commenced on test
projects in remote villages and hamlets to meet their energy needs.
The first test project has been commissioned at Kasai village, Batual
district, Madhya Pradesh on October 2005. The Committee desire that
such projects should be started in these villages in a time bound
manner for which a schedule should be drawn up. The Committee
should be informed of the same. The Committee desire that a detailed
study should be made as to how many systems were installed during
the last three years and how many are functional. The targets relating
to the same should be fixed so that work is executed timely.

Reply of the Government

81 test projects have so far been taken up in 11 States, of which
8 have been commissioned so far, Another 50 projects are proposed to
be taken up during 2007-08 and 70 projects during 2008-09. As regards
evaluation of functionality of the systems, the Ministry has initiated
action to conduct detailed evaluation/impact study of all its major
programmes, including the test projects on village energy security,
during the current year.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (51, No. 13, Para No. 2.37)

The Committee note that the Biomass Power and Co-generation
Programme of the Ministry is being implemented since last few years.
However, there has been a gap between the physical and financial
targets of the programme. The Committee are unhappy to note that
the physical and financial targets under the programme had not been
achieved during various years of the 10th Five Year Plan due to
cancellation of some PPAs. The Committee also note that the developers
of biomass power face certain problems like non-assessment of surplus
biomass, interrupted supplies of biomass, especially during monsoons,
steep price variations in supply, technical and operational problems
and uncertainty associated with tariffs fixation in some potential States.

12


Reply of the Government

It is submitted that as against a target of 700 MW for the 10th
Plan for Biomass Combustion/Bagasse Cogeneration Programme, the
actual achievement is 758 MW which has been achieved by incurring
a lesser expenditure of Rs. 59.69 crore against a BE/RE of Rs. 141.22/
Rs. 100.92 crore.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (51, No. 15, Para No. 2.39)

The Committee also desire that R&D efforts should be stepped up
to improve biomass gasification technologies to give a better result in
power generation. A time schedule should be fixed to complete the
identified projects so that this sector can be made more commercially
viable and huge potential can be tapped. The Committee also desire
that R&D should be related to standardisation of machines, their
maintenance, working and on the whole the institutional set up
required to ensure working of the various systems under biomass
gasification programme.

Reply of the Government

The identified thrust areas for R&D in Biomass gasification have
been placed on this Ministry’s website: http://wwwamnrenic.in and
research proposals have been solicited. Projects relating to standards
for equipment and institutional mechanisms for ensuring regular
maintenance of the systems are receiving focused attention of the
Ministry.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/ '2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 2.40)

The Government should also examine as to how far various
incentives have been able to attract the private investment in this
sector. The Committee desire that these incentives should be linked
with actual generation of power and not merely on creation of
infrastructure etc.

Reply of the Government

As already submitted in reply to recommendation at Sl. No. 8, a
case is being made out for grant of production linked incentives for
wind power and in cases where capital subsidy is being provided

13



such as small hydro power and bio power, the same is being linked
to attainment of the larger objective of deployment of quality equipment
that conforms to IEC standards or equivalent national standards, where
available. Hence, such targeted capital subsidy is also required as it
serves a purpose.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1 /2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 2.49)

The Committee note that the Solar Energy Programme of the
Ministry during the 10th Plan period was to facilitate (i) R&D on
solar energy materials (ii) deployment of solar energy systems for
supplementing heat requirements and (iii) limited demonstration for
extension purpose of SPV systems and devices. The Committee note
that have been huge variations in physical and financial targets and
actual expenditure has been lower than the Budget Estimates and
Revised Estimates. even in the R&D a substantially lower amount had
been spent on the solar energy research front. Not much appears to
have been done in reducing the cost of solar power. The Committee
desire that time bound targets should be fixed to put up solar street
lights, traffic signals and other eco-logical friendly devices in the 11th
Plan.

Reply of the Government

It is submitted that RD&D focus during the 11th Plan is on the
development of silicon and other materials, cost-efficient solar cells,
thin film materials, concentrating PV technology, PV system design
with the objective of significantly reducing the ratio of capital cost to
conversion efficiency for which an outlay of Rs. 220 crore has been
Proposed. A budget provision of Rs. 250 crore has further been
proposed for support to SPV and other renewable energy devices under
the extension component of the Information, Publicity and Extension
Programme during the 11th Plan.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]

14


CHAPTER पा

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PERSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 1.15)

The Committee further desire that while developing various sources
of new and renewable energy, cost effectiveness of the source should
be kept in mind by making a cost-benefit analysis. For example, with
an investment of 36 crore, 1.5 lakh of family type Biogas plants can
be provided. So the basic idea should be to add maximum MW at
least cost.

Reply of the Government

The endeavor is that the unit cost of generation of renewable
power/energy is cost competitive and this cannot be measured in terms
of capacity addition/unit investment alone without taking into account
annual capacity utilization factor, safety aspects, convenience of supply,
etc.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (SI. No. 7, Para No. 2.13)

The Committee note that the potential for wind power generation
for both grid and off grid applications was estimated at about 45000
MW taking sites having wind power density greater than 200 W/Sq
m at 50 m hub height assuming land availability in potential areas
@1% and the requirement of setting up wind farms @12ha/MW. The
Committee also note that two-thirds of the wind potential lies in areas
having a very modest wind regime. The wind capacity installed up to
31.1.2007 is 6315 MW only.

Reply of the Government

The wind power generation installed capacity up to 31.3.2007 is
7093 MW. An additional capacity of 1500 MW has been planned for
2007-08. As noted by the Committee, harnessing of wind power
potential between 200-300 W/m2 at 50 m hub height (Class-II) would

15


require development and deployment of Wind Electric Generators
(WEGs) that make generation cost effective in such low wind regimes,

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/ 1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Recommendation (31, No. 14, Para No. 2.38)

The Committee desire that these problems should be resolved in
consultation with private developers and if necessary, with the State
Governments as well so that private investment can come in this sector,
The Committee further note that a Biomass Resource Atlas for India
has been prepared for surplus agro residues which has been placed
on the website of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, which is
expected to address the issue of firmly assessing surplus agro residue
availability. The Committee have also been informed that the thrust
areas for R&D support on biomass power/co-generation and
gasification have been identified and an increased allocation has been
made for the same.

Reply of the Government

Work on the National Biomass Resources Atlas has been completed
on 31.7.2007 and the same has been hosted on IISc website: http://
www.lab.cgpliisc.ernet.in. The thrust areas identified for R&D support
in biomass power, co-generation and Sasification have been placed on
this Ministry’s website: http://www.amnrenic.in. An increased allocation
of Rs. 5.00 crore has been made in B.E. 2007-08 for R&D activities in
Bio-Energy.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/ 1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]

16


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 1.13)

The Committee note that the main reasons specified by the Ministry
for a lower actual expenditure during the year were on account of the
fact that progress in incurring expenditure in the Remote Village
Electrification Programme started suffering from 2003-04 onwards, when
Finance Ministry raised the issue that Cabinet approval had not been
taken without taking cognizance of the fact that the resolution under
which the Commission for Additional Sources of Energy (CASE) was
formed, clearly spelt out that this Commission had both appraisal and
approval power within the allocated budget. Similarly, problems were
faced with programmes whose 10th Plan outlay exceeded Rs. 50 crore.
As per the subsidy scheme also for small hydro, biomass, bagase
cogeneration etc., the subsidy could not be released. Another reasons
specified by the Ministry for non-utilisation of the funds was that
REC (Rural Electrification Corporation), the implementing agency for
RGGVY had been unable to furnish lists of remote villages and hamlets
until late 2006-07. The Ministry has further informed that R&D
appraisal mechanism could be put in place only in December 2006,
because the entire issue of R&D had to be re-examined due to certain
reasons.

Reply of the Government

It is submitted that the issues relating to RVE programme are of
an ongoing nature and keep getting addressed as they crop up.
Approval for continuation of the Programme during the 10th Plan
period was duly obtained. The process of identification of remote
villages by REC has been further streamlined and around 8700 remote
villages and hamlets have been identified by them so far. States have
been advised to expedite preparation of proposals for these villages
for consideration of this Ministry.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee

Please see Para Nos. 8, 9 and 10 of Chapter-I of the Report.

17



Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 1.16)

The Committee are also of the view that the Ministry should lay
special emphasis on development of small hydel power projects in the
North-East and Himachal Pradesh etc. where a lot of potential exists,
Small hydel power projects does not involve a lot of displacement of
people or disturb the eco-system of the area and could be developed
in a short time. The Ministry should carry out techno-economic
feasibility study to identify small hydel potential in various States on
canals like projects on Indira Gandhi Canal in Rajasthan, Punjab and
Haryana.

Reply of the Government

Under the Small Hydro Power (SHP) Programme of the Ministry,
States that desire to carry out further survey and investigations of
newer SHP sites and prepare a master plan for the development of
the sector can do so for which Purpose upto Rs. 30 lakh is provided.
Furthermore, the level of subsidy provision for special category states
that include north-east region and Himachal Pradesh is on the higher
side. Investment in NER is not forthcoming commensurate with
potential on account of lack of investor confidence.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/ 2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para Nos. 13 and 14 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.14)

The Committee are unhappy to note poor utilisation of funds
during the 10th Plan period. This has led the Ministry of Finance to
reduce their budget every year at RE stage. The Committee consider
it a very serious matter and desire that immediate corrective steps
should be taken to ensure that in future all allocations are fuly utilised.
The Committee also note that 80% accelerated depreciation along with
concessional duties and tax holidays for 10 years on profits earned are
available to the wind power generators in the country to encourage
private participation. However, the Committee are surprised to note
that there is no direct co-relation between the capacity installation of
wind power and the number of units generated. The Committee feel
that although incentives and tax holidays need to be continued in the
wind energy sector, however, these should be linked to the actual
generation of power and its utilisation as grid interactive power or as
power for local use in villages and hamlets near the actual sites. The
Committee recommend that the Government needs to devise a
mechanism to monitor the incentives along with the actual production
and utilization of wind power at the tail end. The Committee should
be kept informed about the action taken in the matter.

18


Reply of the Government

While ideally linking incentives to output, i.e., generation appears
desirable, the same requires not only a high level of monitoring but
also the need to keep accounts for a fairly substantial length of time,
leading thereby to manifold increase in paper work and requirement
of manpower to administer such a scheme. Notwithstanding this
drawback, a case is being made out for production-linked incentives
in lieu of accelerated depreciation benefit for wind power. In cases
where capital subsidy is being provided such as small hydro power
and bio-power the same is linked to attainment of the larger objective
of deployment of quality equipment that conforms to IEC standards
or equivalent national standards, where available. Hence, such targeted
capital subsidy is also required as it serves a purpose.

[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No. 2.15)

The Committee also note that in the past very meagre allocations
had been made for R&D sector and event hen the Ministry has been
unable to use all its funds for R&D and other related programmes of
wind energy. As there is an urgent need to tap the wind resources in
the low wind regimes, the Committee desire that there is a long
pending requirement to undertake more and more R&D activities and
develop WEGSS for low wind regimes so that the available wind
energy potential in the country can be tapped successfully to the fullest
extent. The Ministry should also explore the possibility of getting wind
technology from abroad and also study the different types of wind
zones existing in India.

Reply of the Government

At the outset, it is submitted that because of excellent wind regime
prevalent in most parts of North America and Northern Europe, their
current design for Wind Electric Generators (WEGs) is optimized for
performance at wind powerdensity greater than 300 W/m? at 50 m
hub height. Accordingly Europeans, who have been the leaders in
WEG design, have not focused attention on the development and
manufacture of WEGs for wind regimes less than 300 W/m? at 50 m
hub height so far. The USDOE, it is learnt, has sponsored a project for
design and development of WEGs for low wind regimes. Under the
indo-US Energy Dialogue an offer has been made to the US side to
involve this country in the said project but no favourable response
has been received to date despite several initiatives from our end.
Alongside, C-WET has been asked to go ahead with the design and
development of such WEGs in collaboration or otherwise with other

19


research institutions and corporates in the field. It might be mentioned
that the WEGs manufactured in the country are based on licensed
design, except in the case of Suzlon which has its own design offices
within and outside the country.

[Ministry's O.M. No. 8/1/2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para Nos. 20, 21 and 22 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 2.24)

The Committee took note of the fact that a large amount of work
was to be undertaken for remote village lighting, village energy security
test projects, biogas projects, etc. in the 11th Plan period. The Committee
desired that adequate funds may be made available for these small
yet significant rural programmes so that the population living in rural
areas can take maximum benefit of the Programmes and schemes
initiated by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/ 2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para Nos. 25 and 26 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para No. 2.50)

The Committee note that R&D activity in this country as well as
globally aim to make solar power more competitive in the near future.
An amount of Rs. 400 crore has been proposed in the solar R&D in
the 11th Plan which has the aim of making the Solar Energy Centre
an Institution of excellence. The Committee desire that a time schedule
should be drawn up to carry forward the research in identified areas
in this field so that it can be made economically viable and made use
of at mass level. The Committee desire that the latest technology in
the field of R&D should be adopted so that there is cost effectiveness
by increasing the number of users. The Committee also desire that
various IITs and other scientific institutions should also be asked to
take up research work in the solar energy field.

Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted.
[Ministry’s O.M. No. 8/1/ 2007-P&C, dated 12.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee

Please see Para Nos. 29 and 30 of Chapter-I of the Report.
20


CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF

WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWATED

—Nil—

New छिपा; GURUDAS KAMAT,
November 29, 2007 Chairman,
Agrahayana 8, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

21



APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE 4TH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON 29TH NOVEMBER, 2007 IN
ROOM NO. 134, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1530 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MemBERS
Lok Sabha

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Dr. Ravindra Kamar Rana

. Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri M.K. Subba

a 9०

Rajya Sabha

. Shri Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha

. Shri Motilal Vora

10. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

७ Ong

‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari = Joint Secretary
2. Shri J.S. Chauhan _ Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar ता Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Juby Amar = Under Secretary

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
Draft Twenty-fourth Report on Action taken on the recommendations
contained in the 19th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2007-08.

22


2. The Committee then adopted the draft Report without any
modification.

3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Report and to present/lay the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

23


APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

24

ENERGY (14TH LOK SABHA)
Total number of Recommendations

Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:

SL No. 1, 3, 6, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to persue in view
of the Government’s replies:

Sl. No. 4, 7 and 14
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:

Sl. No. 2, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18
Percentage

Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the final replies of the Government
are still awaited:

Sl. No. Nil

Percentage

18

Total : 9
50%

Total : 3
17%

Total : 6
33%

Total : Nil
0%