STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY
14 (2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2005

FOURTEENTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)


FOURTEENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2005

Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 May 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 May 2006

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)


C.O.E, No. 159

Price : Rs. 65.00

© 2006 By Lok SasHA SecRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of

Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

PAGE

CoMPosITION OF THE COMMITTEE ..... (iii)

INTRODUCTION ..... wae, ¥),

INTRODUCTORY... 1

Report .. ३८० 4
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations of the Standing

Committee on Energy contained in the Report 27

-ANNEXURES
I. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005 32

Il. Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on
Energy held on 16.01.2006, 24.01.2006, 07.02.2006,
08.03.2006, 09.03.2006 and 17.05.2006

(i)


I  eee—Ci
7 ft
&
7
7 ewan 7
roo 7 - है
ः i
oy वा ७० किको5 जी eS er है
a Looe eee [aeRO हि
: roel Bom cere eel eats Bc Deeg Rh ater
'
rs = Nea छः SARA ee =F i]
मिल आह पा ॥
Zz ec ca Sa ne rs :
a Po
a oer oe ee SAE el anaes anion # Ew

fe eS ate a कैफ 7 हक: ah teeter ||
en oo आम
ee ७1 ee TU De or का जाप्रहाजफ

=

ed हि कानों oj CNS pee WL


10.
11.
12,
13.
14.
15,
16.
17.
18.
19,
20.
21.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MeMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

. Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary

Shri B. Vinod Kumar
Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Prashanta Pradhan
Dr. Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Khiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkataswamy
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

“Expired on 14th April, 2006,

(iil)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
“23. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
24. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
26, Shri Bimal Jalan
27. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Neena Juneja — Senior Executive Assistant

“Ceased to be Member of the Committee wef. 2nd April, 2006, consequent upon his
retirement from Rajya Sabha.

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Fourteenth Report on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2005 relating to the Ministry of Power.

2. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005 (copy enclosed at
Annexure-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2005
and referred to the Standing Committee on Energy for detailed
examination and making a report thereon in three months time by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Committee sought extension of time
by three months for presentation of the Report on the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 which was granted by Hon’ble Speaker on
22nd March, 2006.

3. In connection with examination of the Bill the Committee held
five sittings including a briefing by the Ministry of Power and
representatives of eight State Governments. The views of other State
Governments/Union Territories on the proposed amendments were
sought in writing. Associations like Associated Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (ASSOCHAM), Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Confederation of. Indian Industry
(CII) were asked to offer their views/ suggestions in writing on the
proposed amendments to the Bill.

4, The Committee wish to express their thanks to the various
State Governments and Associations for expressing their views on the
proposed amendments to the Electricity Act, 2003. The Committee
would also like to thank the representatives of the Ministry of Power
for placing before them detailed information as desired by the
Committee and also briefing the Committee on the subject.

5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 17th May, 2006.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.

New Det, GURUDAS KAMAT,
May 17, 20067 Chairman,
Vaisakha 28, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


INTRODUCTORY

The Electricity Act 2003 was brought into effect from 10th June
2003. Drafting of the Electricity Bill involved almost 1-1/2 years
consultations with the State Governments, State Power Utilities,
Industry Associations, individual experts, Trade Unions, Central Public
Sector Undertakings, Employee Associations, before it was introduced
in the Lok Sabha in August 2001. After its introduction in Lok Sabha,
the Bill was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Energy for detailed examination. The Standing Committee engaged in
further rounds of discussions with the stakeholders, by inviting
comments from all the concerned.

2, The Committee submitted their report in December 2002. Most
of the recommendations of the Committee were accepted by the
Government. The Electricity Bill, including the official amendments
proposed on the basis of the recommendations of the Standing
Committee, was considered and passed by the Lok Sabha. When the
Bill was being considered in the Rajya Sabha, the Minister of Power
gave assurance to bring amendments on four issues. Based on this
understanding, the Bill was passed. The Act was subsequently amended
for fulfilling the assurance given by the Minister in the Rajya Sabha.
These amendments came into effect from 27th January 2004.

3. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has been introduced in
the Lok Sabha on 23.12.2005 and has been referred by the Speaker to
the Standing Committee on Energy for examination and report thereon.

4. Some of the important amendments proposed in the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 are mentioned in the statement of Objects and
Reasons appended to the Bill.

5. The National Electricity Policy states that both the Central
Government and State Governments would jointly endeavour to achieve
the objective of supply of electricity to all areas at the earliest. The
Central Government has launched the ‘Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana’ for supporting States in creating rural electricity
infrastructure and electrification of households with provision of 90%
capital subsidy to fulfil the objective of the National Common Minimum
Programme (NCMP) of electrification of all households in the next
five years. There has, however, been a suggestion that the Act should
be amended to reflect that the Central Government will also share the


responsibility of rural electrification. Accordingly, it has been decided
to bring amendment to Section 6. After reviewing the definition of an
electrified village, it is acknowledged that less than 44% of the
households in India have been electrified.

6. The Clause 2 proposed to substitute Section 6 of the Principal
Act, provides that instead of the words “the Appropriate Government
shall endeavour to supply electricity to all areas including villages
and hamlets” shall now read that “the concerned State Governments
and the Central Government shall jointly endeavour to provide access
to electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets through rural
electricity infrastructure and electrification of households”.

7. Clause 3 to 7 and 10 and 11 of the amendment Bill relates to
the question of reduction in cross subsidies. These clauses propose
amendment to Sections 38, 39, 40, 42, 61, 178 and 181 of the Act 2003
to delete the words ‘and eliminated/elimination’ of cross-subsidies.
The existing tariff policy lays down a timeframe for rationalisation of
electricity tariffs and reduction of the cross-subsidies within a band of
+ 20% by the end of the year 2010-11.

8. Sub-clauses 10 (iii) and 11 (iv) of the Bill propose to amend
Sections178 (2) (r) and 181 (2) (zc). These Sections deal with the powers
of Central Electricity Authority and powers of the State Commissions
to provide for period within which the cross-subsidies shall be reduced
and eliminated. The present Bill proposes to restrict this power of the
Authority and the State Commissions as to manner of reduction of
cross-subsidies only.

9. Clause 8 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 151 of the Act
2003 so as to expressly provide that the police shall have full powers
of investigation as available to them under the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973 to investigate any offence punishable under this Act.
This clause also empowers the special courts constituted under Sections
153 to take cognizance of an offence punishable under Sections 135 to
138 without the accused being committed to it for trial.

10. In_connection with detailed examination of the aforesaid
amendment Bill, the Committee decided to have the considered views
of the State Governments and the Union Territories on the proposed
amendments as also of organizations such as Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
and The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
(ASSOCHAM). The Ministry of Power also briefed the Committee on
the Bill where clarifications were sought on various issues emerging
out of the proposed amendments to the Act.

2


11. The Committee deliberated on various provisions of the Bill in
detail in view of the suggestions received from various players ie.
State Governments, Associations as also the Ministry of Power on the
proposed amendments to the Electricity Act, 2003 which are discussed
in the succeeding paras of the Report. The Committee desire that the
Bill may be passed after carrying out changes suggested in the
recommendations of the Committee.


REPORT
I, PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO SECTION 6

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 6 of the Act to
make rural electrification joint responsibility of the State Governments
and Central Government.

Section 6 in the Electricity Act, 2003 read as under:

“6. The Appropriate Government shall endeavour to supply
electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets.”

Clause 2 of the Bill provide that the following shall be substituted
for Section 6 of the Electricity Act, 2003.

“6. The concerned State Governments and the Central Government
shall jointly endeavour to provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets through rural electricity
infrastructure and electrification of households.”

2. The Ministry of Power in a note stated that there was a need
to bring about the change as the National Electricity Policy states that
both the Central Government and State Government would jointly
endeavour to achieve the objective of supply of electricity to all areas
at the earliest. The Central Government has launched the ‘Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana’ for supporting States in creating rural
electricity infrastructure and electrification of households with provision
of 90% capital subsidy to fulfil the objective of the National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP) of electrification of all households in
next five years.

3. It was further stated that there has, however, been a suggestion
that the legal provision should be amended to reflect that the Central
Government would also share the responsibility of rural electrification.
Most of the States had desired that the responsibility of providing
electricity should be shared by the Central Government. Keeping this
in mind, the proposed amendment has been brought about.

4. During the course of evidence, expressing their views over the
proposed amendment to Section 6 of the Electricity Act, 2003 wherein,

it is proposed that the concerned State Government and Central

4


Government shall jointly endeavour to provide electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets, the representative of the State
Government of Assam stated that considering the low level of rural
electrification in the State, a large amount of funds were required for
tural electrification and hence they expected that the same would be
provided by the Central Government for North-Eastern Region.

5. In this regard, the representative of the State Government of
Haryana — which had a heavy industrial load apart from the fact that
in the State the rural electrification had already achieved more than
80% level - stated before the Committee:

“The proposed amendment to Section 6 is stated to enable the
Union Government to treat rural electrification as its joint
responsibility alongwith States to allocate and spend resources for
the purpose. It needs to be stated, though neither the 1948 Act nor
2003 Act in its present form indicate such joint responsibility, There
has never been a statutory bottleneck to Government of India
allocating and spending resources on rural electrification or any
other area in the power sector. The APDRP scheme provided
substantial funding for distribution efficiency while we need not
object the proposed amendment, we may highlight the fact that
the proposed amendment should not enable the Union Government
unilaterally to appoint agencies for rural electrification without
specific concurrence of the State Governments, nor it should be
used to introduce structural change in rural electricity distribution
on its own.”

6. The State Government of Gujarat, which had already achieved
good results in the rural electrification programme was in agreement
with the proposed amendment to Section 6. It was submitted before
the Comunittee:

“The proposed participation of the Central Government in the
programme of Rural Electrification shall help the State Government
in providing qualitative power in the rural areas by investing some
more funds in the renovation and updation of the electricity
infrastructure at present available in the rural area. However, while
doing so, it may be ensured that the Central Government
channelised all resources through the State Government only and
no direct operations are undertaken.”

7. The State Government of Punjab deliberating over the issue of
rural electrification stated that Punjab had already achieved 100%
electrification of villages. There was a need to bring about an

5


improvement in the existing old infrastructure for strengthening the
network backbone such as over loaded Power Transmission, up-
gradation of sub transmission system, bifurcation of over loaded/over
regulated distribution feeders etc., for which financial help is needed
from the Central Government. The State Government also had, however,
no objection to the proposed amendment, as electrification of
households would require support from the Central Government.

8. During evidence the representatives of the State Government
of Punjab stated that they were not in agreement with the ‘franchise
system’ under the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana. They
clarified their stand as under:

“Electrification of households in any case requires Government of
India’s support. We have the Rajiv Gandhi Scheme which is going
to help us to do this. There are some parts of the Scheme which
we are not very comfortable with. For example, they have insisted
that there would be franchises given. We are not very comfortable
with it for the simple reason that we already have 99 per cent
collection efficiency. That would act as a hurdle. The matter is
under discussion with the Government of India that we would
like to be excused from this particular portion of the Rajiv Gandhi
Yojana. We have no problems about the functions of the Central
Transmission Utility.”

9. In a written note, the Government of Punjab further added:

“Under the National Rural Electrification Policy/Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana the Government of India has made
it mandatory that all utilities must introduce a franchisee system
for management of the local distribution system in rural areas. In
some States like Punjab and Rajasthan, where the efficiency of
revenue collection is already optimal to the tune of 99%, it may
not be appropriate to change the present system of collection by
introduction of a Franchisee since it would only add to the costs
of the utility, which may not be allowed by the Regulators. If at
all these costs are allowed it would only result in a burden on the
rural consumers by way of increased tariffs. As such the setting
up of Franchisees should be left to the discretion of the respective
States/utilities.”

10. All the State Governments were in broad agreement with the
amendment proposed in Section 6 of the Electricity Act, 2003. However,
the State Government of Uttar Pradesh specified in a note:

“There is no requirement for this amendment when the Rural
electrification programme is running successfully. In the numerous


meetings and deliberations not once has such a measure been
broached. The performance of rural electrification has not only
never mandated such a measure, but has been on target. With this
perspective it is not understood why this amendment was
envisaged or required.

Second, the scope of this amendment could be interpreted in
various ways and “jointly endeavour” is open .¢ interpretation.
This is itself could jeopardize the entire rural electrification
programme that is on stream at the moment.

Third, UP is unable to appreciate what measures the Central
Government wants to take that it cannot take in this dispensation.
Therefore, from this perspective, the Central Government must
come out with the measures that are been hindered in the present
legal framework

We would request a clarification of the figures stated in the
Financial Memorandum. Does this indicate the outlay would be
frozen at the existing levels. UP’s funds requirement of Rs.3,381
crore in the first phase is limited to electrification of the main
village and one Scheduled Caste majra (or hamlet). In the second
phase that has already been planned and communicated to
Government of India, a much more intensive plan of electrification
of households including those in BPL category has been planned.
This will entail an investment of Rs. 4,182 crore from the Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and is intrinsic to the
programme. The amendment would jeopardize the rural
electrification programme, in the State that has the largest number
of unelectrified villages, and therefore requires the programme to
be on trance. Therefore, UP strongly opposes the proposed
amendment.”

11. During the course of evidence, the representative of State
Government of Uttar Pradesh added in regard to the proposed
amendment to Section 6:

“In fact, Uttar Pradesh has set this year a target to cover
7,000 villages and Uttar Pradesh will cover balance 23,000 villages.
The Rural Electrification Corporation is the main financier. They
have not expressed any feeling whereas, on the other side, if we
take a joint endeavour to mean that the Government of India would
be awarding the contracts for districts and villages without
consulting the States concerned, we feel problem in that.


In fact, I would like to bring to the notice of the Committee that
when the scheme was started, we were pressurized by the
Department of Power to accept PGCIL as the main executing
agency for eight districts. Informally, it was made clear that if you
want to have the scheme, you would have to accept this. PGCIL
took the work, floated the tenders and the State was never
consulted and they continued to work the way they wanted.”

12. The Committee also took the views of various associations
including Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI). In a note FICCI made the following submission in connection
with the proposed amendment to Section 6:

“The proposed amendment has laid the onus of electrification on
concerned State Governments along with the Central Government.
These entities have been mandated to jointly endeavor to provide
access to electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets
through rural electricity infrastructure and electrification of
households.

While the involvement of both State and Central Government could
mean access to more financial assistance for expansion of
electrification primarily in rural areas. However, there is also an
apprehension that involvement of multiple organizations might
hamper the timely implementation of projects. Hence, we need a
streamlined process whereby single-window clearance for financial
and non-financial assistance could be arranged for project
developers.”

13. Elaborating their views over Rural Electrification Programme,
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) submitted that as per the
available projections, it was estimated that 55% of rural households in
India had no access to electricity. From time-to-time the Central
Government had launched various schemes involving capital funding
and financial aid for rural electrification. However, the progress on the
ground had remained tardy for various reasons and success of the
schemes has remained elusive. It was added that CII hoped that this
reviewed provision contributes towards success of rural electrification
drive. The key to success of rural electrification initiative lied in creating
sustainable revenue models. CII proposed that the following suggestions
might be kept in mind, while going in for rural electrification through
the Central and State agencies:

“Ensuring the success of rural electrification schemes on long-term
basis, the Center could assist the State Governments in creating


sustainable revenue models based on payment and collection of
affordable user charges for the electricity supplied to rural areas.

Ensuring that the States actively involve panchayat institutions,
district administration and the villagers in the process from the
beginning and seek their cooperation in operation and maintenance
and administration of the electricity infrastructure. This model
would help in generating employment for local people and creating
sense of ownership at the local level, which would become key
parameters in long-term sustainability of the projects.

Sharing best practices on rural electrification amongst States.
Awareness programmes on tariff, subsidy and energy conservation.

Promoting the culture of metering, billing and collection of user
charges.

Building rural loads would be imperatiye for sustenance, economic
viability and gradual scaling up of the electricity infrastructure
besides augmenting prosperity in the rural regions. This objective
could be achieved with awareness and outreach programmes
intended towards promoting benefits of electrification and assisting
rural entrepreneur to set up new commercial enterprises. This
would generate employment, improve life standards and augment
prosperity which is a win-win proposition for Government, rural
society and the country.

Involving lenders and commercial banks to evolve and promote
micro-lending schemes in an effort to promote small and medium
rural business ventures.”

14. The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Indian
(ASSOCHAM) was of the view that the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana with its subsidy component would help in faster
electrification of rural India and provide electricity to all households.

15. The Committee observe that the Electricity Amendment (Bill)
2005 has been introduced within one and a half year since the
enforcement of the Electricity Act 2003. The main aim of the Bill is
to involve the Central Government in the process of Rural
Electrification. For this the Central Government has launched the
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana supporting States in
creating rural electricity infrastructure and electrification of
households with the provision of 90% capital subsidy to fulfil the

9


objective of National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of
electrification of all households in next five years: The Committee
while interacting with the State Governments over the issue observed
that most of the States welcomed the involvement of the Central
Government in the rural electrification programme and desired that
funds for the same should be made available by the Central
Government. Some States like Punjab stated during evidence that
they had achieved almost 100% rural eiectrification. The Committee
find it difficult to accept the claim as this achievement is based on
old definition of village electrification and in fact 100% electrification
of rural households has not been achieved so far. The State
Governments of Punjab and Haryana expressed their reservations
on introduction of the ‘Franchisee system’ under Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana as it involved commitment of the State
Government and State Utility to introduce a revenue sustainable
franchisee arrangement prior to project completion. It was expressed
that through this system collection of tariff would be adversely
effected, as it would lead to an increase in the cost of utilities and
ultimately of electricity.

16. Although various Associations who were asked to give their
views on the proposed amendments welcomed the Central
Government resources for rural electrification. Some of them
expressed their apprehension that involvement of multiple
organizations might hamper the timely implementation of the
projects. The Associations were, however, supportive of the
involvement of panchayat institutions, district administration and the
villagers in the process of rural electrification as this model would
help in generating employment for the people.

17. The Committee, no doubt, support the proposed amendment
to Section 6 of the Electricity Act, 2003 with regard to the role of
Central Government in rural electrification but at the same time
caution the Government that the system of distribution of funds to
States, not necessarily be same for all the States as the rural
electrification needs of different States are widely varied because
the well developed and industrialized States may need more funds
for infrastructure development rather than purely for rural
electrification, at the grass root level i.e., for village/hamlet
electrification, while the not so developed States having more of
rural background like North-Eastern States need funds to implement
the scheme in a totally different perspective. The Committee desire
that the Central Government should undertake the rural electrification
work in close coordination with the concerned State Governments

10


thus obviating the concerns expressed by some of the States. The
Committee also desire that the Government should have a re-look
on the requirement of ‘Franchisee System’ under the Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and ensure that appointment of
Franchises does not lead to cost escalation as apprehended by some

States.

Il, PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO SECTIONS 38, 39, 40, 42, 61, 178, 181

18, Clauses 3 to 6 and clauses 10 to 11 propose amendments to
Sections 38, 39, 40, 42, 178 and 181 of the Principal Act which deal
with deletion of word ‘elimination’ of cross-subsidies as follows:

(a)

(b)

(०

(d)

(e)

(f)

In Section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in
clause (d),—

(i) In the second proviso, the words “and eliminated” shall
be omitted;

(ii) The third proviso shall be omitted.

In Section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section -(2), in
clause (d),—

(i) In the second proviso, the words “and eliminated” shall
be omitted;

(ii) The third proviso shall be omitted.
In Section 40 of the principal Act—

(i) In the second proviso, the words “and eliminated” shall
be omitted;

(ii) The third proviso shall be omitted.
In Section 42 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

(i) In the third proviso, the words “and eliminated” shall
be omitted.

In Section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

(i) In clause (k), the words “and elimination” shall be
omitted;

(ii) In clause (m), the words “and elimination” shall be
omitted;

In Section 181 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

(i) In clause (j), the words “and elimination” shall be
omitted;

1


(ii) In clause (m), the words “and elimination” shall be
omitted;

(iii) In clause (p), the words “and elimination” shall be
omitted;

19. Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 42 of the
Principal Act to provide for open access on payment of a surcharge.
Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 61 of the Principal Act
to provide for that the tariff shall reflect cost of supply of electricity
and reduce cross-subsidies.

20. In a brief note on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005, the
Ministry of Power expressed the following views in regard to the
issue of cross-subsidies:

“There has been a concern regarding those provisions of the Act
which provide for reduction and ‘elimination’ of cross subsidies. It
has been urged that given India’s state of development, elimination
of cross subsidies is presently not feasible. Further, differential
pricing is a well accepted international practice. In the National
Electricity Policy it has been provided that the existing cross
subsidies would need to be reduced progressively and gradually.
Though this issue has been addressed in the National Electricity
Policy, there was insistence from some stakeholders and also from
certain State Governments that the provision of the Act for
‘elimination’ of cross subsidies be deleted as elimination is neither
envisaged nor feasible.”

21. On the issue of reduction of cross-subsidies, the Ministry of
Power further elaborated as follows:

“The Tariff Policy lays down a timeframe for rationalization of
electricity tariffs and reduction of the cross-subsidies within a band
of + 20% by the end of year 2010-11.”

22. The various State Governments expressed their views both in
writing as well as during briefing sessions before the Committee. Most
of the State Governments were in cohesion with the amendment
proposed to the effect and were also in favour of continuation of
cross-subsidies. The State Governments also expressed the views that
the proportion of reduction of cross-subsidies and time frame for the
same should be left to the State Regulatory Commissions to decide
upon.

12


23. The State Government of Assam in this connection, held the
following views:

“The inter-category reduction of cross-subsidy, as per Electricity
Act, 2003 is acceptable within reasonable limits but total elimination
of cross-subsidy is not acceptable as this shall put heavy burden
on the Domestic Consumers of the State due to the consumer
profile and energy consumption pattern. As such, the proposal to
amend the Electricity Act, 2003 to the extent that total elimination
of cross-subsidies is to be done away is a step towards the right
direction. The Tariff Policy notified by the Government of India
dated 6th January, 2006 envisages that the tariff progressively
reflects the cost of supply of electricity with a road map to reduce
the inter-category cross-subsidies within (+) 20% of the average
cost of supply by the year 2010-2011. As already stated, the
reduction of cross-subsidies is acceptable but the condition that
the same is to be within (+) 20% of the average cost of supply
shall impose heavy burden on the Domestic category of consumers
of the State. Considering the vast diversities in the consumer profile
amongst various States, there should not be any benchmark like
(+) 20% but the reduction of cross-subsidies and time frame should
be best left to the State Regulatory Commissions to decide upon,
as the SERCs can take appropriate decision in this respect
considering the consumer profile and energy consumption pattern
of the particular State.”

24. The representative of State Government of Haryana during
discussions with the Committee elaborated about the proposed
amendment in regard to the cross-subsidies as follows:

“On the next bunch of amendments which all deal with open
access and cross-subsidies, the elimination word is to be removed.
We think that it is the step in the right direction. The only thing
we want to submit is that the reduction of cross-subsidy is
desirable, but as was stated by my colleague from Assam, the
reduction of cross-subsidy should be left to the State Regulatory
Commission concerned because they will have to keep in mind
the consumer profile of the individual State. All States have
different kinds of consumer profiles and the reduction road map
will have to follow the consumer profile of that particular State.
He further added that it is true that the consumer profile of Assam
and Haryana is quite different. Simultaneously, it is also true that
in Haryana, the section which is subsidized is perhaps much larger
than in Assam. Our primary focus in Haryana has always been on
agriculture.”

13


25. The State Government desired certain clarifications about the

elimination of cross-subsidies:

“It needs to be clarified that the elimination of cross subsidy
including the treatment of subsidies in distribution tariff and
surcharge in case of open access need to be defined in a more
clear manner so as to provide competent regulatory commissions
which could gradually reduce cross subsidies ‘and surcharges
without altogether eliminating the stated cross-subsidy and
surcharge.”

26. The State Government of Gujarat desired that the proposed

amendment would favour open access system, explaining the same
they stated:

“The existing provision of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides for
elimination of cross-subsidy. In view of the present scenario of the
electricity industry perhaps it may not be feasible for the present
totally to eliminate cross-subsidy because it may demotivate the
providers of the Open Access because they may perhaps not be
encouraged in developing their existing network suitably to
accommodate more and more accesses which may be required for
the future. Therefore, the State Government are of the view that
certain level of cross-subsidy would enable the owners of the
transmission and distribution network to expand their existing
network capacity to accommodate future demand.”

27. In regard to the proposed amendments to this effect, the State

Government of West Bengal stated in a written note:

“The second issue is pertinent to the need of a large number of
consumers who have a low payment capacity due to imbalances
in regional economic development in the country. In order to
provide them an affordable power tariff, a minimum support
through an initial subsidy in respect of power tariff, is necessary.
State Government is however, not in a position to provide this
subsidy from the exchequer while this may be provisioned through
a higher tariff levied on customers with a higher payment capacity.
A phased reduction of this subsidy is envisaged with accretions to
the payment capacity of this target group of consumers, with
gradual increases in their income levels. The National Electricity
Policy has also recognized that a minimum level of support may
be required to make electricity affordable for consumers having a
low payment capacity. This policy also requires that consumers
using upto 30 units per month may be considered eligible for


such support, This stand thus, requires statutory support for proper
implementation. Therefore, the Government of West Bengal supports
the proposed amendment in this respect.”

28, The representative of West Bengal further added during the
course of evidence:

“The State Government feel that the cross subsidy has to continue
for some time and so, it is a very welcome proposal which has
been placed before Parliament for enactment, to drop the provision
of ultimate elimination of cross-subsidies because we feel that
certain segments of the society especially, the people living below
poverty line and even those slightly above poverty line, to lower
middle class people do need subsidies. We support this.”

29. The State of Punjab has a mixed set of consumers of electricity
which include both from industrial and agricultural sectors. They were
also in total agreement with the deletion of the word ‘elimination’.
They elaborated:

“Regarding Sections 38, 39, 40, 42, 61, 178, 181 of the Act the State
Electricity Regulatory Commission has been following the mandate
of the Act in it tariff orders to reduce the levels of cross subsidy.
The State has almost achieved the targets for reduction of cross
subsidy (i.e. plus minus 20%) envisaged at the National level to be
reached by the year 2010-11. However, the Punjab Government are
of the view that the complete elimination of cross subsidy may
not be in the over all interest of the people of the State. Majority
of population in the State is dependent on agriculture sector. Most
of the farmers are just able to sustain themselves from the returns
from this sector. Therefore, elimination of cross subsidy for the
Agriculture sector will badly hurt the farming community. Similarly
the rural and urban poor households also need to be given
domestic supply at reduced rates. Therefore, the proposed
amendments in sections 38, 39, 40, 42, 61, 178 & 181 are welcome.”

30. Similarly, the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Bihar were in agreement with the removal of the word ‘elimination’
from the aforesaid Sections. The State Government of Bihar also added
in a note that with the proposed amendment the provision of removal
of Central surcharge is being deleted. Since surcharge has to be used
for cross-subsidy this amendment will be beneficial for the institutions
engaged into transmission and distribution of power.

15


Views of associations on the proposed amendments in regard to
cross-subsidies

31. The various associations when consulted by the Committee on

the proposed amendment as regard to ‘elimination’ of cross-subsidies
were not in favour of continuation of cross-subsidies in the power
sector for a long duration of time as this might slow down the process
of reforms and Indian industry, which is already paying the highest
power tariffs in the world, will continue to suffer.

32. On the issue when the views were solicited by the Committee,

FICCI in a note suggested:

eer that there should be a specific time frame for reduction
of cross subsidies. The appropriate Regulatory Commission should
set year-wise targets for reduction of cross-subsidies and ensure
effective implementation of these targets as well. Also, if any State
Government desires to provide subsidies to any section of
consumers, the amount should be directly allowed from the State
exchequer and the utilities should not be burdened with this.”

33. The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) also in a written

note submitted to the Committee expressed the following views in
regard to elimination of cross-subsidies:

16

“The proposed amendment in the clauses of the EA 2003 has
favored continuation of the cross-subsidy in the electricity tariff
across the country.

The constituents of CII have for long advocated that the cross
subsidization should be gradually eliminated from the system and
Government should support only the economically weak section
of the society through direct subsidy support to the distribution
licensee.

CII does not find favour with current provisions on cross subsidy
in the recently launched National Tariff Policy. As per tariff policy,
the Government has proposed only reduction of the cross subsidy
and even six years down the line there would be 20% of current
cross subsidy charge which the Industry would need to pay in
their tariff to subsidize the other consuming segments.

In the era of global competition, the Indian Industry has for long
suffered the in-competitiveness due to the high cross subsidy


element in the electricity tariff which constitutes a significant input
cost to the industry. Across the world, the electricity cost is lowest
for the industry but in India this does not hold true. Besides this
disadvantage industry also has to fact several other constraints
including unreliable and power quality of the power, which affects
the industrial processes.

Over the years, the industrial consumption of electricity has come
down for the aforesaid and several other reasons and continuation
of cross-subsidies might lead to further reduction of industrial
consumers from the grid.

Thus CII would strongly urge for time bound plan for elimination
of cross subsidy from the electricity tariffs.”

34. The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
(ASSOCHAM) were of the view that the Electricity Bill, 2003 provided
for reduction and ultimately ‘elimination’ of cross-subsidies between
the different categories of consumers (viz. Industrial/Commercial and
Agriculture/Domestic). The ASSOCHAM agreed with the amendment,
however, maintaining that the cross-subsidy should not be more than
+ 20%.

35. The Committee note that the proposed amendments to
Sections 38 (2), 39 (2), 42 (2), 61, 178 (2) and 181 (2) refer to the
subject of cross-subsidies in distribution tariff and the treatment
thereof. The stated objective behind these amendments is to provide
for a statutory direction for bringing down the cross-subsidy but
not to eliminate it altogether, whereas in the statement of Objects
and Reasons appended to the Electricity Bill, 2001 it was clearly
stated that the Bill proposed to gradually phase out the current level
of subsidy. The Committee note that due to imbalances in the
regional economic development in the country, a large number of
consumers have a low payment capacity in a number of States. In
order to provide them power at an affordable tariff, a minimum
support through an initial subsidy in respect of the power tariff is
necessary. Most of the State Governments are unable to provide this
subsidy from their exchequer—while this may be provisioned
through a higher tariff levied on customers with a higher payment
capacity, especially the consumers in the urbanized and industrial
sector,

36. Many stakeholders and Associations like FICCI and CII have
opined that deleting the term elimination might slow down the
process of reforms as industry has to bear the burden of cross-

17


subsidies. Moreover, it has been stated by these organisations that
the industry was not in favour of the proposals in the tariff policy
wherein the Government have proposed only reduction in the cross-
subsidy and even six years down the line there would be + 20%
cross-subsidy charge which the industry would need to pay in their
tariff to subsidize other consumer segments, making it uncompetitive.
The Committee desire that the percentage should not be more than
+ 10% by the year 2010-11. If need be, this percentage should be
fixed in consultation with Central Regulatory Commission.

37. The Committee, therefore, recommend that although subsidy
in tariff is required for those set of consumers who are living below
the poverty line/those living in tribal areas or hamlets or small
farmers but giving the same subsidy benefit to large commercial
farmers, who have a substantial income, does not appear to be logical.
The Committee desire that a strict control should be maintained by
the State Governments to ensure that only the targeted sections of
society are given subsidies on the power tariff. Moreover, the State
Regulatory Commissions should frame cross-subsidy rules as per
the consumer profile of the State so that the burden of cross-subsidies
does not come down heavily on the industrial sector. The Committee
further desire that the appropriate Regulatory Commission should
not only set year-wise targets for reduction of cross-subsidies but
should ensure effective implementation of these targets as well.

Ill. Proposed amendment to Section 151

38. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the following Section shall
substitute Section 151 of the Principal Act:

“151 (1) No prosecution shall be instituted against any person for
any offence punishable under this Act expect at the instance of
the Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission or any
of their officer authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector
or an Electrical Inspector or licensee or the generating company,
as the case may be.

(2) For the purposes of investigation of any offence punishable
under this Act, the police shall have powers as available under
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(3) The cognizance of the offence under this Act shall not in any
way prejudice any action under the provisions of the Indian Penal
Code:

Provided that the court may also take cognizance of an offence
punishable under this Act upon a complaint in writing made by

18


the Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission or any
of their officer authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector
or an electrical Inspector or licensee or the generating company, as
the case may be:

Provided further that a special court constituted under Section 153
shall be competent to take cognizance of an offence under
Section 135 to Section 138 (both inclusive) without the accused
being committed to it for trial.”

39. The original Section 151 in the Electricity Act, 2003 read as
follows:

“151. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under
this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by Appropriate
Government or Appropriate Commission or any of their officer
authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical
Inspector or licensee or the generating company, as the case may
be, for this purpose.”

40. The statement of Objects and Reasons appended to this Bill
state, regarding amendment of Section 151, that the offences relating
to theft of electricity, electric lines and interference with meters are
cognizable offences. Concerns have, however, been expressed that the
present formulation of Section 151 stands as a barrier to investigation
of these offences by the Police. It is, therefore, proposed to amend this
Section to clarify the position that the police would be able to
investigate the cognizable offences under the Act.

Similarly to expedite the trial before the special courts, it is
Proposed to provide that a special court shall be competent to take
cognizance of an offence without the accused being committed to it
for trial.

41. Giving the details of cognizable offences under the Act, the
Ministry of Power explained that as per existing provisions of the Act,
the offences related to theft of electricity, electric lines, interference
with meters (section 135 to 138) were the cognizable offences. Further,
Rule 12 of the Electricity Rules, 2005 prescribed the procedure for
investigation of these offences by the police. Concerns have however,
been expressed that the present formulation of section 151 of the Act
makes all offences under the Act non-cognizable, to be taken cognizance
of by any court only on written complaint made by the appropriate
Government, appropriate Commission, authorized persons. Accordingly,
it has been decided by the Government to bring an amendment to

19


section 151 so as to expressly provide that the police would be able
to investigate the cognizable offences under the Act and that no
prosecution shall be instituted for any offence under the Act except at
the instance of the appropriate Government or appropriate Commission
or authorized persons. Further, the Special Courts constituted under
section 153 would be competent to take cognizance of offences under
sections 135 to 138 without the accused being committed to it for trial.

42. Most of the State Governments examined in connection with
the proposed amendment were of the view that the amendment to
this Section would clarify the position that police would be able to
investigate the cognizable offences whereas the earlier formulation of
the Act stood as a barrier to investigate these cognizable offences by
the police.

43. Commenting on the formulation of Section 151 of the Act, the
representative of the State Government of Karnataka explained before
the Committee that Special Courts constituted for trying offence under
Electricity Act, 2003 started taking a view that the word “complaint”
referred to under Section 151 has to be read with Section 2 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure and therefore the complaint had to be
made to the Special Court to take further action and not to the
Vigilance Police and the Vigilance Police were not empowered to
register the complaints directly by themselves. Keeping this
interpretation in mind the State of Karnataka introduced an amendment
which read as under and was passed by both the Houses of State
legislature:

“151. Institution of prosecution—No prosecution shall be instituted
against any person for any offence under this Act or any rule,
regulation, licence or order made or issued thereunder, except at
the instance of the State Government or a licensee or a generating
company under the Act or an Officer authorized in this behalf by
the State Government or a licensee or a generating company or by
any person affected by the act alleged to constitute the offence”

44. The amendment was sent to the Government of India for
consideration and assent of the President of India. The Ministry of
Power vide its letter dated 7th July 2005 had conveyed its view to the
Ministry of Home Affairs stating that the difficulties being faced by
the Government of Karnataka stand addressed by Rule 11 and 12 of
Electricity Rules, 2005 (published on 8th June, 2005) and therefore the
amendment proposed by GoK is no longer necessary. When this was
communicated to KPTCL on 26th August, 2005, KPTCL had informed

20


the State Government that the Rule framed in 2005 by the Ministry of
Power run counter to the substantial provision of Section 151 of
Electricity Act, 2003 and therefore might not stand the test of law as
no delegated legislation could run counter to substantial provision of
the Statue.

45. The representative of the Government of Karnataka, however,
further submitted:

8 TN it is our submission that the amendment proposed in the
Amendment Bill, 2005 especially 151 needs to be carried through
immediately as Section 151 as existing in the Electricity Act, 2003
is giving scope for unscrupulous elements to escape after
committing theft of electricity on technical grounds. Besides, what
is proposed for in Amendment Bill it is felt necessary that the
offences under Section 135 to 141 shall be declared as cognizable
so as to enable the Police to arrest the persons who are indulging
in theft of electricity immediately to avoid tampering of evidences
by the accused persons.”

46. While examining the provisions of the amendments, the
Committee were apprised of a provision of law already enacted by
the State Assembly of West Bengal in connection with theft of electricity.
The State Government stated that in the repealed laws, the provisions
were inadequate to contain the theft of electricity at a reasonable level.
In this context, the Government of West Bengal amended the Indian
Electricity Act, 1910 (since repealed) to include stringent provisions
that made the theft of electricity a cognizable offence.

47. State Government's experience in implementing this statutory
provision was stated to be favourable in containing the theft of power,
at a reasonable level. Accordingly, State Government recognized the
necessity of enforcing similar stringent provisions in line with the
previous amendment to contain the theft of electricity and thus,
AT & C losses. The representative of the State Government informed
the Committee that the State Assembly has passed a new Bill that
reckons theft of electricity to be a cognizable offence. This Electricity
(West Bengal Amendment) Bill, 2005 was stated to be awaiting
President's assent. The Government of West Bengal, therefore, support
the proposed amendment in this respect.

48. The State Government of Tamil Nadu in their suggestions to
the Committee during the briefing desired the following change to be
considered in the amendment:

“In regard to Clause 8 of the said Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2005, it may be stated that the proposed section 151 provides for

21


institution of prosecution against any person for any offence
punishable under the Electricity Act, 2003 at the instance of the
Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission or any of
the officer authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or
Electrical Inspector or licensee or the generating company, as the
case may be.

But the Electricity Act, 2003 provides for generation and distribution
of electricity by the Franchisee, Captive Power Plant owner, as the
case may be, or by a person in a Rural Area notified by the
State Government without obtaining a license.

Therefore, such Franchisee, Captive Power Plant owner or such
person in a Rural Area notified by the State Government may also
become aggrieved by commission of any offence under the said
Act by any person.

Hence, it is suggested that the said section 151 and the first proviso
there under may be suitably modified to include such franchisee,
Captive Power Plant owner or such person in a rural Area notified
by the State Government for the purpose in question, so as to
enable such persons also to institute prosecution or to give
complaint in a court. The State Government were, however, in
agreement with the other amendments proposed in the Bill.”

49. The State Government of Uttar Pradesh while supporting the
amendment to Section 151 stated that the proposed amendment was
similar to the Uttar Pradesh State specific insertion of Section 49B in
the IE Act.

50. The State Government of Rajasthan in a written note stated
that Section 151 of the Act was creating lot of difficulties in the field.
According to the existing Section no Court shall take cognizance of an
offence except upon a complaint in writing made by the appropriate
Government or appropriate commission or any of their officer
authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical
Inspector or Licensee or the Generating Company, as the case may be.
The word “Complaint” had not been defined anywhere in the Act.
The Complaint had been defined under Section 2 (d) of The Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and according to this, it did not include a
police report and, therefore, without the amendment of Section 151 of
the Electricity Act, 2003 it was not safe to lodge FIR because ultimately
the Courts might not entertain the police report under the provisions
of existing Section 151.

22


51. The State Government further stated that although the
Central Government had issued the electricity Rules, 2005 and
Clause 12 of the said rules provided for taking cognizance of the
offences by the police as well, but without amendment to Section 151
of the Act to this effect, the rules might come under challenge.

52. Looking to these difficulties and position of law, the proposed
amendment in Section 151 of the Act was also strongly supported by
Government of Rajasthan, because direct cognizance by the
Special Courts would save the time and money. However, they
requested the following also for consideration:—

“In Section 153 (1) Special Courts can try the offences under Section
135 to 139. Similarly, in Section 154 (1) even offence punishable
under Section 135 to 139 is triable only by Special Courts. The
proposed amendment of Section 151 in the second proviso states
that “provided further that a Special Court constituted under
Section 153 shall be competent to take cognizance for an offence
under Section 135 to 138 (both inclusive) without the accused being
committed to it for trial.” We do not find any reason to delete
Section 139 in this proviso and it is also noted that the amendments
in all other sections of the Act where the words “Sections 135 to
139” are appearing have not been amended. We feel that in the
proposed amendment of Section 151 instead of the words “Section
135 to 138”, the words “Sections 135 to Section 139” should be
used to maintain the consistency in the Act.

It is also to submit that the authorized officers of the licensee or
the generating company have not been covered to initiate the
prosecution or filing the complaint. The licensees and the generating
companies are artificial juridical persons in the eyes of law as they
are State owned companies. They have to appear before the Court
through some natural person who are their officers. It will be in
fitness of things that the officers authorized by the licensees or the
generating companies are also incorporated in the proposed
amendment of the Act. This will be in line with the powers given
to the State Government or the Appropriate Commission who can
file complaint or initiate prosecution through any of their authorized
officers as well.”

53. Further the State Government submitted that the proposed
amendment should read as follows:

“151 (1) No prosecution shall be instituted against any person for
any offence punishable under this Act except at the instance of

23


the Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission or
licensee or the generating company or any of their officer
authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical
Inspector, as the case may be.

First proviso — Provided that the Court may also take cognizance
of an offence punishable under this Act upon a complaint in writing
made by the Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission
or licensee or the generating company or any of their officer
authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical
Inspector, as the case may be.

Second proviso - Provided further that a Special Court constituted
under Section 153 shall be competent to take cognizance of an
offence under Section 135 to Section 139 (both inclusive) without
the accused being committed to it for trial.”

54, The other State Governments, i.c., Maharashtra, Uttaranchal,
Orissa, Meghalaya, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh were in broad agreement
with the proposed Amendments to the Electricity Act, 2003. The
Government of National Capital Territory (NCT), Delhi desired the
following two changes:

“The heading for Section 151 can be changed from ‘Cognizance of
offences’ to ‘Cognizance and investigation of offences’ and offences
u/s 135, 136 and 137 of the Electricity Act are of special nature
and it should be clarified in the Act itself that they are cognizable
and non-bailable offences.”

55. Of the various associations who were asked to give their views
on the proposed amendments, all of them were in agreement with the
changes in Section 151 as it would allow investigation of any offence
punishable under this Act and the police shall have powers as available
under the code of the criminal procedure.

56. The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) stated that the
changes in Section 151 would help in the following ways:

“Strengthen the hands of the distribution licensees by giving the
powers of search and seizure to the local police and allowing the
special courts to take cognizance of the offence.

The reviewed provision in legislation would strengthen the hands
of the State Governments and State Utilities to actively plug the
leakage in the system and work as a catalyst in restoring the
utilities from bankruptcy to bankability.

24


The changes would facilitate the States to bring down the
commercial losses, which have over the years deteriorated the
financial viability of the States electricity utilities.

The theft of electricity has been a deep-rooted evil, which has

tremendously impeded the growth and development of the power
sector.”

57. The Standing Committee on Energy themselves in their
31st Report, 13th Lok Sabha on the Electricity Bill, 2001 while
deliberating on clause 151 had noted that there was no provision for
institution of prosecution at the instance of an aggrieved person in the
Electricity Bill, 2001 which needed to be added in the provisions.

58. The Committee note with satisfaction that the substitution
of Section 151 by Clause 8 of the Bill will enable police to investigate
the cognizable offences whereas the present Section of the Act is
stated to be a barrier to investigate these offences by the police. The
amendment would also enable the special courts to take cognizance
of an offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.
The State Legislatures of Karnataka and West Bengal have passed
Bills for controlling the theft of electricity which are pending for
the Presidential assent. The Committee are in agreement with the
view that a Central Legislation to this effect was required to clarify
an ambiguous position in Section 151 of the Act 2003.

59. The Committee note that the State Government of
Tamil Nadu has desired that franchisee, captive power plant owner
or such person in rural area notified by the State Government for
the purpose in question may be included in the category of persons
eligible to make a complaint. At the same time, the State Government
of Rajasthan desired that the provisions of Section 139 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 whereby negligently causing electricity to be
wasted or diverted or negligent breaks, injuries, throw down or
damages of any material connected with the supply of electricity
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to Rs. 10,000 may
also be added to the proposed amended Section 151 (1) as applicable
to Sections 135 to 138 which are already proposed in the amendment
Bill. The State Government of Delhi desire that the heading for
Section 151 can be changed from ‘Cognizance of offences’ to
‘Cognizance and investigation of offences’ and offences u/s 135, 136
and 137 of the Electricity Act being of special naturg and as such it

25


should be clarified in the Act itself that they are cognizable and
non-bailable offences. The Committee desire that the feasibility of
carrying out the minor changes as suggested by State Governments
of Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Delhi should also be examined while
amending the Act.

New Deu; GURUDAS KAMAT,
May 17, 2006 Chairman,
Vaisakha 27, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

26


STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

CONTAINED IN THE REPORT

91.90. Reference Conclusions /Recomunendations
Para No.
of the
Report
iE 2 3
i 15

The Committee observe that the Electricity
Amendment (Bill) 2005 has been introduced
within one and a half year since the
enforcement of the Electricity Act 2003. The
main aim of the Bill is to involve the Central
Government in the process of Rural
Electrification. For this the Central Government
has launched the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana supporting States in
creating rural electricity infrastructure and
electrification of households with the provision
of 90% capital subsidy to fulfil the objective of
National Common Minimum Programme
(NCMP) of electrification of all households in
next five years. The Committee while
interacting with the State Governments over the
issue observed that most of the States
welcomed the involvement of the
Central Government in the rural electrification
programme and desired that funds for the same
should be made available by the Central
Government. Some States like Punjab stated
during evidence that they had achieved almost
100% rural electrification. The Committee find
it difficult to accept the claim as this
achievement is based on old definition of
village electrification and in fact 100%
electrification of rural households has not been
achieved so far. The State Governments of
Punjab and Haryana expressed their

27


3

16

17

reservations on introduction of the ‘Franchisee
System’ under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana as it involved commitment
of the State Government and State Utility to
introduce a revenue sustainable franchisee
arrangement prior to project completion. It was
expressed that through this system collection
of tariff would be adversely effected, as it
would lead to an increase in the cost of utilities
and ultimately of electricity.

Although various Associations who were asked
to give their views on the proposed
amendments welcomed the Central Government
resources for rural electrification. Some of them
expressed their apprehension that involvement
of multiple organizations might hamper the
timely implementation of the projects. The
Associations were, however, supportive of the
involvement of panchayat institutions, district
administration and the villagers in the process
of rural electrification as this model would help
in generating employment for the people.

The Committee, no doubt, support the
Proposed amendment to Section 6 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 with regard to the role of
Central Government in rural electrification but
at the same time caution the Government that
the system of distribution of funds to States,
not necessarily be same for all the States as
the rural electrification needs of different States
are widely varied because the well developed
and industrialized States may need more funds
for infrastructure development rather than
purely for rural electrification, at the grass root
level i.e., for village/hamlet electrification, while
the not so developed States having more of
tural background like North-Eastern States need
funds to implement the scheme in a totally
different perspective. The Comumittee desire that

28


3

35

36

the Central Government should undertake the
rural electrification work in close coordination
with the concerned State Governments thus
obviating the concerns expressed by some of
the States. The Committee also desire that the
Government should have a re-look on the
requirement of ‘Franchisee System’ under the
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana and
ensure that appointment of Franchises does not
lead to cost escalation as apprehended by some
States.

The Committee note that the proposed
amendments to Sections 38 (2), 39 (2), 42 (2),
61, 178 (2) and 181 (2) refer to the subject of
cross-subsidies in distribution tariff and the
treatment thereof, The stated objective behind
these amendments is to provide for a statutory
direction for bringing down the cross-subsidy
but not to eliminate it altogether, whereas in
the statement of Objects and Reasons appended
to the Electricity Bill, 2001 it was clearly stated
that the Bill proposed to gradually phase out
the current level of subsidy. The Committee
note that due to imbalances in the regional
economic development in the country, a large
number of consumers have a low payment
capacity in a number of States. In order to
provide them power at an affordable tariff, a
minimum support through an initial subsidy
in respect of the power tariff is necessary. Most
of the State Governments are unable to provide
this subsidy from their exchequer—while this
may be provisioned through a higher tariff
levied on customers with a higher payment
capacity, especially the consumers in the
urbanized and industrial sector.

Many stakeholders and Associations like FICCI
and CII have opined that deleting the term
elimination might slow down the process of

29


3

37:

58

reforms as industry has to bear the burden of
cross-subsidies. Moreover, it has been stated by
these organisations that the industry was not
in favour of the proposals in the tariff policy
wherein the Government have proposed only
reduction in the cross-subsidy and even six
years down the line there would be + 20%
cross-subsidy charge which the industry would
need to pay in their tariff to subsidize other
consumer segments, making it uncompetitive.
The Committee desire that the percentage
should not be more than + 10% by the year
2010-11. If need be, this percentage should be
fixed in consultation with Central Regulatory
Commission.

The Committee, therefore, recommend that
although subsidy in tariff is required for those
set of consumers who are living below the
poverty line/those living in tribal areas or
hamlets or small farmers but giving the same
subsidy benefit to large commercial farmers,
who have a substantial income, does not appear
to be logical. The Committee desire that a strict
control should be maintained by the State
Governments to ensure that only the targeted
sections of society are given subsidies on the
power tariff. Moreover, the State Regulatory
Commissions should frame cross-subsidy rules
as per the consumer profile of the State so that
the burden of cross-subsidies does not come
down heavily on the industrial sector. The
Committee further desire that the appropriate
Regulatory Commission should not only set
year-wise targets for reduction of cross-subsidies
but should ensure effective implementation of
these targets as well.

The Committee note with satisfaction that the
substitution of Section 151 by Clause 8 of the
Bill will enable police to investigate the
cognizable offences whereas the present Section
of the Act is stated to be a barrier to investigate

30


3

59

these offences by the police. The amendment
would also enable the special courts to take
cognizance of an offence without the accused
being committed to it for trial. The State
Legislatures of Karnataka and West Bengal have
passed Bills for controlling the theft of
electricity which are pending for the
Presidential assent. The Committee are in
agreement with the view that a Central
Legislation to this effect was required to clarify
an ambiguous position in Section 151 of the
Act 2003.

The Committee note that the State Government
of Tamil Nadu has desired that franchisee,
captive power plant owner or such person in
rural area notified by the State Government for
the purpose in question may be included in
the category of persons eligible to make a
complaint. At the same time, the State
Government of Rajasthan’ desired that the
provisions of Section 139 of the Electricity Act,
2003 whereby negligently causing electricity to
be wasted or diverted or negligent breaks,
injuries, throw down or damages of any
material connected with the supply of electricity
shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to Rs. 10,000 may also be added to the
proposed amended Section 151 (1) as applicable
to Sections 135 to 138 which are already
proposed in the amendment Bill. The State
Government of Delhi desire that the heading
for Section 151 can be changed from
‘Cognizance of offences’ to ‘Cognizance and
investigation of offences’ and offences u/s 135,
136 and 137 of the Electricity Act being of
special nature and as such it should be clarified
in the Act itself that they are cognizable and
non-bailable offences. The Committee desire
that the feasibility of carrying out the minor
changes as suggested by State Governments of
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Delhi should also
be examined while amending the Act.

31


ANNEXURE I

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 165 cf 2005

THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

Short title
and
commence-
ment.

Substitution
of new
section for
section 6.

Joint
responsibility
of State
Governments
and Central
Government
in rural
electrification.

Amendment

of section
38.

Amendment
of section
39.

32

A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:

1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2005.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. For section 6 of the Electricity Act, 2003
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:

“6. The concerned State Governments and
the Central Government shall jointly endeavour
to provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets through rural
electricity infrastructure and electrification of
households.”.

3. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), in clause (d)—

(i) in the second proviso, the words
“and eliminated” shall be omitted;

(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.

4, In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), in clause (d),—

(i) in the second proviso, the words
“and eliminated” shall be omitted;

36 of 2003.


2 of 1974.

(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.
5. In section 40 of the principal Act,—

(i) in the second proviso, the words
“and eliminated” shall be omitted;

(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.

6. In section 42 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2),—

(i) in the first proviso, for the words
“such open access may be allowed before
the cross-subsidies are eliminated on
payment of a surcharge”, the words “such
open access shall be allowed on payment
of a surcharge” shall be substituted;

(ii) in the third proviso, the words “and
eliminated” shall be omitted.

7. In section 61 of the principal Act, for
clause (g), the following clause shali be
substituted, namely:—

“(g) that the tariff progressively reflects
the cost of supply of electricity and also
reduces cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission;”.

8. For section 151 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“151. (1) No prosecution shall be instituted
against any person for any offence punishable
under this Act except at the instance of the
Appropriate Government or Appropriate
Commission or any of their officer authorised
by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an
Electrical Inspector or licensee or the generating
company, as the case may be.

(2) For the purposes of investigation of any
offence punishable under this Act, the police
shall have powers as available under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Amendment
of section

Amendment
of section
42.

Amendment
of section
61.

Substitution
of new
section for
section 151.
Cognizance
of offences.

33


(3) The cognizance of the offence under this
Act shall not in any way prejudice any action
under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code:

Provided that the court may also take
cognizance of an offence punishable under this
Act upon a complaint in writing made by the
Appropriate Government or Appropriate
Commission or any of their officer authorised
by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an
Electrical Inspector or licensee or the generating
company, as the case may be:

Provided further that a special court
constituted under section 153 shall be
competent to take cognizance of an offence
under section 135 to section 138 (both inclusive)
without the accused being committed to it for
trial.”.

Amendment 9. In section 176 of the principal Act, in
ct section clause (2), in clause (b) for the brackets and
words “(including the capital adequacy, credit
worthiness or code of conduct)”, the words
“relating to the capital adequacy, credit
worthiness or code of conduct” shall be
substituted.
Amendment 10. In section 178 of the principal Act, in
py ect sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (k), the words “and
elimination” shall be omitted;

(ii) in clause (m), the words “and
elimination” shall be omitted;

(iii) for clause (r), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely;—

“(r) the manner for reduction of cross-
subsidies under clause (8) of section 61;”.
Amendment Il. In section 181 of the principal Act, in
Of section: sub-section (2),--
(i) in clause (j), the words “and
elimination” shall be omitted;

45 of 1860.


(ii) in clause (m), the words “and
elimination” shall be omitted;

(iii) in clause (p) the words “and
elimination” shall be omitted;

(iv) for clause (zc), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(zc) the manner of reduction of cross-
subsidies under clause (g) of section 61;”.

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The law relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading
and use of electricity is contained in the Electricity Act, 2003. The Act
has been reviewed by the Government as per the commitment made
by it in the National Common Minimum Programme and in view of
the concerned expressed by a number of States. It is proposed to
amend the Act to give effect to certain changes as have been considered
necessary.

2. Section 6 of the Act provides that the appropriate Government
shall endeavour to supply electricity to all areas including villages
and hamlets, There has been a concern that the onus of rural
electrification has been put only on the State Governments. It is
proposed to amend section 6 so as to provide that the concerned State
Governments and the Central Government shall jointly endeavour to
provide access to electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets
through rural electricity infrastructure and electrification of households.

3. Sections 38, 39, 40, 42, 61, 178 and 181 of the Act, inter alia,
provide for reduction and ‘elimination’ of cross subsidies. There have
been a concern that though the cross-subsidies may be reduced but
elimination of such subsidies may not be feasible for the present. It is,
therefore, proposed to amend the said sections so as to do away with
the ‘elimination’ of cross-subsidies. However, reduction of cross
subsidies will continue.

4. As per the provisions contained in section 151 of the Act, the
offences relating to theft of electricity, electric lines and interference
with meters are cognizable offences. Concerns have been expressed.
that the present formulation of section 151 stands as a barrier to
investigation of these cognizable offences by the police. It is proposed.
to amend section 151 so as to clarify the position that the police would
be able to investigate the cognizable offences under the Act. To expedite
the trial before the special courts, it is also proposed to provide that
a special court shall be competent to take cognizance of an offence
without the accused being committed to it for trial.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deut; PRIYARANJAN DASMUNSI
The 20th December, 2005

36


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 6 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 relating to obligations of appropriate Government to supply
electricity to rural areas. The proposed new section 6 seeks to provide
that the concerned State Government and the Central Government
shall jointly endeavour to provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets through rural electricity infrastructure
and electrification of households.

2. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It has been
estimated that the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (with
an outlay of Rs. 16,225 crore) would have a subsidy competent of
Rs. 14,750 crore to be funded from the Consolidated Fund of India.in
two phases. Phase-I of this scheme has begun from the financial year
2005-2006 with a sanction of Rs. 5000 crore of subsidy from; the
Consolidated Fund of India. ;

3. It is estimated that no other expenditure, both recurring or

non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India, would be
involved.

37


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)

* * * * *

Obligations 6. The Appropriate Government shall
to supply re
electricity to endeavour to supply electricity to all areas
rural areas. including villages and hamlets.

* : हि हि x
Central

Transmission 38. (1) * पा * * *
Utility and | |
functions. (2) The functions of the Central

Transmission Utility shall be—

* * + * *

(d) to provide non-discriminatory open
access to its trarismission system for use by—

(i) any licensee or generating company
on payment of the transmission charges; or

(ii) any consumer as and when such
open access is provided by the State
Commission under sub-section (2) of section
42, on payment of the transmission charges
and a surcharge thereon, as may be
specified by the Central Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall be
utilised for the purpose of meeting the
requirement of current level cross-subsidy:

Provided further that such surcharge
and cross subsidies shall be progressively
reduced and eliminated in the manner as
may be specified by the Central
Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge may
be levied till such time the cross subsidies
are not eliminated:

38


Provided also that the manner of payment
and utilisation of the surcharge shall be
specified by the Central Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable in case open access is provided to
a person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use.

39. (1) * * * * +

(2) The functions of the State Transmission
Utility shall be—

* * * * +

(d) to provide non-discriminatory open
access to its transmission system for use
by—

(i) any licensee or generating company
on payment of the transmission charges; or

(ii) any consumer as and when such
open access is provided by the State
Commission under sub-section (2) of section
42, on payment of the transmission charges
and a surcharge thereon, as may be
specified by the State Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall be
utilised for the purpose of meeting the
requirement of current level cross-subsidy:

Provided further that such surcharge
and cross subsidies shall be progressively
reduced and eliminated in the manner as
may be specified by the State Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge may
be levied till such time the cross subsidies
are not eliminated:

Provided also that the manner of
payment and utilisation of the surcharge
shall be specified by the State Commission:

State

Transmission
Utility and

functions.

39


Duties of

transmission

licensees.

40

Provided also that such surcharge shall
not be leviable in case open access is
provided to a person who has established
a captive generating plant for carrying the
electricity to the destination of his own use.

40. It shall be the duty of a transmission

licensee—

(a) to build, maintain and operate an
efficient, co-ordinated and economical inter-
State transmission system or intra-State
transmission system, as the case may be;

(b) to comply with the directions of the
Regional Load Despatch Centre and the
State Load Despatch Centre, as the case
may be;

(c) to provide non-discriminatory open
access to its transmission system for use
by—

(i) any licensee or generation
company on payment of the
transmission charges; or

(ii) any consumer as and when
such open access is provided by the
State Commission under sub-section (2)
of section 42, on payment of the
transmission charges and a surcharge
thereon, as may be specified by the
State Commission:

Provided that such surcharge shall
be utilised for the purpose of meeting
the requirement of current level cross-
subsidy:

Provided further that such
surcharge and cross subsidies shall be
progressively reduced and eliminated in
the manner as may be specified by the
Appropriate Commission:


Provided also that such surcharge
may be levied till such time the cross
subsidies are not eliminated:

Provided also that the manner of
payment and utilisation of the
surcharge shall be specified by the
Appropriate Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge
shall not be leviable in case open access
is provided to a person who has
established a captive generating plant
for carrying the electricity to the
destination of his own use.

* * * * *

Parr VI
DistriBuTION OF ELECTRICITY
Provisions with respect to distribution licensees
42. (1) * * * * *

(2) The State Commission shall introduce
open access in such phases and subject to such
conditions, (including the cross subsidies, and
other operational constraints) as may be
specified within one year of the appointed date
by it and in specifying the extent of open access
in successive phases and in determining the
charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard
to all relevant factors including such cross
subsidies, and other operational constraints:

Provided that such open access may be
allowed before the cross subsidies are
eliminated on payment of a surcharge in
addition to the charges for wheeling as may
be determined by the State Commission:

Provided further that such surcharge shall
be utilised to meet the requirements of current
level of cross-subsidy within the area of supply
of the distribution licensee:

Duties of

distribution
licensee and
open access.

4


Tariff
regulations.

Cognizance
of offences.

42

Provided also that such surcharge and cross
subsidies shall be progressively reduced and
eliminated in the manner as may be specified
by the State Commission:

Provided also that such surcharge shall not
be leviable in case open access is provided to
a person who has established a captive
generating plant for carrying the electricity to
the destination of his own use:

Provided also that the State Commission
shall, not later than five years from the date of
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2003, by regulations, provide such open
access to all consumers who require a supply
of electricity where the maximum power to be
made available at any time exceeds one
megawatt.

* * * * +

Parr VII
TARIFF

61. The Appropriate Commission shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, specify
the terms and conditions for the determination
of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by
the following namely:—

* * * * *

(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the
cost of supply of electricity and also, reduces
and eliminates cross subsidies within the period
to be specified by the Appropriate Commission;

* * * * *

151. No Court shall take cognizance of an
offence punishable under this Act except upon
a complaint in writing made by Appropriate
Government or Appropriate Commission or any
of their officer authorised by them or a Chief
Electrical Inspector or an Electrical Inspector or
licensee or the generating company, as the case
may be, for this purpose.

* * * * +

36 of 2003.


176. (1)* + * * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
tules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:

* + * * *

(b) the additional requirements
(including the capital adequacy, credit
worthiness or code of conduct) under sixth
proviso to section 14;

* * * * *
178. (1)* * + * +

(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the power contained in sub-
section (1), such regulations may provide for
all or any of the following matters, namely:

* * * * *

(k) reduction and elimination of
surcharge and cross subsidies under second
proviso to sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of
sub-section (2) of section 38;

+ + * * *
(m) reduction and elimination of
surcharge and cross subsidies under the

second proviso to sub-clause (ii) of
clause (c) of section 40;

* * * * *
(t) the period within which the cross

subsidies shall be reduced and eliminated
under clause (g) of section 61;

+ * * * *
181. (1)* * * * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the power contained in sub-
section (1), such regulations may provide for
all or any of the following matters, namely:

* * * * *

Directions
by State
Government.

Powers of
Authority to
make
regulations.

Powers of
Central
‘Commission
to make

regulations.

43


(j) reduction and elimination of
surcharge and cross subsidies under second
Proviso to sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of
sub-section (2) of section 39;

* * * * *

(m) reduction and elimination of
surcharge and cross subsidies under second
proviso to sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of
section 40;

* * * * *
(p) reduction and elimination of
surcharge and cross subsidies under the

third proviso to sub-section (2) of section
42;

* * + * *

(zc) the terms and conditions for the
determination of tariff under section 61;

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003

(Shri Priyaranjan Dasmunsi, Minister of Information and
Broadcasting and Parliamentary Affairs)

45


ANNEXURE II

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 16TH JANUARY,
2006 IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ’E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1430 hours to 1600 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman
MEMBERS

. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri E.G, Sugavanam

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkataswamy

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

9 9 कफ एफ 9

Peep
®nRES

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Surender Singh — — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary

List or Wrtnesses
Ministry of Power

1. Shri A.K. Kutty —_ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Alok Kumar — Director
3. Shri Sanjay Garg —  DGM, PG

46


2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the
Committee and also the representatives of the Ministry of Power and
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. The Chairman, then asked the representatives of the Ministry of
Power to make a presentation on “The Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2005”. The representatives of the Ministry of Power thereafter made a
presentation with the help of slides on the proposed Amendments to
the Electricity Act, 2003. During the presentation the following main
points were covered:—

(1) The concerns expressed by the States in implementation of
Electricity Act, 2003.

(2) Extension of time for reorganization of SEBs granted to the
States.

(3) The State Governments and the Central Government to
jointly endeavour to provide access to electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets as proposed in the
amendments to the Act.

(4) Continuation of the provision for reduction of cross subsidies
in the Act while an amendment regarding the use of the
word ‘elimination’ in the context of cross subsidies in the
Act.

(5) Offences related to theft of electricity, interference with
meters etc. to be made cognizable offences.

4. The Members present also raised some queries on other
provisions in the Electricity Act, 2003. The Chairman informed the
Committee that the subject ‘Electricity Act, 2003—Implementation
Thereof’ has already been selected and would be taken up for detailed
examination wherein at that point of time all the relevant points other
than the presently proposed amendments by the Central Government
in regard to implementation of Electricity Act, 2003—could be taken
up.

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Committee then adjourned.)

47


MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 24TH JANUARY,

48

2006 IN THE MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1430 hours to 1630 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Clairman
Members

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

» Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Kiren Rijiju

. Shri Nandkumar Sai

. Shri M. Shivanna

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam.

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

. Shri G. Venkataswamy

. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah

. Shri Bimal Jalan

. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

waenNnaunaAwND

PePe epee en
NADRONRES

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — — Under Secretary

List or Witnesses

Government of Punjab

Miss Kusumjit Sidhu Principal Secretary
Shri ४.5, Ratra Chairman, Punjab State Electricity
Board

Shri Arunjit Singh Miglani Additional Secretary, Department
of Power


Government of Gujarat

1. Shri Balwant Singh, IAS — Principal Secretary
2. Smt. V. L. Joshi, IAS — Chairman & Managing
Director

Government of West Bengal

1. Shri P. Vanamali — Resident Commissioner

2. Shri M. K. Dey — Chairman, Electricity Board

2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the
Committee and also the representatives of the State Governments of
Punjab, Gujarat and West Bengal to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. After the introductory remarks of Chairman and formal
introduction of the witnesses, the representatives of the State
Government of Punjab, expressed their views on the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 before the Committee as follows:

(i) The State Government of Punjab was in agreement with
Amendments proposed in the Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2005.

(ii) Punjab had already achieved 100% electrification of the
villages.

(iii) The State Government was not in agreement with the
proposal of appointing ‘Franchises’ for rural distribution in
the Rajiv Gandhi Vidutikaran Yojana.

(iv) Metering of consumers was mandatory in The Electricity
Act (2003) and extension of time by two years upto 2007
for the purpose has been given. However, the farmers in
the State of Punjab were opposed to metering, which was
a problem in the State.

4, Members raised some queries which were answered by the
representative of the State Government of Punjab.

5. Thereafter, the Chairman invited the representatives of the State
Government of Gujarat to express their views on the proposed
Amendments in the Bill.

49


6. The representatives of the State Government of Gujarat made
the following submissions before the Committee:

(i) Electrification of villages had been achieved in Gujarat
according to old definition. However, as per new definition,
the new targets are yet to be achieved.

(ii) All funds for electrification should be channelised through
the State Governments only.

(iii) The State Government was in agreement with the removal
of the word ‘elimination’ in the Act and cross subsidies
should continue.

(iv) Collection efficiency: of Gujarat was 99%, therefore they were
also not in agreement with the appointment of ‘Franchises’
for rural distribution as mentioned in the Rajiv Gandhi
Vidutikaran Yojana.

(v) There was also a need in the State to educate the farmers
to bring about Metering in all the agricultural sectors.

7. Some queries were also raised by Members with the
representatives of the State Government of Gujarat.

8. Then the Chairman proceeded to invite the representatives of
the State Government of West Bengal to express their views on the
proposed Amendments in the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005.

9. The representatives of the State Government of West Bengal
expressed the following views before the Committee:

(i) The cross subsidy needs to be continued for more time in
the State.

(ii) The State Government was also not in agreement of
‘Franchises’ in Rajiv Gandhi Vidutikaran Yojana.

(iii) 15% of the villages were yet to be electrified in the State.

(iv) The State Government had already introduced a bill in the
State Legislature to make theft of electricity a criminal
offence.

10. Members also raised some queries which were answered by
the representatives of State Government.

(The witnesses then withdrew)

11. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Committee then adjourned.)

50


MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 7TH FEBRUARY,
2006 IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘D‘, PARLIAMENT

HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1430 hours to 1630 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh — In the Chair

Members

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

- Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

. Shri M. Shivanna

. Shri M. K. Subba

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

. Shri G. Venkataswamy

. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav
. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A, Heptullah
. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

SbCRETARIAT
1. Shri PK. Bhandari जा. Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary
List of WrrNesses
Government of Assam

Shri S. K, Srivastava — Principal Secretary

Shri D. Das — Additional Chief
(Commercial)

Engineer

51


Government of Haryana

1. Shri R. N. Prasher —- Financial Commissioner &
Principal Secretary

2. Shri PK. Das — Managing Director, Haryana
Vidyut Prasar Nigam

Government of Karnataka

1, Shri Bharatlal Meena — Managing Director, Karnataka
Power Transmission Corporation

2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee chose another
member, Shri Vijendra Pal Singh, M.P. under rule 258 to act as the
Chairman for that sitting. The Chairman welcomed the Members of
the Committee and also the representatives of the State Governments
of Assam, Haryana and Karnataka to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.

3. After the introductory remarks of Chairman and formal
introduction of the witnesses, the representatives of the State
Government of Assam, expressed their views on the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 before the Committee as follows:

(i) The State Government of Assam was in agreement with
Amendments proposed to the Electricity (Amendment) Bill,
2005. They were of the view that there should be reduction
in the subsidies but not an elimination of the subsidies.

(ii) The T&D losses in the State were high to the tune of 45%
and the major portion of the loss was due to technical
reasons.

(iii) To take care of the theft of electricity, special courts had
been set up in the State.

4. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representatives of the State Government of Assam.

5. The Chairman, then, invited the representatives of the State
Government of Haryana to express their views on the proposed
Amendments to the Bill.

52


6. The representatives of the State Government of Haryana made
the following submissions before the Committee:

(i)

(1)

(iii)
(iv)

The State Government of Haryana welcomed the amendment
providing that Central and State Governments would jointly
endeavour to provide electricity to all but desired that
implementation aspect of the same should be left to the
State Governments.

The State Government was also in favour of the removal of
the word ‘elimination’, although reduction of cross subsidies
was more desirable. However, they also maintained that
the decisions in regard to this aspect should be left to the
concerned State Regulatory Commissions, keeping in mind
the consumer profile of the State.

Metering of agricultural supply in the State was also low.

As per the available data 17% of the rural household in the
State were stated to be without the electricity.

7. Some queries were also raised by Members with the
representatives of the State Government of Haryana which were duly

replied to.

8. The Chairman, then, invited the representatives of the State
Government of Karnataka to express their views on the proposed
Amendments to the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005.

9. The representatives of the State Government of Karnataka
expressed the following views before the Committee:

0)

(ii)

(ii)

The State Government was in agreement with the
amendments proposed to the Electricity (Amendment) Bill
2005.

A system had been adopted in the State under which meters
had been installed at the transformer centre level which
read all the installations covered under the transformer and
that information went into a computer. Due to adoption of
this technique the T&D losses could be controlled in the
State to a significant extent.

About 80% of the households in the State were electrified.
According to the new definition, 400 villages remained yet
to be electrified.

53


10. Members also raised some queries which were replied to by
the representatives of State Government.

(The witness then withdrew.)

11. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Committee then adjourned.)

54


MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 8TH MARCH,
2006 IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘139’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1530 hours to 1600 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

NA OP ON

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri PK. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary

List oF WITNESSES
State Government of Tamil Nadu

1. Shri R. Satapathy, IAS — Secretary, Energy
2. Shri Hans Raj Verma —  Chairman/TNEB

2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the
Committee and also the representatives of the Government of Tamil
Nadu and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker.

3. After the introductory remarks of Chairman and formal
introduction of the witnesses, the representatives of the State

55


Government of Tamil Nadu, expressed their views on the Electricity
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 before the Committee as follows:

(i) The State Government of Tamil Nadu was in agreement
over the proposed amendment regarding rural electrification.

(ii) The State Government was in favour of providing cross-
subsidies to the various sectors and expressed its agreement
to the proposed amendment to this effect.

(iii) Suggested addition of the words “captive generation plant
owner” in amendment to Section 151.

4. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representatives of the State Government of Tamil Nadu.

(The witnesses then withdrew.)

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

(The Committee then adjourned.)

56


MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 9TH MARCH,

2006 IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘G074’, PARLIAMENT
LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

. Shri Motilal Vora

. Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam

७ 9 व्यय 9७ एछा- के wn

a
छ

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Surender Singh — — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary

List OF WITNESSES
State Government of Uttar Pradesh

1. Shri Ashok Khurana — Principal Secretary, Energy &
Chairman, UP Power
Corporation Ltd.

2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the
Committee and also the representative of the Government of Uttar
Pradesh and apprised him of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker.

57


3. After the introductory remarks of Chairman and formal
introduction of the witness, the representative of the State Government
of Uttar Pradesh, expressed his views on the Electricity (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 before the Committee as follows:

0)

(i)

The State Government of Uttar Pradesh was not in
agreement regarding the role of the Centre for rural
electrification due to problems faced in the past in this
regard like uneven progress in various districts regarding
tural electrification under the Centrally sponsored scheme.

The Government of Uttar Pradesh was in agreement with
the substitution of word ‘elimination’ in case of cross-
subsidies as also to the proposed amendment in
Section 151 regarding theft of electricity.

The following other aspects on the Electricity Act, 2003 also came
up for discussion with the representative:

()
Gi)
(iii)

Trading of power and problems relating thereto.
Problems relating to open access in the State.

Private sector participation in the power sector in Uttar
Pradesh.

4. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representative of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh.

(The Witness then withdrew.)

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

58

(The Committee then adjourned.)


MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON 17TH MAY,
2006 IN COMMITTEE ROOM G-074, PARLIAMENT
LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 hours.

PRESENT

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty

. Shri B. Vinod Kumar

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

7. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

. Shri M. Shivanna

9. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

10. Shri M.K. Subba

a ak YN

@

Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
12. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
13. Shri Jesu Das Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri B.D. Swan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.

59


3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:

(i) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of power.

(ii) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

(iii) Draft Report on the Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2005 of
the Ministry of Power.

4. The Committee adopted draft Reports with minor additions/
deletions/amendments as suggested by the Members of the Committee.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports after incorporating the changes suggested
by the Members of the Committee and also making consequential
changes arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned
Ministries and also to present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.