STANDING COMMITTEE
7 ON ENERGY

(2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

‘HYDRO POWER—A CRITIQUE’

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Forty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Hydro Power—A Critique’)

SEVENTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)


SEVENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF POWER

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Forty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Hydro Power—A Critique’]

Presented to Lok Sabha on ..
Laid in Rajya Sabha on

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)


FS ei cee fox sagen sats
RSSSSRARSRES

22.

24,
25,
26.
27.

SPNAT AWD

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MeEmeers
Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

+ Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri E.G, Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkataswamy
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

(iii)


(iv)

28.
29.
30.
31.

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Director
4. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
5. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary
6. Shri Arvind Sharma — Committee Officer


PA eS eyes oes
PSBSSSRRESBRES

23.
24.

SP के व 9. छा का 9

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G, Venkataswamy

- Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

(v)


25.
26.

28.
29.
30.
31.

(vi)

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Forty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on the
subject - ‘Hydro Power - A Critique’ (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Ministry of Power.

2. The Forty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
was presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2003. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 6th October, 2004.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 13th July, 2005.

4. An Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendation contained in the Forty Second Report of the
Committee is given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deter; GURUDAS KAMAT,
AS July, 2005 Chairman,

14 Asadha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(vii)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the 427व Report
(130 Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the subject
‘Hydro Power—A Critique’ of the Ministry of Power which was
presented to the Lok Sabha on 23" December, 2003.

2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 69 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

SI No. 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 11, 13, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 29, 33, 34,
40, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 62, 63,
64, 66, 68 and 69

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to persue in view of the Government's replies:

5 No. 2, 6, 8, 14, 16, 17, 22, 23, 25, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36,
39, 43, 45, 58, 65 and 67

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:

SI No. 15, 37, 38 and 52

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

SI No. 5, 10, 12, 26, 41, 59, 60 and 61

3. The Committee desire the final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government ought to be furnished to the Committee within
3 months.

4. The Committee also desire that utmost importance should
be given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the


Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Government to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.

5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

A. Survey & Investigation of New Projects of Damodar Valley
Corporation (DVC)

(Recommendation 51. No. 4, Para No. 2.42)

6. Taking note of the new hydro schemes such as Boro-Konar
Hydel, Bermo Hydel Project, Balpahari Dam & Hydro Electricity Project,
and Lugu Pahar Hydro Electric Project identified by Damodar Valley
Corporation (DVC) for execution, the Committee were constrained to
note that no budgetary allocations were provided to start these projects.
Taking into consideration, the adverse thermal & hydel mix ratio in
the Eastern region, the Committee had recommended that the
Government should take up all these new schemes at the earliest. At
the same time, the Committee desired to know the present status of
the new schemes identified by DVC.

7. The Government in their reply have inter alia stated that in
the re-assessment studies of hydro electric potential of the country
carried out by CEA during 1978-1987, two schemes mentioned above
namely Boro (500 MW) in West Bengal and Lugu Pahar (2800 MW) in
Bihar were identified. However, DVC entrusted the work of
investigation and preparation of pre-feasibility report for integrated
development of Damodar basin to CWC only in August, 2001 with a
special emphasis on the following hydro electricity projects:—

Balpahari Dam with hydro electric project
Bermo Pump Storage Project
Bokaro Reservoir (including Lugu Pahar Pump Storage Scheme)

8. CWC had earlier submitted an estimate of Rs. 400 lakhs for
the above work, which was accepted, in principle, by the DVC. After ,
several interactions between DVC and CWC, officials of CWC visited
the proposed sites in October, 2003. In December, 2003 CWC submitted
a revised estimate of Rs. 10.88 crore for the survey and investigation
work of (i) Balpahari Dam, (ii) Bermo Pump Storage Scheme and
(iii) Boro-Konar Pump Storage Scheme. The work of Lugu Pahar was
not covered in the estimate furnished by CWC, as the proposed site

2


could not be visited by the team during their visit in October, 2003
owing to local disturbances.

9. CWC has been requested to submit their revised estimates for
the pre-feasibility study of Balpahari Dam only and other schemes
have been excluded from the purview of the study by CWC.

10. The Committee are constrained to note that although , DVC
entrusted the work of investigation and preparation of pre-feasibility
report for integrated development of Damodar basin to CWC in
August, 2001 with a special emphasis on the Balpahari Dam with
hydro electric project, Bermo Pump Storage Project, Bokaro Reservoir
(including Lagu Pahar Pump Storage Scheme) and CWC had earlier
submitted an estimate of Rs. 400 lakhs for the work which was
accepted, in principle, by the DVC; the estimates were revised to
Rs. 10.88 crore in December, 2003 by CWC without assigning any
reasons thereof. The Committee cannot but deplore the delays already
committed in negotiating with CWC for award of the survey and
investigation of these projects and feel that 5 to 8 years that have
been projected for preparation of Detailed Project Reports of the
above referred new projects of the Damodar Valley Corporation is
unduly a long period to carry out Survey and Investigation activities.
The Committee strongly urge the Government to ensure that CWC
should carry out the Survey and Investigation including DPR of
these already delayed projects within 3 years as per the revised
outlays. The Committee would await the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

B. Pump Storage Scheme (PSS)
(Recommendation 51. Nos. 5 & 12, Para Nos. 2.43 & 2.50)

11, The Committee had taken strong note of inaction on the part
of the Government in not harnessing the Pump Storage potentials
although these were treated essential in optimizing energy generation
from base load thermal stations and in meeting peak load and system
contingencies. The Committee had observed that only 2.45% of total
identified potential of 94,000 MW Pump Storage Schemes had been
harnessed and another 2.5% were under construction. The Committee
were of the view that a new programme/action plan should be
launched, exclusively for PSS, so that the vast untapped potential be
exploited expeditiously.

12. In their reply, the Government have inter alia informed the
Committee that Pumped Storage Scheme work on the principle of

3


surplus power available during the off-peak period being used to pump
water from a reservoir at a lower height to a reservoir at a higher
level. During peak hours the water in the higher reservoir is used to
generate power thereby increasing the available peaking power in the
grid. The cost of peaking power obtained through the pumped storage
scheme is high as it includes the cost of the power (off-peak), losses
in transmission and in the pumping operations (of the order of 30%)and.
the cost of operations of the pumped storage schemes. The Indian
Power Industry has not enhanced sufficiently to have a high enough
differentiation in price between peak and off-peak power to allow
commercial operation of pumped storage schemes. As a result, in spite
of best efforts, the Tehri Pumped Storage Scheme which is sought to
be set up on commercial lines has not yet fructified since the beneficiary
States are unwilling to offer off-peak power at low prices (marginally
above the cost from thermal units) and purchase the peaking power
at rates including the cost as explained above.

13. According to reassessment study of H.E. potential of the
country carried out by CEA during 1978-87, 56 Nos. pumped storage
schemes with probable aggregate installed capacity of 94,000 MW were
identified. At present, 8 no. of pumped storage schemes with installed
capacity of 2854 MW are under operation. This works out to 3.04% of
the total installed capacity as per CEA studies. At present 3 no. of
pumped storage schemes with total installed capacity of 1950 MW are
under construction. This works out to 2.07% of the total installed
capacity as per CEA studies.

14. In addition, one scheme, namely Tehri St. II Uttaranchal with
an installed capacity of 1,000 MW has been accorded TEC by CEA
and is awaiting investment decision.

15. The Ministry of Power also mentioned that pumped storage
schemes might also involve environmental/forest hindrances similar
to conventional hydro electric project. The Ministry further informed
that since Pumped Storage Schemes stabilize the grid, increase the
efficiency and reliability of thermal plants by sharing peak and
fluctuating load, the operation of pump storage projects need to be
rationalized to give a proper weightage for these factors and also for
the prime power available during peak demand from pumped storage
projects. The weightage to the following factors would be quite justified
considering that Pumped Storage Project will obviously be costly as
the fuel cost would be added for pumping which would be about

4


50% of total cost of energy, besides lower efficiency in pumping mode
ete

(i) Weightage for stabilizing grid and frequency variation in
the entire system and thus saving infructuous power
consumption,

(ii) Weightage for optimum utilization of Thermal Plants and
ensuring effective fuel economy,

(iii) Increasing longevity and reducing damage to the thermal
plants and

(iv) For assuring industrial growth by providing stable & reliable
power.

16. By giving weightage to the above aspects, the PSS may become
economical and reasonably comparable with other modes of feasible
Peaking Power.

17. According to the Ministry of Power, in Eastern and Western
regions of India, where hydro capacity compared to thermal is very
small (about 15%) the induction of more and more pumped storage
plants would need specific consideration. In these regions, due to less
demand during off-peak hours, thermal plants are forced to operate at
part loads causing considerable efficiency loss and reduced PLE. The
operation of pumped storage plants would provide much needed load
in the off-peak hour to enable efficient operation of thermal plants
and provide premium peaking power during peak hours.

18. The Committee are unhappy to note that although there are
proved advantages of hydel power generated by Pump Storage
Scheme (PSS) such as stabilizing grid and frequency variation,
optimum utilization of thermal plant, reducing damage to the thermal
plant and assuring industrial growth, etc., no action plan has been
prepared/launched exclusively for Pump Storage Scheme inspite of
vast untapped potential of 94,000 MW and the Committee’s
recommendation thereto. The Committee are further constrained to
note that although the Government have analysed various facts such
as (i) Stabilizing grid and frequency variation in the entire system
and thus saving infructuous power consumption, (ii) Optimum
utilization of Thermal Plants and ensuring effective fuel economy,
(iii) Increasing longevity, etc., no action has been initiated on the
Committee's recommendation to draw an action plan for tapping the
huge Pump Storage capacity. The Committee do not concur with the
view of the Government that there is less demand in the Eastern

5



and Western regions and as such proposal would need specific
consideration only in these regions. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that such an action plan for
PSS be prepared considering the advantages of PSS and the
Committee be immediately apprised of the same.

C. Contingency Plan for Hydel Projects affected by Natural Calamities
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10 & 15, Para No. 2.48 & 3.15)

19. The Committee were distressed to note that the cost of Nathpa
Jhakri Hydro Electric Project (now SJVNL) in Kinnaur district of
Himachal Pradesh had been raised from Rs. 1678.02 crore to 7686.31
crore. This project was delayed from 1996-97 to 2003-04. The Committee
had observed that consequent on being affected by flood on 01.08.2000,
the restoration of infrastructual works in dam and intake areas,
desalting chamber and power house were completed. Diversion tunnel
was reported to be made operational again on 18.9.2002 after repair of
coffer dam. As regard to the cost escalation of Nathpa-Jhakri Hydro
Electric Project, the Committee were further perturbed to note the cost
escalation which was about Rs. 6000 crore and the project was delayed
by seven years. The Committee were not convinced with the reply of
the Government that flash floods on 14 August, 2000 had caused severe
damage to the project as this apprehension was raised by the Standing
Committee on Energy during their study visit to the project during
May-June, 2000 and the project authorities failed to take timely action.
The Committee failed to understand as to why technical and civil
aspects being looked after by Central Electricity Authority and Central
Water Commission, had been neglected and no precautions were taken.
The Committee had felt that both CEA and CWC owe an explanation
for this and the Government should fix the responsibility in the matter.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that DPRs cleared by CEA
and civil work carried out under supervision of CWC should be
examined thoroughly and minutely and the lacuna in the clearance
system should be brought to the notice of the Committee alongwith
the steps taken to avoid such recurrence in future.

20. The Government in their reply have stated that the Nathpa
Jhakri Project got delayed due to the following reasons:

(i) Massive rock slides in July, 1993 and March, 1996 at the
Dam site and their consequent removal.

(ii) Consequent increase in the length of the diversion tunnel
from 400 meter to 700 meter.


(iii) Strengthening of both the right & left banks of river Satluj
with cable anchors.

(iv) Emergence of shear Zones at Nugalsari, Sholding, Manglad
and Rattanpur ends.

(v) Presence of hot water springs and extremely hot working
temperature in the HRT at Wadhal Downstream.

(vi) Massive floods in August, 1997 and 1% August, 2000.

All the units of Nathpa Jhakri have been commissioned during
2003-04.

21. About the reasons for delay and time & cost overruns, the
Committee have been informed that these are being looked into by
the Standing Committee of the Ministry of Power in which the
representatives of CEA, CWC, Planning Commission, etc. are also
members. The responsibility for lapses, if any, on the part of any
organization or individuals will be fixed by the said Standing
Committee.

22. As regard to the practices established and various BIS codes
on the subject matter of design of various water resources projects the
Government have informed the Committee that CWC follows the world
over established practice. According to the Government, the
unprecedented and extreme natural calamities, that too at construction
stage, would cause certain damages. However, prudent project
management and timely actions by the project authorities would help
in minimising the extent of damages. Further, a suitable flood
forecasting system is being planned in Satluj basin for the operation
stage. Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) is also participating in
the project named, Hydrology Project, Phase-II which is being
undertaken by the Ministry of Water Resources. Scope of the proposal
is indicated as under:

(i) Installation of Telemetry System in the catchments of Sutlej
and Beas rivers for improvement of water management
through effective early flood warning system with the help
of automatic sensors and satellite based data communication
system. The main objective of the scheme would be to have
following inputs on real Time basis:—

- Discharges in the river Beas and Sutlej upstream Bhakra,
Pandoh and Pong Dams.

- Rainfall in corresponding runoff in the Beas and Sutlej
Catchments.


- Rainfall and corresponding runoff in the Sutlej Catechment.
- Atomospheric temperatures in the catchments

- Relative humidity.

- Wind Velocity (Speed and Direction)

(ii) Estimation and forecasting of rainfall & snowfall and
corresponding runoffs.

(iii) Installation of state-of-art automatic electronic gauge
recorders at various gauge discharges sites on rivers/
channels downstream of dams alongwith Real Time Data
Communication System.

(iv) Setting up a Central Control Room at Nangal for real time
display of observed data of catehcments dams and various
rivers/channels.

23. The Committee are dismayed to note that although there
has been continuous problem of the Nathpa Jhakri Hydro Electric
Project being hit by the flash floods in 1997, 2000 and 2004; no
concrete action was taken to probe the matter in spite of this
Committee’s earlier recommendations. The Committee had desired
an explanation from CEA and CWC who were associated with
technical and civil aspects of the project, but no action seems to has
been taken. It is only now that the Standing Committee of the
Ministry of Power have been constituted to identify the reasons for
delay and time & cost overruns, in which the representatives of
CEA, CWC, Planning Commission, etc. are also members. The
responsibility for lapses, if any, on the part of any organization or
individuals is reported to be fixed by the said Standing Committee.

- The Committee has yet to submit a Report. The Committee deplore
the delay in investigation being carried out and strongly recommend
that the Committee constituted for the purpose by the Government
should identify the lapses and fix the responsibility of the
organization/individual within the next 3 months and apprise the
Committee of the action taken in this regard. The Committee would
also like to know the lacuna with the Detailed Project Report (DPR)
of the said project, if any, and would like to know the steps taken
to formulate contingency plan to check such incidents as regard to
this project and all other major ongoing Hydel Projects.

24. The Committee do not accept the reply of the Government
that the practice well established world over on the design of various
Water Resources Projects is being followed by Central Water

8


Commission(CWC). The Committee feel that the principal consultant
ie. Central Water Commission which in the present case of Nathpa
Jhakri Hydro Power Corporation (NJHPC).(now SLVNL Project) was
associated with the design of civil component of the project cannot
absolve itself of the responsibilities by merely stating that prudent
project management and timely action by the project authorities could
have helped in minimising the extent of damages as CWC had not
addressed itself to the issue during designing of Civil component of
the proejct. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Government
that designing of civil component of Hydro projects for which
CWC / Ministry of Water Resources are associated with should plan
elaborate steps to minimise the extent of damages during natural
calamities. Although, the Committee appreciate the flood forecasting
system that is being planned in Satluj basin and also an Hydrology
Project, Phase II, where Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) is
also participating, the Committee feel that these issues should have
been addressed while finalising the Detailed Project Report of a
hydel project. The Committee expect that due care will be taken in
all the future projects to avoid devastating losses due to flood or
other natural calamities. The Committee would await the action taken
by the Government in this regard.

D. Need to set up single window clearance for Hydel Project
(Recommendation 51.90. 26, Para No. 5.90)

25. The Committee had noted that various authorities such as the
Central Electricity Authority, the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, etc. had been involved in the appraisal of a
hydro power project before it was certified for development. The
Committee desired that there was a need to have a single window
dispensation/authority so that a Project be cleared without much
hassles. In this context, the Committee had recommended that any
hydel project submitted for clearance should receive all the statutory/
non-statutory clearances/approvals within six months of submission
of the proposal. The certification of commercial viability be given within
15 days, especially to private developers. The Techno-Economic, MoEF
and CCEA clearances be given within 1, 2 and 2 months respectively.
The Committee had also recommended that Ministry of Power should
work out a shelve of hydel Projects cleared from all the angles. MoEF
should also be involved in the appraisal process. The Committee further
observed that the Government launched 50,000 MW hydro-electric
initiative under which work on Feasibility Studies for 162 Hydro-Electric
Projects would be taken up by the Central Electricity Authority in

9


association with Central/State Power Utilities as consultants. The
Committee, in this context, had desired that the Government should
involve MoEF in advance for undertaking Impact Assessment Studies
of fauna/flora, CAT in various river basins through their own
institutional arrangements in a fixed time-frame. This would ensure
that the Hydro-Electric Projects were appraised from environment and
forest angles expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.

26. Regarding environmental clearances, the Government have
stated that it is proposed that the MOEF would initially prescribe the
Terms of Reference (TOR) for carrying out the Environment Impact
Studies (EIA)/EMP studies. This will ensure that the parameters for
the preparation of documents are fixed initially. There would be no
scope for asking for additional details or new information once the
TOR has been agreed to. The revised procedure when implemented
would ensure that there is no delay in carrying out environmental
appraisal once the documents are prepared conforming to the TOR.

27. As regard to forestry clearance, the Government have informed
as under:—

“The ‘Land’ is a State subject and hence it is -the State/UT
Government who first decide on the possible utilization of forest
land for non-forestry purpose. The project proponents may take
up essential studies in advance which are in the interest of
conservation of forests and environment, prior to submission of
the project to the State/UT Government.When the State/UT
Governments recommend the project, the Central Government
considers it in a time bound manner under the provisions of the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. A time limit of 210 days has been
prescribed for the State Governments/UTs to process the forestry
clearance cases at their various levels and forward it to Central
Government for their consideration”.

28. The Committee note that the Government is revising the
existing procedure as regard to environmental clearances to ensure
that there is no delay in carrying out environmental appraisal once
the documents are prepared comforming to the Terms of Reference
(TOR). However, the Committee find that the reply of the
Government is silent about single window dispensation/authority to
clear hydel projects without much hassles. The Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendations and would appreciate if the
environmental studies, about the various probable sites identified
by the Ministry of Power for the projects are carried out by the
10


Ministry of Environment and Forests themselves in advance. This
will guide the entrepreneurs to straight away carry out various
environmental works as and when they approach the Ministry for
clearances to set up the project at an identified place. At the same
time, the Committee also desire that any hydel project submitted for
clearance should receive all the statutory/non-statutory clearances/
approvals within six months of submission of the proposal. The
Committee would like to know the action taken by the Government
in this regard.

E. Need to off-load indirect cost components on hydel project
(Recommendations 51. Nos. 37& 38 Para Nos. 63& 64)

29. The Committee had observed that benefits from hydro power
such as clean and environment friendly power with no fuel cost and
non-consummative use of water are recognized world over and there
was a need to accelerate development of identified hydro power
schemes in the country. At the same time, the Committee found that
many of the hydel projects were located in troubled areas and infested
by militancy and terrorist activities. The Committee were of the view
that maintaining law and order being the responsibility of the
Government, there was an urgent need to amend the present policy of
the Government in regard to charging the entire security expenditure
from concept and uptill commissioning—on the project cost. However,
the Committee opined that recurring expenditure incurred on security,
once a hydel project goes on stream should to be charged on the
project developer, In the absence of such a change, the Committee felt
that a large number of the hydel power projects would become
unviable. This had become more so important, in view of adverse
thermal hydel mix in the country, and untapped hydel potential in
Jammu & Kashmir and North-Eastern Region—both the areas under
threat of militancy/insurgent activities from time to time. The
Committee, therefore, had recommended that Planning Commission,
the Ministry of Finance and Home Affairs (Internal Security) should
allocate separate funds for providing security to these infrastructure
projects, including power.

30. On cost of access roads being included in the project cost, the
Committee had found that hydroelectric projects which generally
appeared to be in remote, inaccessible locations had either substandard
roads or no access roads. In order to develop the project, main trunk
roads had to be either laid afresh or widened and improved to reach
the project site. The Committee. were constrained to note that although
the project authorities were bound to be liable for compensation for

"1



land and property which was directly attributable to the project and
had to bear the cost of development of catchment area, even then as
per the current practice, 12% free power was being given to State
throughout the life of the project. The Committee also felt that since
development of hydro projects in a State results in economic benefit
to the State due to triggering of economic and commercial activities
around the project site and R&R, flood moderation costs were also
included in the capital cost of the project, the provision of 12% free
power, needed reconsideration as the provision did not apply to thermal
power projects. The Committee were of the considered view that
although economics should be one of the prime guiding philosophy,
while determining tariff and production cost, the States be pursued to
forgo the provision of 12% free power for initial some years so as to
make the projects economically viable.

31. In their reply, the Government have inter-alia stated that the
Ministry of Power had mooted a proposal for off-loading cost of
security and other indirect costs including highways/road from the
project cost in remote and disturbed areas. The note was circulated to
other Ministries for their comments. The proposal did not find favour
with the other Ministries including Planning Commission, Ministry of
Finance and Ministry of Home Affairs who have all not agreed to the
proposal and maintained that these costs be borne by the project only.
The proposal is being further pursued with the Stake holders for
acceptance. Ministry of Finance are of the view that all components
which are directly related to the project have to be a legitimate charge
on the project budget. These include R&R costs, security costs and
flood mitigation measures, etc. At best, security costs should be borne
by the State Government which benefits from the project.

32. The Comments of different Ministries/Department are as
under:—

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure

“Alternate highways development due to submergence of a
highway as a direct consequence of a project as in the case of
‘Tipaimukh’ project has to be an integral part of the total project
cost and must be included accordingly”.

Planning Commission

“Planning Commission has consistently maintained that all costs
such as roads, mitigation of environmental or ecological damage,
security, R&R etc. are directly resulting from the project should be

12


included in the project cost. This is in accordance with the best
international accounting practice and will preclude development
of uneconomic and unsustainable site based on erroneous or
incomplete cost numbers”.

Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways

We have no comments on the loading or otherwise of the cost of
alternative highway development on the power component cost of a
hydro-electric project as long as specific funding is provided for such
highway development.

The Ministry has no objection to the proposal of special
Government loans having low interest rates and long moratorium
periods.

33. The Ministry of Power further informed that they are also
pursuing with the State Governments to agree to stagger the 12% free
power keeping it low in the initial year and raising it gradually to
12% in order to keep the initial tariffs viable. However, the State
Governments are yet to agree to the Proposal even on a case by case
basis. However, the Government of J&K has agreed to forego its share
of 12% free Power from Baglihar H.E. Project and the Government of
Madhya Pradesh has also agreed to forgo its share of 12% free Power
from Indira Sagar and Omkareshwar H.E. Projects. The Ministry of
Power is reported to be taking up the matter with concerned State
Governments on case to case basis wherever necessary.

34. The Committee are unhappy to note that although hydro
power projects besides generating electricity, also benefit flood
moderation, irrigation and development of backward regions
including North-Eastern Region in terms of not only developing
inaccessible locations, but also help in economic upliftment of the
people of the region and the State, no incentives have been given
to these projects. The Committee are further constrained to note that
undesirable components are loaded over the project cost making the
project unviable. The Committee are not convinced with the
Government's reply that construction of highways, providing security
etc. are the direct components which should be levied on the project
cost while determining tariff. Further, taking into account the present
system of allowing a State to draw 12% free power, the Committee
recommend that this should be done away with in a phased manner
and the States be pursued not to claim the same to make the projects
viable. At the same time, the Committee feel that maintaining law
and order, being the responsibility of the Government, there was an

13


urgent need to amend the present policy of the Government in regard
to charging the entire security expenditure from concept and uptill
commissioning—on the project cost. The Committee also opine that
recurring expenditure incurred on security, once a hydel project goes
on stream may be charged on the project developer. Taking note of
the fact that a huge sum of money in released to States affected by
heavy flood / draughts, the Committee feel that construction of dam
and increasing storing water capacity would not only help in
generating electricity but would also help in curving huge losses
incurred due to heavy floods or draughts. The Committee therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation to off-load indirect cost
components of construction of highways, security etc. as these hydel
projects not only benefit the backward Region/States which need
immediate industrial/ economic development but also help in
controlling other problems caused by natural calamities like draughts
and floods. The Committee, therefore, stress the need to take
necessary steps in this regard and apprise the further action taken
thereon.

F. Delay on Account of Acquisition of Land
(Recommendation SI. No. 41. Para No. 67)

35. The Committee had observed that one of the causes that
retarded early execution of a hydel project was delay on account of
acquisition of land. The process of land (both private and Govt.)
acquisition for a project differed from State to State as per Land
Acquisition Act. Acquisition of land for Ranga Nandi Hydro-Electric
project of the North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO)
in Nagaland took 5 years, which had a deleterious impact on the
project cost and tariff. The Committee had further found that delay
often takes place due to certain reasons such as deciding the title
holder, classification of land and fixation of compensation. The
Committee observed that the land records were not properly
maintained and updated by the revenue authority, sometimes same
land existed in the name of more than one person. There was no
standard for fixation of rate of land, land owners often accept
compensation under protest and then move the court. The Committee
had recommended that in order to expedite the acquisition of land,
more flexibility should be given to the Project Authorities to acquire
land by negotiations. At the same time, the land records should be
updated and computerized so’ that no time should be wasted in
deciding the title holder. The procedure for fixation of compensation
for land should also be streamlined. The Committee had also desired

14


that in order to mitigate the problems encountered while acquiring
land, the Government should amend Land Acquisition Act and
include hydro power projects in the priority list and the State
Governments be persuaded to provide land to the project authority
in agreed time frame to facilitate shifting of Project Affected
Persons(PAPs). In case of project in the hilly States, forest land
should be made available by the Ministry of Environment and Forests
and the State Government for the construction of project as well as
the rehabilitation and resettlement of PAPs. Further, in order
to expedite the outcome of land disputes, pertaining to power
projects, the Committee had recommended that Special Courts be
constituted.

36. In their reply, the Government have stated that the
recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the State
Governments, the Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural
Development and the Ministry of Environment and Forests for
implementation.

37. The Committee find the reply of the Government as evasive
as it had not reflected the follow-up action taken by them on one
of important hurdles of land acquisition in execution of hydel
projects. Taking a strong note of the casual manner in which such
an important issue have been dealt by the Ministry of Power, the
Committee feel that since the issue require simultaneous action by
several Ministries/Departments and the State Governments, the
Ministry of Power should come with a concrete proposal highlighting
the difficulties faced by different hydel power projects due to delays
in land acquisition. In this regard, the Committee would like to
emphasize the recommendations made by them such as more
flexibility should be given to the Project Authorities to acquire land
by negotiations, the land records should be updated and
computerized so that no time should be wasted in deciding the title
holder, and the procedure for fixation of compensation for land
should also be streamlined. The Committee also reiterate their earlier
recommendation that in order to mitigate the problems encountered
while acquiring land, the Government should amend Land
Acquisition Act and include hydro power projects in the priority
list and the State Governments be persuaded to provide land to the
project authority in an agreed time frame to facilitate shifting of
Project Affected Persons (PAPs) and in order to expedite the outcome
of land disputes, pertaining to power projects, ‘Special Courts’ be
constituted. The Committee would await the action taken by the
Ministry of Power in this regard within 3 months.

15



G. Benefits/Concessions for Hydel Power Projects
(Recommendation No. 47, Para No. 7.23)

38. The Committee had noted that under Mega Power Policy, a
hydel project with a capacity of 500 MW was entitled to draw
additional benefits of custom duties and local levies and Taxes waiver.
In spite of much publicized Mega Hydel Policy, there were reported
to be few takers for it and as such it remained on the paper only. The
Committee were of the view that for accelerating the pace of hydel
development, there was an imperative need to revise the ceiling
downwards under Mega Power Policy. The Committee, therefore had
recommended that all the hydel projects, except small hydel, be
extended all the benefits/concessions, available under Mega Power
Policy.

39. The Government in their action taken reply have stated that
the Ministry of Power had already mooted a revised mega policy
cabinet note for relaxing the existing qualifying capacities of 1000 MW
for thermal and 500 MW for hydro to 250 MW for both thermal and
hydro. The proposal, however did not find favour with the other
Ministries when it was sent for their comments.

40. The Committee are dismayed to note that although the
Government have planned to achieve 50,000 MW of additional power
by the end of 11"* Plan period, the incentives such as benefits/
concession in custom duties and local levies/taxes on project
components are being denied for projects even up to 250 MW
resulting in low investments in new power schemes. The Government
have not given the reasons as to why the proposal mooted for
relaxing the existing qualifying capacities of 1000 MW for thermal
and 500 MW for hydro to 250 MW each did not find favour with
other Ministries. The Committee would, therefore, like to know the
details of the proposal mooted by the Ministry of Power to revise
the Mega Power Policy and the reasons for its rejection. At the
same time, the Committee again recommend that the Government
should pursue to extend all possible benefits/concessions to all hydel
projects.

H. Pre-feasibility Report of Hydel Project by Brahmaputra Board
(Recommendation Serial No. 52, Para No. 8.22)

41. While observing poor industrialization, comparatively less
population and the potential being far in excess of the local need in

16


the North-Eastern Region, the Committee were constrained to note
that although Ministry of Power had initiated generation of
50,000 MW of hydro power and has identified 162 projects, the agencies
actually involved had not been entrusted to prepare the pre-feasibility
reports of the projects. Thirteen projects such as Hutong, Kalai, Dimwe
in Arunachal Pradesh, Sushen, Umjaut, Umduna ete. in Meghalaya for
which Survey & Investigation were carried out by Brahmaputra Board
or Meghalaya State Electricity Board had been entrusted to either Water
and Power Consultancy Services(India) Limited or National Hydro-
electric Power Corporation for preparing pre-feasibility Reports. The
Committee failed to understand as to why the original Survey &
Investigation agencies had not been associated with preparation of the
Pre-Feasibility Reports(PFRs) of these projects when they had already
done a lot of work in the field. Taking note of the factual position, the
Committee strongly urge the Government to immediately associate
Brahmaputra Board or MSEB, as the case may be, to submit the Pre-
Feasibility Reports(PFR) of most of the projects under their
investigation, which were in a very advanced stage and they should
be given added responsibilities.

42, In this connection, the Government have inter-alia stated that
162 schemes spreading in 16 states with aggregating capacity of over
50,000 MW have been considered for preparation of PFRs. The studies/ .
PERs for all 162 schemes have been completed. National Hydro-Electric
Power Corporation, WAPCOS, North-Eastern Electric Power’
Corporation, Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam and a number of State Power
Utilities have been associated to complete these feasibility studies. As
a follow up of completion of PFRs action has been initiated for
preparation of DPRs of attractive sites through these agencies.

43. The Committee cannot but deplore the way the Government
have furnished vague and incomplete reply to their recommendation.
The reply of the Government is silent on the Committee's observation
that although thirteen projects such as Hutong, Kalai, Dimwe in
Arunachal Pradesh, Sushen, Umjaut, Umduna etc. in Meghalaya for
which Survey & Investigation were carried out by Brahmaputra Board
or Meghalaya State Electricity Board; work for preparing per-
feasibility Reports had been entrusted to either Water and Power
Consultancy Services(India) Limited or National Hydroelectric Power
Corporation. The Committee failed to understand as to why the
original Survey & Investigation agencies had not been associated
with preparation of the Pre-Feasibility Reports(PFRs) of these projects
when they had already done a lot of work in the field. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to

17


associate the agencies which had carried out S&I for these projects
with work relating to preparation of pre-feasibility reports. The
Committee would also like to know the reasons as to why these
agencies have not been associated while pre-feasibility reports of
these projects and these were entrusted to other agencies.

I. Revamping Brahmaputra Board
(Recommendation Serial No. 54 Para No. 8.24)

44. The Committee were perturbed to note that agencies/bodies
like Brahmaputra Board which is preparing DPR of 11 hydro projects
with a total installed capacity of 11,451 MW to be assigned to NHPC,
NEEPCO, etc. for execution, received only Rs. 99 crore during the last
five years which were just sufficient to cover the salary part of staff.
The Committee were of the view that for improving hydel share in
the country, more and more organizations should be involved so that
the large hydel potential available in the country could be tapped and
projects executed in a shortest span of time. The Committee had,
however, noted that Brahmaputra Board which is involved in
preparation of Detailed Project Reports for hydro project and control/
moderation of floods in Brahmaputra Valley and was also capable of
executing hydel power projects survived entirely on Government of
India’s budgetary support. The Board was not receiving adequate funds.
Taking into consideration, the technical infrastructure and manpower
available with the Board, the Committee had recommended that the
Government should make available sufficient funds to Brahmaputra
Board so that it could prepare DPRs and they should also be allowed
to execute hydel power projects.

45. In their reply the Government have inter-alia stated that many
steps and measures have been taken to boost Hydro Power
Development. Hydro Power Corporations in the central sector and the
joint sector (Central and State) viz., National Hydro-electric Power
Corporation (NHPC), North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation
(NEEPCO), Nathpa-Jhakri Power Corporation (NJPC) now SJVNL and
Tehri Hdyro Development Corporation (THDC) have been created.
Besides, NTPC has also been authorised to take up hydro projects.
Narmada Hydro Development Corporation (NHPC), a joint venture of
NHPC and Government of MP has been constituted to implement
Indira Sagar (1000 MW) and Omkareshwar (560 MW) HE Projects.
The 50,000 MW Hydro-electric Initiative was launched by Hon'ble
Prime Minister which covers preparation of PFRs for 162 hydro-electric
projects spreading in 16 States. Preparation of PFRs of 162 schemes
with aggregate capacity of 47,930 MW has since been completed.

18


National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation, WAPCOS, North-Eastern
Electric Power Corporation, Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, HPSEB, UJVNL
and KPCL were associated to complete these feasibility studies. These
feasibility studies were being coordinated, monitored and appraised
by the Central Electricity Authority. As a next step the preparation of
DPRs for 77 low tariff hydro electric schemes from these PFRs has
been entrusted to the above agencies and also to NTPC and THDC.

46. The Government further informed that at present, the
Brahmaputra Board is investigating and preparing DPRs for 11 projects
in the North-Eastern Region with installed capacity of 11,451 MW. The
Brahmaputra Board is also considering a proposal for revamping the
Board so that they can borrow money from the market and take up
hydro projects in future. An outlay of Rs. 414 crore has been made for
Brahmaputra Board for the X Plan of which Rs. 102 crore is for the
continuing scheme for survey and investigation and balance of Rs. 321
crore for execution of projects. All the mega projects being investigated
by Brahmaputra Board for hydel power development require huge
investment for execution of such projects. In the changing scenario, if
Bharhamaputra Board is to enter into construction activities of hydro
electric projects with hydel power as major component, the
Bharhmaputra Board would be seriously handicapped to execute such
projects for want of funds. For undertaking such activities the possible
way out is to arrange the funds by way of borrowing money from the
market. The construction of multipurpose projects with hydro-power
as a major component would also help in realizing the identified
hydropower potential in the region and earn revenue for repayment
of borrowed loan. For borrowing money, necessary amendments in
the related provisions of the Brahmaputra Board Act will have to be
made. Brahmaputra Board has already initiated action to revamp the
Board by way of redrafting the Brahmaputra Board Act. The revamping
proposal after approval by the Brahmaputra Board and Ministry of
Water Resources will be submitted for consideration and approval of
the Parliament.

47. The Committee are happy to note that the Brahmaputra
Board is investigating and preparing DPRs for 11 projects in the
North-Eastern Region with installed capacity of 11,451 MW. The
Brahmaputra Board is also considering a proposal for revamping the
Board so that they can borrow money from the market and take up
hydro projects in future. Further, the Government have informed
that Brahmaputra Board has already initiated action to revamp the
Board by way of redrafting the Brahmaputra Board Act. The
revamping proposal after approval by the Brahmaputra Board and

19


Ministry of Water Resources will be submitted for consideration and
approval of the Parliament. Taking into account the technical
infrastructure available with the Brahmaputra Board, the Committee
recommend that the revamping proposal after approval by the
Brahmaputra Board and Ministry of Water Resources should be
submitted in a fix time frame for consideration and approval of
Parliament. The Committee would like to know the present status
of revamping proposal.

20


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.39)

The Committee find that hydel power share to the total installed
capacity, stood at 38%, at the time of Independence. It continued to
rise and reached a level of 50.62% in the year 1962-63 and thereafter
there has been a steep decline in its share and reached a dangerous
level of 25% in the year 2002-03. In this context, the Committee would
like to point out that as 40% of total demand in the country occurs
as a peak demand and since hydro-stations are best suited to meet
this demand, the ideal thermal hydel mix ratio of 60:40 is required to
be maintained. Further, in spite of setting up of Central: Hydro-
Corporations like NHPC, NEEPCO, THDC, SJVNL, the development
of hydel sector, has been lopsided. Surprisingly, the programmes and
policy framework chalked out to boost hydro power resources, do not
paint a rosy picture, as the hydel share in the 10% Plan, is further
moving southward. The Committee, therefore, desire that Government
should review their policy /programmes etc., so that hydel potential, is
exploited expeditiously and the country is able to achieve 60:40 thermal
hydel mix in the near future.

Reply of the Government

The share of hydro power in the total installed capacity, which
was 33% at the start of First plan in 1951, rose upto 46% by the end
of Third Five Year Plan, reached to a maximum of 50.62% in 1963 and
thereafter experienced a steady decline and at present accounts for
26.6% of the total capacity. In absolute térms the hydro development,
since Independence has however, experienced a steady rise from a
meager 508 MW in 1947 to 29625 MW as of now. Since Thermal
Power has lower risk and lower gestation period and is not site specific,
its development has been more as compared to hydro development

The optimum hydro-thermal power mix required for proper
management of demand/supply of electricity depends on the load Pattern
of the system and available power generation resources. A power system
having peak load to base load ratio of about two would. need a
higher hydro-thermal power mix than system having a ratio of 1.5.

21


Further, if gas based peaking plants are available in the system then
a lower hydro-thermal may fulfil the requirement of the system
effectively.

The constraints which have affected hydro development are
technical (difficult investigation, inadequacies in tunneling methods),
financial (deficiencies in accessing long term financing), tariff related
issues and managerial weaknesses (poor contract management). The
hydro projects are also affected by geological surprises (especially in
the Himalayan region where underground tunneling is required),
inaccessibility of the area, problems due to delay in land acquisition,
and resettlement of project affected families, law & order problem in
militant infested areas etc.

With the targetted capacity addition of 14,393 MW during 10%
Plan, the hydro capacity share may go up to 28% from the present
level of 26.6% and will be around 30% if the capacity addition of
about 67,000 MW materializes during 110 Plan. Accelerated hydro
power development can result in improved hydro share in the overall
installed capacity in the country.

Out of 14,393 MW of programmed hydro capacity addition during
10% Plan, Central Sector and State Sector are expected to contribute
8742 MW and 4481 MW respectively and the balance 1170 MW by the
Private Sector, Sanctioned and ongoing schemes under implementation
will also enable a capacity addition of 6998 MW during the 11" Plan,
of which 3690 MW, 1786 MW and 1522 MW will be the contribution
of Central Sector, State Sector and Private Sectors respectively. Based
on demand forecast, a hydro capacity addition of about 23,500 MW
would be required during 11 plan presuming that all the capacity
addition envisaged for 10% plan is fully realized.

The Government of India has set the following objectives for
accelerating the pace of hydro power development:

To boost the Hydro Power Development in the Country, a 50,000
MW Hydro Initiative was launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister in
May 2003. The following other steps are also being taken:

© Preparation of bankable Detailed Project Report (DPR), based
on a detailed survey to avoid geological uncertainty.

* Contract monitoring, as distinct from project monitoring is
being emphasized.

* Land acquisition and infrastructure development are to be
* settled and completed before the start of the project.

22


* The preliminary ranking study of the remaining hydro
potential sites of all the basins in the country has been
completed by the CEA, detailed ranking study and
preparation of detailed feasibility report based on economic
viability is being done.

In addition, the following steps have also been taken to expedite
hydro projects:

* A national rehabilitation policy has been prepared by the
Department of Rural Development which will reduce time
in settlement of R&R Packages to Hydro Projects.

* Clearances for priority projects have been streamlined by
introducing three stage clearances procedure.

* Approval procedures have been simplified.

* Facilitation of early financial closure of projects through a
concerted approach (comprising the Central Govts./State
Govts., Indian Financial Institutions, private sector
promoters) towards multilateral agencies and other
international funding sources.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.41)

The Committee find that in the recently announced 50,000 MW
Hydro Initiative, 162 projects have been found to be viable. This has
been categorized under ‘A’ and considered to be most viable projects.
Further, as much as 75% of this potential is spread over in the State
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal, with
Arunachal Pradesh alone accounting for over 50% of the total of these
category ‘A’ projects. The Committee are apprehensive of the viability
of these 25,000 MW hydro capacity in the State of Arunachal Pradesh
serving the peak and frequency support needs of the rest of the country
especially in the context of missing transmission links in North —
Eastern region and also absence of National Grid. The Committee desire
that this needs to be examined. The Committee, therefore, caution the
Government and desire that while exploiting the Hydel potential in
these States, an action plan may be drawn, for laying of associated
transmission lines so that power generated is evacuated.

23


Reply of the Government

PFRs of 162 hydro electric schemes with total installed capacity of
47,970 MW have been prepared. Hydro electric schemes identified in
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal are as
follow :

State No. Estimated
Installed Capacity

Arunachal Pradesh 42 27,293

Himachal Pradesh 15 3,328

Uttaranchal 33 5,282

Total 90 35,903

The estimated installed capacity of 35,903 MW in these three States
works out to about 75% of the total capacity of 47970 MW. Regarding
viability of addition of more than 25,000 MW hydro capacity in the
State of Arunachal Pradesh serving peak and frequency support needs
of the rest of the country in the context of missing transmission links
in NER and absence of national grid etc., it may be mentioned that
transmission system for evacuation of power from these schemes shall
be finalized at the time of preparation of DPR. Further, interaction
with Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd., (PGCIL) has also taken
place in regard to transmission of power from North Eastern Region
to other regions of the country.

The Hydro potential available in North-eastern region especially
Arunachal Pradesh can be fully exploited and made use of for meeting
energy/power requirements of the country. For enabling this,
transmission system would be needed so that power from the hydro
projects in North-eastern Region could be evacuated to pooling points
in the NER and there on transmitted to other regions where bulk
power requirement exists. The transmission system planning for the
National Grid is being carried by CEA as nodal agency in coordination
with all the stakeholders e.g. PGCIL, NHPC, NEEPCO and also the
State Utilities. The various transmission lines and grid substations which
would collectively form the National Grid, are being planned as
evacuation system for new generation projects as well as, as system
strengthening schemes for the various regions for enabling increased
trade in electricity across regions. The development of National grid
network is being programmed in a phased manner to match with
commissioning of generation projects. Additional transmission capacity
24


P)
is also being provided in the regional networks of Northern, Western
and Southern grids for import of power. This additional transmission
capacity in the regional networks would help in reducing incremental
transmission requirement for hydro projects in North Eastern Region/
Arunachal Pradesh, which in turn enhance the commercial viability of
the hydro projects. Present inter-regional power transfer capacity of
transmission system is about 8000 MW and this would be increased to
about 30,000 MW by 2011-12.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/ 19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.42 )

Taking note of the new hydro schemes such as Boro-Konar Hydel,
Bermo Hydel Project, Balpahari Dam & Hydro Electricity Project, and
Lugu Pahar Hydro Electric Project identified, the Committee are
constrained to note that no budgetary allocations have been provided
to start these projects. Taking into consideration, the adverse thermal
& hydel mix ratio in the Eastern region, the Committee recommend
that the Government should take up all these new schemes at the
earliest. At the same time, the Committee desire to know the present
status of these new schemes identified by 0५८.

Reply of the Government

In the re-assessment studies of HE potential of the country carried
out by CEA during 1978-1987, two schemes mentioned above namely
Boro (500 MW) in West Bengal and Lugupahar (2800 MW) in Bihar
were identified.

DVC was entrusted the work of investigation and preparation of
pre-feasibility report for integrated development of Damodar basin to
CWC in August 2001 with a special emphasis on the following hydro
electricity projects.

1. Balpahari Dam with hydro electric project
2. Bermo Pump storage Project

3. Bokaro Reservoir (including Lagu Pahar Pump Storage
Scheme)

CWC had earlier submitted an estimate of Rs. 400 lakhs for the
above work which was accepted, in principle, by the DVC.

25


Subsequently DVC requested CWC to take up the investigation
work of Boro-Konar Pump Storage scheme also.

After several interactions between DVC & CWC officials, a team
of CWC official visited the proposed sites in October 2003.

In December 2003 CWC submitted a revised estimate of Rs. 10.88.
Crores for the survey and investigation work of 1. Balpahari Dam,
2. Bermo Pump Storage Scheme, and 3. Boro-Konar Pump Storage
Scheme.

The work of Logu Pahar was not covered in the estimate furnished
by CWC, as the proposed site could not be visited by the team during
their visit in October 2003 owing to local disturbances.

Time required by CWC for study & investigation work including
preparation of DPR is 5 years. In case Logu Pahar scheme is included,
further 3 years will be required. The revised estimate of CWC is under
consideration of DVC.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.45)

The Committee find that Government have come up with hydro
policy—In the year 1998 to accelerate development of hydro projects
in the country with mega power benefits of custom duty exemption,
deemed export benefit etc. to hydro projects with capacity of 500 MW
and above. In addition to this, steps like private sector participation,
formulation of bankable DPRs etc. have also been taken by
Government. The Committee are however, dismayed to note that these
initiatives have not yielded the desired results owing to lack of modern
planning construction and indigenous machinery in the country, surplus
staff on completion of projects, virtual absence of private sector, long
transmission lines to evacuate power from remote areas to load centre
etc, The Committee cannot but deplore the way the Government have
executed the hydro policy and stress that concrete steps need to be
taken by the Government to overcome the constraints which have
hampered the acceleration of development of hydro power in the
country. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard at the earliest.

26


Reply of the Government

After the announcement of Govt. of India’s Hydro Power Policy
in 1998, the following initiatives have also been taken:

(i) Transfer of TEC

CEA has evolved modalities for simplified transfer of TEC of hydro
electric projects already cleared by CEA. Now TEC could be
accorded in the name of another agency. As per the simplified
procedures, TEC has been transferred in favour of the new
executive agencies for the following 8 hydro electric projects during
the period 1999-2004 :—

Old Agency New Agency

1. Shrinagar (330 MW) State DNHPCL
2. Kol Dam (800 MW) State NTPC

3. Parbati-II (800 MW) State NHPC

4. Indira Sagar (1000 MW) State NHDC

5. Omkareshwar (520 MW) State NHDC

6. Priyadarshini (Jurala) (221.4 MW) State APGENCO
7.  Jalaput Dam (18 MW) State OPCL

8... Shrinagar (330 MW) DNHPCL AHPCL

(ii) Three Stage Development Procedure for Hydroelectric Projects
in Central Sector

Ministry of Power in consultation with MOF and MOEF brought
out three stage development procedure of new hydro-electric
projects in Central Sector for expediting hydro development.

The procedure is summarized below:—
Stage-I

In. Stage-I, an expenditure upto Rs. 10 crs. on survey, investigation
and preparation of pre-feasibility report for hydro-electric projects
will be sanctioned by Ministry of Power subject to condition that
the proposed hydro electric project is figuring in the five year
plan or long-term hydro electric power development plan. If the
expenditure is more than Rs. 10 crs., the same would be considered
by the Committee of PIB (CPIB). The activities under Stage-I shall
be completed within one year from the date of sanction.

27


28

Stage-II

All cases of Stage-II, where the estimates of cumulative expenditure
including Stage-I exceeds Rs. 10 crs., will be considered by
Committee of PIB (CPIB). Proposals costing Rs. 20 crs. and more
will require the approval of Finance Minister. While those involving
a cost of over Rs. 50 crs. will require the approval of Cabinet/
CCEA. Project which have been found to be commercially viable
and have obtained site clearance from Ministry of Environment
and Forests would be considered for Stage-II development.

Stage-II development would involve preparation of DPR, pre-
construction works, development of infrastructure facilities and land
acquisition, etc. The activities under Stage-II shall normally be
completed within one and a half years from the date of sanction.

Stage-IIl

Stage-III would require approval of PIB/CCEA for investment
decision in respect of construction of the project. The approval of
the PIB/CCEA would be sought after Environment & Forest
clearances have been obtained from MOEF and TEC from CEA.

50,000 MW Hydro-Electric Initiative

To give necessary fillip for development of hydro sector, Central
Electricity Authority in the year 2001-2002 completed Ranking Study
to determine the inter-se priority of balance hydro electric schemes
for taking up their development in appropriate sequence. The
schemes considered attractive in the Ranking Study have now been
taken up for the purpose of preparation of Preliminary Feasibility
Reports (PFRs).

The 50,000 MW Hydro-electric Initiatives was launched by Hon’ble
Prime Minister on 24.05.2003 which covers preparation of PFRs for
162 hydro-electric projects spread in 16 States with aggregate
capacity of over 50,000 MW. National Hydro-Electric Power
Corporation, WAPCOS, North-eastern Electric Power Corporation,
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam and number of State Power Utilities were
associated to complete these feasibility studies. These feasibility
studies were being coordinated, monitored and appraised by the
Central Electricity Authority. The preparation of Feasibility Reports
of 162 H.E schemes with an aggregate installed capacity of 47970
MW has since been completed.


The initiative has evoked interest in the country as also in the
international community with regard to enormous potential
opportunities to the equipment suppliers, construction agencies,
financers and prospective independent power producers.

The PFRs will provide useful information to prospective developers
for taking up detailed Survey & Investigation and DPR formulation
and facilitate the accelerated development of balance Hydro Electric
Potential in the country. This is considered essential to generate a
shelf of project which could be taken up for execution during 11
and 12" Plan and beyond. Implementation agencies viz. PSUs,
State Utilities and other organizations will be identified later to
develop these projects.

DPR Preparation

As a follow up of preparation of PER, it is proposed to take up
preparation of DPRs for 73 attractive schemes with first year tariff
less than Rs. 2.50/kwh.The aggregate installed capacity of these
schemes is about 33000 MW.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No.2.47)

The Committee are not satisfied with the present system of project
implementation by NHPC and other hydel power PSUs including,
THDC, SJVN etc. The Committee feel that issues which delay in
finalising loan agreement, placing of orders, Procurement of forest land
etc,, as in the case of Purulia Pump Storage Schemes only indicate the
lack of seriousness on the part of the executing agencies. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government that in the present
case of Purulia Pump Storage where project cost has increased by
more than Rs. 1700 crore and the project is delayed by about four
years, there is a need to fix the responsibility at higher level. The
Committee also desire that necessary PIB clearances should be sought
immediately. The committee desire to know the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government

These CPSUs are presently making all out efforts to execute every
Project as per schedule. Recently Chamera-II project of NHPC was
dedicated to the Nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister ahead of schedule.
All the six units of 250 MW each of Nathpa Jhakri project have been

29


successfully commissioned by SJVNL. The Tehri project is also
scheduled for completion during current/next year. There appears
generally no delay on the part of CPSUs in issues such as finalizing
loan agreement, placing of orders etc. Where ever feasible, they take
action concurrently to save time. Tendering and Pre-bid qualification
process are initiated as soon as the project is Techno-economically
cleared, and the work is awarded as soon as the CCEA approval is
conveyed. However, some times there occurs delay in clearance from
MoEF which consequently delays the investment decision.

Purulia Pumped Storage Scheme is under execution in State Sector
and is being implemented by WBSEB. Hence, the delays in loan
finalization and in award of work are attributable to the State
Government. NHPC has signed the MoU in May 2001 for forming a
Joint Venture Company to execute this project in Joint Sector with
Government of West Bengal. The Pre-PIB Meeting was held on
15.02.2002 and the proposal was recommended in the meeting subject
to fulfillment of certain conditions like TEC from CEA, routing of
JBIC loan through Government of West Bengal without any change
and signing of PPA with Government of West Bengal for off peak
power as well as sale of power. CEA informed vide letter-dated
28.06.2002 and 16.10.2003 that TEC for this project is not required, as
there is no major change in the scope of the project. PPA was signed
amongst NHPC, WBPDCL & Government of West Bengal for supply
of off peak power to Purulia Project. Another PPA was signed on
2.8.2003 among NHPC, WBSEB and Govt. of West Bengal for purchase
of entire power from the project by West Bengal. The proposal was
discussed in PIB Meeting held on 24.03.2004, PIB proposed change in
equity pattern, raised the issue of “in principle” approval of Planning
Commission and routing of JBIC Loan. NHPC has submitted the reply
to the observations of Planning Commission vide letter dated 9.8.2004.
NHPC has already communicated their views on the issues raised in
PIB minutes vide letter dated 23.7.2004 and also pursued the matter
with Govt. of West Bengal for early resolution. Ministry of power is
also vigorously pursuing Govt. of West Bengal to resolve various issues
as per observations of PIB so that PIB meeting can be convened again
and investment decision can be expedited.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No.2.49)

The Committee have observed delayed execution of several hydel
projects both in Central, State and Joint Venture Projects such as Tehri
St-I (4x250 MW) and Sardar Sarovar (6x200+5x50 MW) have been

30


ve
snuo ey} uo passed Ajareu pey SyNWW 1ण्पा pautdo उग्झाणाप०0 ayy “जय
‘SINW Aq Supueuy Aqensed ‘sayeig 0} doy atqissod ९ puayxa 0} sqsq
Tegue> ‘[enusjod ayy ssasse ० urjd uonoe aarsuayaidur0s MPIP 0}
SJUDUTUIAOD गणथ5 By] Surpensiad se yons saomog ABrauq [euoWUDAUO>
-uoN jo Ans, Aq waxy} sdays ayy jo ajou Sunjel ‘way) yordxe
0} “suruex8ord punog au jo uonYjnuToy pur says jo णएगाण्ण्रप्रण्का
9०एप्गप्रणा०>ज pey ,suoyen[eAy wy—euuresZo1g 1aMog opAH
Tretus,, 4aalqns oy uo yoday may ut poureyuos suojepuaunuodar ayy
uO JUsWAaAOD oy} Aq प्म्ष्य, UONDY UO zOday pee Tay) ur A810uq
Yo saytuWO एण्ड ayy “Groedes japdy Treuts jo Surssaurey [एश170
pur [epuajod ay} uaamjoq de a8ny ayy uoReraprsuos our Burry,

(9८ “ON bled ‘EL “ON [eHag) uoHEpuaumODay
[F00z'0T'80 एगण II-H-F00z/61/9T ‘ONY Jomog jo Ansnmy]

"MIN 00088 1ए०व० st soweyos
sayy Jo Ayoedeo paypeysur ayeSar88e ज्पा-पश्ण/04'ट “sy पण्पा ssay
He} 1४०४ ysny YPM sowayps aanoenye ६८ उग्र syqq jo uoNeredad
dn aye} 0} pasodord st 1 ‘Yq Jo uoneredaid jo dn moyoy ४ sy

uoyeredaig Yad

‘sypalord asayy dojaaap
1 ज्थण PayHuEpr eq प्‌ suonezre810 reo pue sonTTA aris
‘SASd “ZIA sapusse पण्रषण्ग्प्पगुवंणु ‘puodeq pue पणव॒ फटा, pue
wll 8upmp uoYndaxa उग्र dn ueyey aq Pinos YIM yalosd jo says
ए ayerous$ ०1 JeyUassa parapIsuoD st sty] “ANUMOD ayy UT Tenuajog
जूपरभु>णएरप aouepeq jo uourdopaaap payerspaooe ayy ayeyTOey pure
पण्प्रथाप्पपरण Ydq pue uoyesysaauy 2 Aeaing pareyap dn Supye} गण
stadojaaap aarpedsord 0} पग्प्रण्प्णग्रणु Tryasn apraoid [TIM syd ग्पा,

‘staonpoid 29०१ juapuadaput aayzadsoid pue sadueuly
‘sopuase uoyonysuos ‘siayddns jueudmba ey} 0} sanmmyroddo
Tenusjod snouous ० pre8er ym ArMUIWOD [एपगप्रण्प्पगणु
up UF osfe se Aqunos ayy UF ysaryUT payoas sey >5प्रण्पाण ayy,

* payatdwioo uaaq aouls sey MV
0८64 JO Ayoedeo parpeysur ayeSar88e ue ym saumayps gH Z9T jo
syodey Ariqiseay jo uoqeredard ayy, Auoyy ADT [ध्यण्ग्3
ayy Aq pasterdde pure paroyuour ‘payeutpi00) Sutaq arom sarpnys
Aupgiseay asoyy, ‘sorpnys Aypiqiseay asoyy ayayduro> ० payeroosse
oFOM SPHHAN JOMOg ग्रथ$ JO Jaqunu pue wes 1147५ 1९( npEs
‘uoyerodiod 2०००३ 3170014 UL9ISPI-YION ‘SODdYM ‘Uoneiodi0>
TOMO जपज्गुरू०्फवीय TLUOUeN “MIN 00004 7२०० jo Ayoedes
ayeSar33e YM saqwig of ut peaids syaford अमजगरण्एर्षप Z9T


ee

IO} SYd JO uoneredaid 1950० पृणपृ७ E00Z'S0'FZ ०० JaysTUTY BUT
aq. uoxy Aq paypumyy sem saanenruy जगु-०्ए4ीप MI 000‘0S PUL

‘(Sadd) suoday
Ayqaiseay Areurunperg jo uoneredaid Jo asodimd ay) गण dn ueye}
uaaq Mou aary Apnys Supjuey ayy UT >भ्जण्याए paroplsuos saureyos
ayy ‘eouanbas ayeudoidde uy yuowdopaaap ग॒ग्पा dn Suny} गण
sauayps daa orpAy >>ण्श॒ण्व्‌ ३० Ayrrord as-zayur ayy ग्पप्प्पमग 0}
Apmag Supjuey एगगुव॑प्प०० Z907-L007 794 arp ur Auowny डीएम
yequad “topes oxpéy jo yuawdoyaaap soy dy Aressazau oars QL

aayeHU] 91799]9-01pAH MIA, 0000५

"गण एग्जण्ण
Sutaq st ग्राण्य aAqeorput पशथ्प Jo MarA ur yalord ayy Jo म्ञः्प०
3० AyPqRIA ग्पा, “OdHN ण एगण्ण्गाएं ueq Mou sey yoord oy,

“6Z6V' LOFT एगश्ए JH] गए AN
jo प४०छ Aq paproooe sem yeaordde aageysturupe ey, 9Z6T'10'60
pap aye apa VAD JO DAL 17०प्रा# ‘sd ८6फा “SY JO S09
poyeumsa ue Joy uorsstumu0> Suruuyyg Aq paydaooe sem yaloid oy],

feypuereng “(MI 0ZP=09XZ+001Xe) Pafor [8९४५ TEMYpET (1A

“6p z-xauuy 1४ uaats are sawayps >5०्प jo s[iejap
ग्पा, ‘DMD/VAD JO Sjusuarmbar/syuaunu0 jo aoueyduros उग्र
uorssturqnsar Joy saquoyyne yeloid ग pounjar 219M MIN काट
jo Ayoedes parpeysur ayeSar33e ue IM saurayps o1yaje-orpéy 18

uorssturqnsar
Joy saQHoynY palorg गण paumjar sauraysg गुपरग>णफदम (1A

“WHO Ut DAL Joy uoHeUTUTexa Japun st MI ६9 Jo Ayoedeo
एगायशण ue wim Aqddempy Ajaureu aureyos o1qo9]9-orpAy १०७

YAO Ul UOHLUTUTexY JapuN saulayrg गपरगरगफी (४
‘Qerz-xeuuy 1७ UdATS ore saulayos esau} Jo जाम ay],

~puofaq pue uejg ll 3unmp
qyauaq aat8 ० ApeyT are YOTYM MIA 0680801 JO ०४१४० parTeisut
aqyeSar33e ue YyyIM sourayds गयजगरगर्षप JO “ON 9Z 0} adUEILa[D
जुष्पठप०9३-०पप०० paprosze sey Ayoyjny AIOTDaTY ‘TeUED

Vad Aq DAL papsory saurayps जूगरगु०-ण्फतत (AT

‘uoneuTueXa Japun st
auiayps जयजग्‌>णएर्बप्‌ OU उग्र saNtATE व॒-्ग्श्य5 उण sayeumysa 180०3


to the State Governments and Central power PSUs to take appropriate
action. The Committee did not approve of this half-hearted approach
of the Government and had recommended that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources together with CEA should undertake
survey of all the river/canal basins and identify the potential sites. A
ranking study was also suggested to be undertaken for prioritizing
the identified sites. The Committee note that recommendation of the
Committee has been accepted by the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources in their action taken statement submitted on
5" December 2003. MNES have stated that keeping in view the
recommendation of Standing Committee, detailed discussions were held
with the Hydro Division of Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to take
up identification of more potential sites suitable for small hydro
development in various states. CEA had mentioned that for the
identification of sites they depend on the Investigation Divisions of
various State Electricity Boards (SEBs). Under these circumstances, the
involvement of SEBs needs to be increased. Keeping this in view, the
Ministry has launched a new scheme from 2003-2004 to provide financial
support for identification of new sites and preparation of perspective
plan in each state. The following financial support is extended.

State/UTs Assessment of total potential in the State,
Preparation of Perspective Plan and

Identification of Identification of
upto 50 new sites more than 50
new sites

50% of Proposed Cost Limited to:—

N.E. Region, Sikkim, Rs. 22.50 lakhs Rs. 30.00 lakhs
J&K, H.P. & Uttaranchal
(Special Category States)

Other States/UTs Rs. 15.00 lakhs Rs. 22.50 lakhs

The State of Chattisgarh has already taken advantage of the above
scheme and with the involvement of Alternate Hydro Energy Centre
(AHEC), IIT Roorkee. They have already identified over 100 new sites
in the State. Proposals have also been received from the States of
Uttaranchal and J&K. In order to identify new potential sites in the
North-Eastern States, the Ministry has given financial support and
equipments to the Renewable Energy Wing of the Assam State
Electricity Board to identify new sites. In addition to this NHPC and
NEEPCO have also launched efforts to identify new sites. The

35


Committee are happy to note the acceptance of their recommendation
and except the Government to take necessary steps to ensure that the
above steps do not go haywire and the scheme become fully successful
and operational in all states.

Reply of the Government

Following the recommendations of the Standing Committee on
Energy in its Thirty-Third Report and as stated in the Action Taken
Statement by the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES)
submitted on 50 December, 2003, by the MNES has launched a new
scheme from 2003-04 to provide financial support for identification of
new sites and preparation of a perspective plan in each State. The
Standing Committee on Energy has taken note (in para 2.51 of its 424
Report) of the action taken by the MNES. The MNES is pursuing the
mater with States so that the aforesaid scheme is grounded and new
potential SHP sites are identified.

Chattisgarh has completed the task with the help of the Alternate
Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC), Roorkee and over 100 new sites have
been identified in the State. Work in J&K and Uttaranchal is in progress,
whereas Punjab likely to initiate it soon. As a follow up of meetings
with various States, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, UP, Kerala
and Andhra Pradesh have expressed interest and are preparing
proposals under the scheme. In addition, a modeling exercise has been
completed for a part of Nagaland to identify potential SHP sites. After
the model is validated, it is propose to extend this exercise to the
entize N.E. Region.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.18)

The Committee find that so far the development of hydro electric
projects have been on good sites where no major problems from
geological and other technical considerations have been met. As a
development of hydel sector is to continue, there is no other position,
but to exploit the difficult geological and terrain conditions. This is
true for Himalayan and North Eastern Region. The designs, are,
therefore, challenging and are to be based “as we proceed with the
investigations”. In this context, the Committee desire that new
innovations should be attempted especially for projects located in the
regions having poor rock strata/parameters. Innovations in regard to
foundation treatment, stability of the cavern in undergrounds, projects,
ete. are thrust area where R & D is required. The Committee desire

36


that the Government should encourage PSUs to undertake these
R & D activities to the maximum extent.

Reply of the Government

The features of the hydro-electric projects, being site-specific,
depend on the geology, topography and hydrology at the site. The
construction time of a hydro project is greatly influenced by the geology
of the area and its accessibility. Most of the hydroelectric projects in
India are located in geologically complex Himalayan terrain. As the
project components of such superstructures are to be located on rock
and soil, which are heterogeneous in nature, thorough geological
investigation of the project area is the basic requirement from concept
to commissioning of the project. Even when extensive investigation
using new techniques of investigations are undertaken an element of
uncertainty remains in the subsurface geology and the geological
surprises during actual construction which could cause time and cost
overruns, cannot be completely ruled out. Therefore, it is essential that
state of the art investigations and construction techniques are adopted
to minimize the geological risks as well as the overall gestation period
of hydel projects.

TECHNOLOGY INNOVATIONS IN INVESTIGATION

Prior to construction of hydroelectric projects, it is imperative to
carry out certain investigations which form the backbone of
optimization of project layout and cost estimation. Modern techniques
to accelerate the investigations as well as to minimize surprises during
the construction, are now adopted. These techniques are being used
for Topograhic survey, hydrological observations and Geotechnical
investigations. Some are described as under:

Surface Geological Exploration
Surface Geological Mapping

Large scale geological mapping with intensive field traverses by
experienced engineering geologists is carried out wherein detailed
delineation of bed rock and overburden characteristics are made and
picked up systematically on contour plans or survey sheets. The kind
of survey is carried out in detail for all the important components of
the projects like dam, tunnels, channels, powerhouse complex, tailrace
system, reservoir etc. This is done using detailed topographic map on
which ground geological details are transferred with the help of survey
instruments.

37


Once the database is created, the next step is to carry out rockmass
classification which has proved to be a very useful practical engineering
tools, not only because it provides a starting point for the design of
tunnel support but also because it forces users to examine the properties
of the rockmass in a systematic manner. The rock mass is being
classified as per the International Standards which becomes the basic
quantitative parameter for further designing of hydro power project
components. The engineering judgments which can be made as a result
of the familiarity and understanding gained from this systematic study
are as useful as any of the calculations associated with the classification
systems. Of a number of classifications available worldwide for
assessment of rockmass, the widely used are RMR system by Bieniawski
(1976) and Q-system by Barton, Lien and Lunde (1974). These
classifications include information on the strength of the intact rock
material, the spacing, number and surface properties of the structural
discontinuities as well as allowances for the influence of subsurface
ground water, in situ stress and the orientation and inclination of
dominant discontinuities. The RMR methodology is being adopted
widely in view of its simplicity in collection of data and interpretation.
Assessment of rockmass carried out based on surface data is further
supplemented by sub-surface data obtained through drilling & drifting
before it is finally used as design parameter.

Now a days, the rockmass involved at all the project components
are subjected to this kind of classification and their percentage of
occurrence especially for underground structures are helpful in quantity
estimation of support system and for adopting methodology of
tunneling in systematic manner.

Use of Space Technology for Regional Geological Assessment

Space technology using satellites and aerial photography are used
by the international experts or by expert organizations, for faster results
in terrain mapping and scientific assessment of the ground conditions
especially for inaccessible regions. Image analysis of satellite digital
data and creating spatial geo-reference information of terrain provides
basis to address the regional geology faster than the traditional method
at comparatively comfortable cost. Remote sensing analysis is used for
preparation of different thematic maps comprises of lineament pattern,
geomorphic characteristics, lithological and structural details etc.
Experience shows that macro level evaluation of the terrain in respect
of geological features with certainty for firming up project components
may not be possible in this technique owing to small scale. However,
these studies are quite effective during reconnoitory and preliminary

38


stages of investigations of the project, being quick and handy especially
for identifying the tectonic features. In case the area of survey is
hazardous because of steep topography or remote location, the
interpretation of aerial photography or satellite imagery with the help
of geological data in the neighbourhood and other suitable means
may be an effective substitute.

In India, aerial photographs are available with Survey of India
and can be obtained on payment after getting requisite permission.
Since it takes a long time to get security clearance before acquiring it,
especially for restricted areas where normally most of the hydro projects
are located, use of photographs is generally not always possible. Fresh
aerial photography can also be got done on special request but it is
too expensive when small area is involved. Whereas, in case of satellite
imagery, a series of remote sensing images of a site, taken at various
times, can be obtained from National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA),
Hyderabad on payment.

Sub-surface Geological Exploration

Subsurface explorations viz. geophysical survey, exploratory drilling,
pitting, trenching and test tunnels/drifting add further details about
the site. The initial geological mapping helps in deciding the areas
required to be explored in details.

Use of Geophysical Techniques/Equipments for Sub-surface
Exploration

This is an indirect method of subsurface investigation technique
and has the benefit of covering large areas at small cost. At times this
technique can locate features that might be missed by conventional
drilling. Geophysics is used as first step in exploration process thus
guiding placement & depth of exploration holes. On its own results
obtained through these technique are not to be taken as end product
but needs checking by direct methods like drill holes and drifts. Out
of the several methods of geophysical survey, seismic refraction,
tomography and resistivity based surveys are widely used in the
investigation of hydropower projects. Some latest geophysical
equipments available are detailed as below:

48-channel (Terraloc Mk-6) and 24-channel (Terraloc Mk-3)
seismographs for seismic refraction/reflection studies in land and water
covered areas. Seismic Tomography system with sparker source along
with latest 2D and 3D softwares for seismic tomographic scanning
between drillholes, shafts and tunnels. 3D borehole geophone system
for in-situ S-wave measurements in drillhole. 2-Channel Seismograph
for determining seismic velocity in drift and tunnel. Sonic Viewer 170

39


with P&S transducers for ultrasonic measurements of in-situ and core
sample.SAS-4000 Terrameter with imaging system, SAS-300C Terrameter
with latest software RESZDINV & RES3DIN for resistivity sounding
and 2D/3D resistivity imaging for subsurface exploration. DS 667
Seismograph with relevant software for vibration monitoring studies
for optimum blasting design.Inclinometer system with relevant software
for slope monitoring studies.

Drilling

This is a direct method of subsurface investigation technique &
essential tool in the investigation work and is extensively used. Rock
cores are recovered through diamond drilling. There are ample diamond
rotary drilling machines available in the country in Govt as well as
private agencies to undertake required drilling for the investigation of
hydroelectric projects. The rock cores recovered from drilling are
geologically logged in a format and used as one of the basic inputs.
Some of the rock samples are subjected to rock mechanics testing. In
addition to this the water permeability tests are conducted through
these holes. On an average 1000mts. to 3000mts. of cumulative length
drilling encompassing all the project component area is done for
medium to large dam projects so as to minimize grey area.

Exploratory Excavations

Test pits, test trenches, and exploratory tunnels provide access for
larger-scaled observations of rock mass character, for determining top
of rock profile in highly weathered rock/soil interfaces, and for some
in-situ tests which cannot be executed in a smaller borehole.

a. Test pits and trenches: In weak or highly fractured rock, test
pits and trenches are constructed quickly and economically by surface-
type excavation equipment. Final excavation to grade where samples
are to be obtained or in-situ tests performed are done carefully. Test
pits and trenches are generally used only above the ground-water
level. Exploratory trench excavations are often used in fault evaluation
studies. An extension of a bedrock fault into much younger overburden
materials exposed by trenching is usually considered proof of recent
fault activity.

b. Exploratory tunnels / Drifts, Exploratory tunnels/ drifts permit
detailed examination of the composition and geometry of rock
structures such as joints, fractures, faults, shear zones, and solution
channels. They are commonly used to explore conditions at the locations
of large underground excavations and the foundations and abutments

40


of large dam projects. They are particularly appropriate in defining
the extent of marginal strength rock or adverse rock structure suspected
from surface mapping and boring information. For major projects where
high-intensity loads will be transmitted to foundations or abutments,
tunnels/adits afford the only practical means for testing in place rock
at locations and in directions corresponding to the structure loading.
The detailed geology of exploratory tunnels, regardless of their purpose,
are mapped carefully. The cost of obtaining an accurate and reliable
geologic map of a tunnel is usually insignificant compared with the
cost of the tunnel. The geologic information gained from such mapping
provides a very useful additional dimension to interpretations of rock
structure deduced from other sources. A complete picture of the site
geology is achieved only when the geologic data and interpretations
from surface mapping, drillings, and pilot tunnels are combined and
well correlated. When exploratory tunnels are strategically located, they
are often be incorporated into the permanent structure. Exploratory
tunnels are used for drainage and post-construction observations to
determine seepage quantities and to confirm certain design assumptions.
On some projects, exploratory tunnels are used for permanent access
or for utility conduits. The drifts/ test adits specially located in dam
abutments and underground caverns are used for conducting in-situ
rock mechanics testing to find out mechanical properties of rock/shear
parameters.

Seismological Studies

Seismic motions cause earthquakes of various magnitudes and
intensities with varying effects. A detailed account of neo-tectonic
activity, seismotectonic status and seismic history of the area is compiled
from field surveys and literature with the help of specialized
organizations, viz., India Meteorological Department (IMD) and
Department of Earthquake Engineering, IIT—Roorkee. The safe seismic
design parameters, in terms of Maximum Credible Earthquake (MCE)
and Peak Ground Acceleration (PGA) for major civil structures are
derived and got approved by National Committee on Seismic Design
Parameters (NCSDP).

Rock Mechanic Testing

Rock mechanic testing is a part of geotechnical investigation to
obtain different physical & mechanical parameters of the rock associated
with project construction, Generally, these tests are conducted in the
field and also on the rock samples in the laboratory. Properties of
intact rock, such as unconfined compressive strength, modulus of
elasticity, specific gravity, water absorption, durability, shear and

41


compressional seismic velocities and rockmass properties such as
compressive and shear strength elastic parameters & compressional
wave velocities etc. are determined. Services of reputed Govt.
organizations like Central Soil and Material Research Station (CSMRS),
New Delhi, Central Mining Research Institute (CMRI), Dhanbad, and
National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM), Karnataka are availed
regularly and such tests are done at each and every project. Results of
these tests are used for reliable design of foundation, slopes stability
and underground openings.

INNOVATIONS IN MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY

Latest category of materials such 13.4 Cr. Ni stainless steel for
turbine runners, Teflon bushings with steel backings for wicket gates
bushes, Cupro-Nickel alloys for heat exchangers of generator air coolers
are being used in the Hydro-electric plants. Hard coatings for
underwater turbine parts are also being developed to minimize damage
due to silt in silt laden projects in Himalayan region.

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION

The major concern often discussed as regards hydro development
in the continued adoption of obsolete, primitive and cumbersome
construction technologies and practices.

Simplified, time saving, innovative and more efficient construction
techniques adopted in recently completed hydroelectric power projects
would provide great help in planning and execution of future hydro
projects.

Geological surprises/uncertainties or difficulties are encountered
often during construction of hydroelectric projects. There are instances
of delayed project construction owing to severe geological problems
during tunneling, instability related problems in slopes and
underground powerhouse caverns etc. during construction. In order to
minimize such problems, the investigations are being planned wherein
major part of the tunnel alignments & powerhouse complex are now
a days brought more towards the valley side so that geological
predictions made from the surface data are more reliable. It helps in
approaching the main tunnel through shorter and many number of
construction adits. It also help in overall faster construction of the
project. All the underground powerhouse complexes are intensively
explored through drifts through out its length and adequate number
of in-situ rock mechanic tests are got done to avoid any major surprises
during the construction stage. In way, all the major components of the
projects envisaged during DPR stage are thoroughly subjected to surface

42


and subsurface exploration methods explained above. It is to
understand the geological set up and its implication, layout and design
of the project.

PLAN FOR ADOPTING NEW TECHNOLOGY

The new areas of Technology upgradation concerning the Power
Sector has been identified and stated in the National Perspective Plan
for R&D in Indian Power Sector which has been prepared by a
Standing Committee on R&D headed by the Chairman, CEA. The
scheme in regard to the Hydro electric sector as derived from the
National Perspective Plan broadly covers taking up R&D and acquiring
new technology in the following areas:

A. Electric & Mechanical Equipments

(i) Adjustable speed generating units for pumped storage and
conventional hydro electric plants.

(ii) Development of new materials and alloys including hard
coatings for turbine runners and other underwater parts.

(iii) Split runners for hydro generating units.

(iv) Self lubricated thrust bearings for hydro turbines.

(v) On-line monitoring devices for hydro generating plants.
(vi) High efficiency, runners.

(vii) Assessment of residual life and life extension of Hydro
generators and transformers.

B. Civil Engineering/Construction

* The large size underground caverns, acquisition of the new
technology would enhance significantly the reliability,
efficiency and trouble free operation of the new as well as
existing Hydro Power Stations.

* Investigation of Hydro Power Projects.

* Numerical 3D modeling & structural non-linear analysis of
fill & concrete dams under seismic conditions.

* Arch Dams
* RCC. dams

* Instrumentation in Hydro Power Projects


* Polymer trash racks for extreme cold situations and trash
raking machines at inlet of water intakes.

* Suitable lining material for head race tunnel at higher
velocities to reduce size of tunnels.

Out of the above areas, R&D work in the following areas is being
taken up on priority.

(i) Hard coatings for under water turbine parts - Lead agency
: NHPC in association with BHEL.

(ii) Development of new materials and alloys for underwater
turbines parts - Lead Agency: National Metallurgical
Laboratory, Jameshdpur.

(iii) Field trials of new developed materials/alloys/hard coatings
at HE Projects - Lead agency : NHPC.

(iv) Development of Technology for Design & Construction of
Roller Compacted Concrete Dams - Lead agency : CSMRS
in association with TIFAC & CWC.

Highly skilled and trained manpower in various disciplines like
geology, hydrology, electrical mechanical and civil engineering, is the
biggest asset for speedier development of hydro power in today’s time.
Through transfer of technology programme, engineers of the Central
Electricity Authority, Central Water Commission and Geological Survey
of India have acquired latest / modern know-how in the planned
engineering design and monitoring of Hydroelectric Power Projects.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 4.19)

The Committee note that as usual finance is the most critical factor
in infrastructure development. Financiers regard power plants as one
of the most complex of infrastructure projects to finance because of
the extensive network of agreements and interlocking arrangements
which need to be put in place and reflected in contractual obligations.
Even of power projects, hydro projects are regarded by many financial
institutions as especially complex because they have (i) high up front
construction costs due to the need for dams (ii) long lead times (with
consequent long loan terms) and (iii) long working life of the projects.
Taking note of the three stage approval system designed for execution
of hydro electric projects in the country, the Committee are satisfied to
note that the system permits pre-investment expenditure in project

44


preparation, prior to the actual execution of the project. The Committee
are glad to note that Ministry of Finance have finalized certain
guidelines for delegation of financial power that include appraisal of
plan, authority of approval, expenditure limit on pre-investment
activities, costing of project/scheme etc. for setting up hydro electric
power projects and these have been revised time and again. The
Ministry of Finance have informed the Committee that no hydro power
project in the Central sector is likely to delayed due to fund constraints.
The Central public sector outlay for hydro power development has
been enhanced from Rs.12,306 crore during the 9" Plan to Rs.25,839
crore during the 10 Plan. Similarly, budgetary support has been raised
from Rs,9284 crore during 97 Plan to Rs.17,511 crore during the 100
Plan. Also, at the stage of PIB, it is ensured that project finance is tied
up which precludes the possibility of delay on account of fund
constraints. The Committee further observe that sectoral as well as
project-wise allocation of funds is in the domain of Planning
Commission. In order to ensure that the projects. do not suffer on
account of lack of funds, at the time of PIB appraisal, care is taken
not only to look into the viability as well as the cost estimates of the
project, but it is also taken to see that funds are tied up. Thereafter,
it is the responsibility of Ministry of Power and the implementing
agency to ensure that funds flow to the project remains smooth. The
Committee find that although Ministry of Finance have stated that the
present system for appraisal and approval is satisfactory, delays
normally are on account of project being brought before PIB not fully
prepared in terms of tying up of funds, environmental/forest clearances,
non-tying up of commercial arrangements or revised costs not fully
firmed up or responsibility for time and cost over run not fixed. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Power should
take necessary steps to overcome above constraints and lay considerable
stress on project preparation. The Committee feel that Ministries of
Power and Finance should help the promoters in preparation of DPRs,
ete, instead of merely putting objections in the project reports and
delay the implementation of the project. The Committee feel that power
delegated to the Ministry/Department concerned is too meager. For
instance, projects/plan of Rs.5 crore investment is appraised by the
concerned Department/Ministry. Above Rs.5 crore but less than Rs.25
crore, the appraisal forum is Standing Finance Committee of the
Department, chaired by Secretary of Department concerned. The projects
requiring investment of above Rs.25 crore but less than Rs.100 crore,
the appropriate appraisal authority is Department of Expenditure,
Financial Committee, chaired by Secretary of Administration
Department and including Financial Adviser, as Member Secretary and
representative of Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure

45


as members. Moreover, the approval authority for project of less than
Rs.50 crore is Minister-in-charge, for project outlay of Rs.50 crore and
above and less than Rs.100 crore, the approval authority is Minister-
in-charge and Finance Minister. The project above Rs.100 crore approved
by cabinet/CCEA. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
delegation of powers to Ministry of Power needs to be enhanced
suitably. Otherwise all the major projects would have to undergo
appraisal by cabinet/CCEA, causing inordinate delay. The Committee
also take a strong note of the fact that at only 11.30% and 11.84%
have been approved for the annual plans of 2002-03 and 2003-04 by
NTPC, NHPC, THDC, SJVN and NEEPCO against the approved outlay
of Rs.46198.01 crore and would like to know the reasons for low outlays
for the first two years of the 10" Plan.

Reply of the Government
(a) Fund Flow :

Ministry of Power and its PSUs, in close coordination, are trying
their best to manage smooth flow of funds for projects through
budgetary support and market borrowings, both domestic and external,
as per the requirement. Ministry of Power also takes up the issue of
budgetary support and market borrowings with MoF and Planning
Commission as and when desired by PSUs.

(b) Investment Approval :

Ministry of Power normally takes up the issue of delegation of
powers from time to time with MoF and latter has been delegating
the powers on occasions. For example, vide OM dated 18% February,
2002, MoF delegated powers to the Ministry for sanctioning pre-
investment activities like preparation of detailed feasibility / Project
Reports. For preparation of DFR and pre-investment activities an
amount upto Rs. 2 crores subject to availability of budget plan. funds
can be approved by Secretary of the Administrative Ministry concerned.
Proposals of PSUs upto Rs.10 crore for preparation of DPR and pre-
investment activities excluding land acquisition/ infrastructure facilities
if not funded from the Budget and the concerned PSU is a profit
making one, it can be approved by the Minister of the concerned
Ministry. For Hydro-electric projects, powers were delegated to Ministry
of Power vide letter No.16/31/2000-DO(NHPC) dated 80% June, 2001,
empowering to accord sanction of expenditure upto Rs.10 crore for
Stage-I on survey, investigation and preparation of Feasibility Report.
All cases of Stage-II where the estimates of cumulative expenditure
including Stage-I exceeds Rs.10 crores will be considered by the

46


Committee of PIB (CPIB). Proposals costing Rs.20 crore and more will
require FM’s approval while those involving a cost of over Rs.50 crore
will require the approval of the Cabinet/ CCEA. Stage-III would require
the approval of PIB/ CCEA for investment decision in respect of
construction of the project. The issue of expenditure on pre-investment
activities/ preparation of DPRs in case of transmission projects was
also taken up with MoF and consequently powers were delegated to
Ministry of Power vide letter No.1(1)/PF.II/2002, dated 23.09.2002 to
accord approval to proposals of POWERGRID upto Rs.10 crore for
preparation of DFR and pre-investment activities including land
acquisition/ infrastructure facilities if not funded from Budget and
PSU is profit making and where the generation project associated with
the transmission project has been granted investment approval.
Financial & Operational autonomy was given to profit making public
sector undertakings — miniratnas vide O.M.No.11(36)/97-Fin. dated 97%
October, 1997. In addition to the above, Ministry of Power, in
accordance with the guidelines of DPE, allowed the sanction of Stage-
I activities by NHPC Board of Directors upto Rs.50 crore. This
delegation, issued vide D.O. No.F 28012/8/2002-Fin dated 29' January,
2003 has helped in accelerating the process of Stage-II activities for
new projects. The Ministry of Power has taken up the issue of enhanced
delegation of powers with the Ministry of Finance. A proposal of this
Ministry is under discussion by the Committee of Secretaries.

(० ) The reason why low outlays have been approved for the first
two years of the 10 Plan for NTPC, NHPC, THDC, SJVN and
NEEPCO is that the demand for funds depends on the construction

schedule of the projects. The details of low outlay, corporation-wise
are as under ;

NHPC

Major reasons for less utilization of funds during the first two
years of the Tenth Five Year Plan are delay in the following
clearances/ activities as envisaged during finalisation of outlay for
Tenth Five Year Plan were due to non-settlement of issues including
environmental, geological and commercial - certain projects could
not be approved by the competent authority during the first two
years as a result of which the outlays for both the years were
revised at the early stage. These projects are :-

(a) Purulia Pump Storage
(b) Kishanganga
(०) Parbati-IIT
(व) Chamera-III
47


48

In addition it was decided that for survey & investigation of new
schemes, NHPC will not utilize the budgetary support of the
Govt. instead it will conduct these activities from its internal
resources.

THDC

An amount of Rs.3646.50 crore has been allocated to THDC in the
Tenth Plan. Actual utilization in 2002-03 is Rs.920.02 crore and
Rs.560.04 crore during 10 months of 2003-04 so THDC has utilized
40.58% of Tenth Plan Provision during one year and ten months.
The utilisation of funds was contingent upon the approval of
revised cost estimates of Tehri Stage-I project. Due to reasons
beyond the control of the Ministry, RCE could not be approved
resulting in lesser outlays.

SJVN

The last unit of Nathpa Jhakri project was commissioned in the
month of May, 2004. The requirement of budgetary support from
the Govt. of India was not necessary as SJVN was able to raise
adequate loans to fund the remaining activities of the project during
the first two years.

NEEPCO

Plan outlay in the Annual Plan 2002-03 and 2003-04 were low
since investment decision for other new projects, as anticipated,
could not be obtained. There has been delay in tying up of various
issues required for investment decisions.

The projects which could not get approval during the first two
years are Tipaimukh HEP, Tripura Gas Based Project and Kameng
HEP.

In case of Tipaimukh HEP, various factors loaded on to the project
cost like security cost, cost of diversion of national highways and
flood moderation has resulted in making the tariff unviable.

Tripura Gas Based Project was reconfigured from 500 MW to 280
MW due to less availability of gas resulting in delayed approval
of the competent authority.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]


Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 4.20)

The Committee have also observed the funding Ppattern/foreign
investment in the hydel sector which have allowed debt equity ratio
of 80:20. The Committee observe that resource crunch and inadequacies
in funding hydro electric projects have been the main causes for decline
in the hydro development. In this context, the private sector option
and attracting foreign investment offer new hope for reviving and
accelerating hydro development. Taking into account that the
international experience of attracting private investment in hydro power
has not been encouraging and the Government move to extend several
incentives for attracting private investment for hydro development,
the Committee feel that while the private sector option should be
pursued vigorously, a judicious mix of both private and public sector
options be evolved for ensuring maximum thrust in accelerating hydro
development. To have additional resource mobilization for investment
in hydel power schemes, the Committee recommend that the
Government may create a special dedicated fund for providing finances
for hydro power development, both in the public and private sectors,
through an institution on the pattern of a Finance Corporation. The
fund for this institution can be raised internally through access on
electricity sales, from international financing institutions and from public
through-tax-free bonds and debentures. Further, most of the bilateral
and multilateral funding may be earmarked for hydro-electric Projects.
The Committee would like to know the action taken by the Government
on the above suggestions of the Committee.

Reply of the Government

With the enactment of the new Electricity Act, there has been a
renewed interest by the private sector in investment. It may be
mentioned that with open access having been allowed, there is no
difficulty in good projects having moderate and attractive tariff to
starve of funds. In fact, a mega project of 1000 MW, namely,
Karchamwangtoo HEP is close to achieving financial closure - which
is a private sector project.

With regard to public sector projects, it has been the endeavour of
the Govt. to ensure that no projects lack due to non-availability of
funds - either equity by way of budgetary support from Govt. of
India or loan funds. Further Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC), which are sector-specific
development financial institution dedicated to power sector, for ensuring
that loan funds are provided to the projects in a time-bound
manner.

49


As regards state sector projects, as and when the State Govt.
requires assistance, Centre has stepped in so as to ensure that the
project implementation continues as scheduled. Examples of state sector
projects where the Govt. has provided help recently are Baglihaar HEP
and Purulia Pump Storage Project. In addition to the above, PFC has
set up an India Power Fund, which is a venture capital fund to provide
the last mile equity to various projects.

It is, therefore, felt that there is no problem in so far as providing
finances for hydro power development is concerned. provided that the
tariff of the project is good and it is saleable. In view of the above
there is no proposal before the Govt. to create a special dedicated
fund for hydro power development.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 21, Para No. 5.85)

By far the most formidable element which retards the faster
execution of hydro projects is the delay on account of permission to
obtain clearances and approval from the Ministry of Environment &
Forests. The Committee have examined in detail the procedure involved
in such clearances and prima facie are of the opinion that there is an
imperative need to thoroughly review the mechanism and procedures
which, at present are cumbersome, complicated and very difficult to
comply with. The Committee acknowledge the need and concern of
MoEF to protect the environment and forests while appraising and
granting approvals for the infrastructural/developmental projects
including the hydel projects. Sadly, MoEF seem to look at the proposal
only with an objective of protecting the interest of the environment
and forest at any cost, irrespective of the enormous benefits that may
accrue to the entire country from the project. Such lop-sided action on
the part of MoEF has at times led to enormous time and cost overruns
with no responsibilities fixed at all and thereby making the whole
system counter-productive. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
MoFF should accord clearances/approvals in a fixed time frame.

Reply of the Government
A. Environmental clearance

The concerns expressed on account of time and cost overruns due
to the delay in environmental and forestry clearances have been
carefully examined by the Ministry of Environment & Forests. The
clearances are mandatory in nature and the procedures for obtaining

50


clearances are revised from time to time keeping in view the mandatory
responsibilities, transparency, accountability and requirements of all the
stakeholders involved. As per the mandatory requirements,
environmental assessment of the project has to be completed within a
period of 90 days from the receipt of complete information from the
project authorities and a decision conveyed within 30 days thereafter.
The current environmental clearance procedures are being closely
reviewed to avoid delays and at the same time to bring objectivity in
appraising proposals referred to the Ministry for environmental
clearance.

The Ministry of Environment & Forests has undertaken an exercise
for reengineering of environmental clearance process with a view to
make it more effective and time bound. The proposed reengineering
process would include various steps including screening, scoping, public
consultations, appraisal and post project monitoring. Presently, the
revised environmental clearance process is being deliberated upon
intensively within the Ministry. After intra-Ministerial discussions,
discussions will be held with the concerned Ministries/Departments
and Industry Associations. On completion of the consultations with all
the concerned stakeholders, a draft notification would be issued subject
to its approval by the Government.

B. Forest clearance

* Forests are the precious natural resource base of our country
and contribute to national GDP by about 2.3% besides
providing livelihood to millions of people, fresh and
pollution free environment. Forests are precious because they
support agriculture of the country by maintaining the
nutrient cycle in the soil and influence local rains. Forests
prevent floods, drought and desertification. Forests are rich
source of bio-diversity, flora & fauna. There is huge
biodiversity in our forests for which there is great demand
in global market and forests are the good source of foreign
exchange through eco-tourism, export of bamboo, handicraft,
and non-timber forest products including medicinal plant
products. It is very difficult to assess the actual value of
the forests due to their intangible benefits and there is a
need to conserve the natural forests and forest land to the
greatest extent.

* While diverting forest land for Hydro projects, the whole
forest area goes under submergence and the forest is lost
for ever. Due to loss of this forest cover, the extent of

51


damage caused to the agriculture, livelihood of the people
and the environment cannot be always measured in
monetary terms. The question of inter-generational equity
is also very important as no monetary value can be attached
to the loss of forests for the future generations.

* Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is a regulatory Act and has
significantly contributed in the conservation of the national
heritage of the country.

* Ministry of Environment & Forests has already fixed a time
frame for the processing and disposal of the project
proposals through Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 framed
under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. To simplify the
procedure, these rules have been amended further in 2004.
As desired by the Standing Committee on Energy, a time
limit of 90 days has been fixed for the Central Government
to take a decision on the forest clearance.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 24, Para No. 5.88)

The Committee find that where any hydel project involves diversion
of forests area falling in National Parks and Sanctuaries, approval of
the Standing Committee of the Indian Board for Wildlife and prior
permission of Supreme Court is required. The prior permission of the
Supreme Court is mandated through its order dated 13.11.2000 in IA
No. 2 in Writ Petition No. 337 of 1955. As a result, each and every
case is subjected to the scrutiny of the Supreme Court and also Wildlife
Board under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister. This not only
causes undue hardships to a project proponent but also leads to
enormous delays in according clearance and consequently cost overruns
of the project. The Committee feel that the question of seeking prior
permission of the Supreme Court for diversion of forest area does not
fall within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as this is an executive/
administrative matter of the Union/State Governments and as per the
scheme of our Constitution, the Courts have no power to handle such
matters. In this context, the Committee feel that there is a need to
have this matter reviewed. The Committee, in this connection, concur
with the view of Secretary, Power, who during his evidence before the
Committee was candid enough to observe that ‘we should take up
this matter with MoEF for seeking review of earlier decisions.’ The
Committee are of the opinion that there need not be prior permission
of the Supreme Court but can be considered by the Wildlife Board.

52


The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoEF should take
appropriate action in the matter and they be apprised of the action
taken.

Reply of the Government

* Supreme Court vide their order dated 14.2.2000 in Civil Writ
Petition No. 202 of 1995 prohibited the removal of diseased,
dying or wind falien trees, drift wood and grass etc. from
any National Park or Sanctuary.

* Supreme Court vide their order dated 13.11.2000 in Civil
Writ Petition No. 337 of 1995 ordered that there should be
no de-reservation of forest, sanctuary and national Park area.

* Supreme Court vide their order dated 9% May, 2002 in Civil
Writ Petition No. 337 of 1995 ordered that no permission
under Section 29 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act should
be granted without getting the approval of the Standing
Committee.

¢ After the order dated 13.11.2000, the user agencies and the
State Governments started filing affidavits in the Supreme
Court requesting for permission to divert the area for
developmental projects.

* Such diversion cases were referred to the Standing
Committee for Indian Board for Wildlife for its opinion,
The opinion/recommendations of the Standing Committee
were placed before the Supreme Court and in most of the
cases, the recommendations have been accepted.

* However, the Supreme Court also referred some diversion
Proposals to the Central Empowered Committee for its
opinion.

* Ministry of Environment and Forests had requested the
Supreme Court for deleting the word “forests” from their
order dated 13.11.2000 in Civil Writ Petition No. 337. The
Supreme Court has rejected the same on 9.2.2004.

* A National Board for Wildlife has been constituted under
the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. The
National Board is a statutory body under the Chairmanship
of Prime Minister. The Board is primarily responsible for
Promoting the conservation and development of wildlife and
forests in the country. It consists of experts from Government

53


Organizations, Non-Governmental Organizations, eminent
Conservationists, Ecologists and Environmentalists. The
Board is competent to take decision regarding diversion
proposals.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 27, Para No. 5.91)

The Committee note that the activities relating to environment and
forest clearances are being undertaken by MoEF in sequence which is
often causing undue delays. They recommend that MoEF should carry
out such activities parallel. The Committee are happy to note that a
beginning in this direction has been made by MoEF in that earlier
they were insisting on No Objection Certificate from the Pollution
Control Boards prior to processing the applications. Now, MoEF are
not insisting on No Objection Certificate at the beginning but only
prior to the consideration of the proposal by the Expert Committee.
The Committee directed MoEF to explore other activities which can be
taken up in parallel and carry out the same simultaneously which will
go a long way in reducing delays. The Committee also recommend
that MoEF should consider the feasibility of simultaneous processing
of activities relating to both environment and forest clearances.

Reply of the Government

At present, the appraisal of project proposals for environmental
and forestry clearances are being simultaneously processed, however,
the environmental clearance is issued after forestry clearance has been
accorded. The recommendation would be appropriately incorporated
in the revised environmental clearance procedures under review.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 29, Para No. 5.93)

The Committee have been informed that a World Bank Study aimed
at bringing in reforms in the environment and forest clearance
procedures underway. ‘They have also been informed that the said
studies nearing completion and the interim findings are due shortly.
The Committee suggest that the problems faced by the hydel power
projects should be brought to the notice of the World Bank team so
that the study can be more meaningful.

Reply of the Government

The World Bank study is restricted to the reengineering of the
environmental clearance procedures. The specific recommendations of

. 54


the Committee have been communicated to the World Bank Consultant
for suitably incorporating them in the revised Environmental Clearance
procedures. Presently, the revised environmental clearance process is
being deliberated and after consultations with all the concerned
stakeholders, the revised procedures would be notified subject to its
approval by the Government.

[Ministry of Power E.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 33, Para No. 5.97)

It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the
preparation of the Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plan is being
routed through the State Government which has made the entire
process as complicated one. At times, the cost of community halls, rest
houses, liaison offices, rural infrastructure development (construction
and repair of roads, improvement of religious places, construction of
village crematorium) and other infrastructure works are loaded on the
project cost under this head. As a result, the cost of the Plan becomes
exorbitant. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Environment & Forests should review the works/items included under
the CAT and Compensatory Afforestation. The Committee also desire
that MoEF should fix the norms for arriving at cost on Catchment
Area Treatment Plan/Compensatory Afforestation schemes by clearly
indicating the percentage of cost of actual works to be kept for
administrative and other miscellaneous activities. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter.

Reply of the Government

* Ministry has taken note of the concern shown by the
Committee for arbitrariness in the manner the Catchment
Area Treatment Plan is prepared/processed at the level of
the State Government and all types of works/expenditure
items are included in the Plan.

* Ministry has also noted the decision of the Committee that
the Ministry should review the work/items included the
CAT/CA proposals, the cost norms and the percentage of
cost admissible under overheads and miscellaneous activities.

* As desired by the Committee, these items will be reviewed
at the level of Ministry and the action taken intimated in
due course.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
55


Recommendation (51, No. 34, Para No. 5.98)

The Committee finds that loss of original flora and fauna
particularly bio-diversity can never be replaced because forest takes
thousands of years to grow. However, since development has to take
place and hydro projects are to be commissioned, MoEF assign different
plans for Compensatory Afforestation and Catchment Area Treatment
(CAT). The cost of Compensatory Afforestation and CAT is charged to
the project authorities and the State Government is required to
undertake the plans for afforestation and CAT and money transferred
to the respective State Governments. The Committee find that the States
have been unable to meet the projected targets and at times the money
transferred to State Governments has been diverted to the general
revenue budget of the State. As regards achievement under CAT and
Compensatory Afforestaton Plan, it may be noted that as against
7 lakh hectares, only 4 lakh hectares have been put under
Compensatory Afforestation and CAT Plans. Of Rs. 850 crore earmarked
to States, the utilization has been only Rs. 500 crore. In this context,
the Committee desire that instead of State Governments, MoEF should
undertake the Compensatory Afforestation and CAT Plans. In the
opinion of the Committee, this will yield better result and there will
be no scope for diversion of money by the State Governments
transferred to them for Compensatory Afforestation/CAT Plans.

Reply of the Government

* For the proper utilisation of funds Compensatory
Afforestation, Catchment Area Treatment Plan, Wildlife
Management Plans, Bio-diversity Conservation Plans etc, and
their monitoring, an authority namely Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
(CAMPA) has already been constituted vide order dated:
23-4-2004 published in Official Gazette in accordance with
an order dated 30-10-2002 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995.

¢ The User Agency shall deposit the funds with CAMPA
which will not be a part of the Consolidated Funds of India.
This fund will directly be released by the CAMPA to the
implementing agency in the field for the execution as per
the schemes submitted by the State/UT Governments.

* CAMPA will have independent monitoring system.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]


Recommendation (Sl. No. 40, Para No. 6.6)

The Committee are perturbed to note that many of the hydel
projects such as Tehri, Narmada Sarovar, etc. have undergone time
and cost-overruns due to unresolved Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(R&R) issues. The Committee find the National Policy on Rehabilitation
and Resettlement (R&R) which was entrusted to Ministry of Urban
and Rural Development for several years is still to be concretized
even after repeated recommendation made by the Standing Committee
on Energy in this regard. The committee deplore in strongest terms
inaction on the part of the Government in not coming with much
awaited National Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R). The
Committee recommend that the Government should atleast now declare
their National Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) without
fail.

Reply of the Government

The National Policy on resettlement and rehabilitation for project
affected families has already been formulated and notified by the
Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development. The
policy essentially addresses the need to previde succor to the assetless
rural poor and support the rehabilitation efforts of the poorer sections
of project affected families, small and marginal farmers, SC/ST and
women who have been displaced. Besides, it seeks to provide a canvas
for an affective dialogue between the project affected families and the
administration for resettlement and rehabilitation. The intention is to
impart greater flexibility for integration and negotiation so that the
resultant package gains all round acceptability in the shape of a
workable instrument providing satisfaction to all Stake holders.

[Ministry of Power R.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 42, Para No. 6.8)

The committee find that ideally the average time required for
Hydro Power Project should not exceed 5 years. This is based on total
time of 50 to 80 months from Stage-I through Stage वा followed by
actual construction and commissioning time of 42 to 45 months are
desirable break up of Stage-I, II and III could be 6 to 4 & 6 months
respectively. The Committee find that this time schedule is not being
reduced because most of the projects are not thoroughly surveyed or
are located in inaccessible difficult terrain and typically suffer for R&R,
lack of realistic and complete environment social impact assessment,
inadequate preparatory and exploratory services, forest clearance, land

57


acquisition problems, geological surprises, etc. The Committee are of
the opinion that to expedite early execution of hydel projects, bankable
Detailed Project Report (DPR) based on our detailed survey should be
prepared to avoid geological uncertainties. At the same time, contract
monitoring as distinct from project monitoring should be emphasized
and land acquisition and infrastructure development be settled and
completed before the start of the project.

Reply of the Government

Three stage development procedure in respect of new hydro electric
projects in Central Sector has been formulated in consultation with
MOF/MOEF with effect from June 2001. The same is given as under.

Stage-I : Expenditure on survey and investigation and preparation
of pre-feasibility reports for H.E. Schemes will be sanctioned by
Ministry of Power subject to the condition that proposed H.E.
Project is figuring in Five Year Plan or Long-term hydro electric
power development plan.

Stage-II : Stage-II development involves preparation of DPR, pre-
construction work, Development of infrastructure facilities and land
acquisition etc. The amount is to be sanctioned by Committee of
PIB/CCEA for the project which have been found to be
commercially viable and have obtained site clearance from MOEF.

Stage-III: This would require approval of PIB/CCEA for investment
decision in respect of construction of H.E. Schemes.

The features of the hydroelectric projects, being site specific, depend
on the geology, topography and hydrology at the site. The
construction time of a hydro project is greatly influenced by the
geology of the area and its accessibility. Even when extensive
investigations using new techniques are undertaken an element of
uncertainty remains in the subsurface geology and the geological
surprises during actual construction, which could cause time and
cost overruns, cannot be completely ruled out. It is essential that
state-of-the art investigations and construction techniques are
adopted to minimise geological risks as well as the overall gestation
period of hydro projects.

The cost escalations on account of inadequacies in the survey &
investigation and uncertainties in constructing civil works in
difficult geological terrains have contributed to certain misgivings
and misapprehensions regarding hydro power development. There

58


is an urgent need to give due attention on the survey &
investigation and analysis of geological, geo-morphological, geo-
electrical, hydrological data etc. at the time of preparation of a
DPR itself in order to minimise the impact of risks. It is, therefore,
necessary to expedite survey and investigations with the latest
state of the art technology and prepare a shelf of projects for
execution. The quality of DPRs should be of high standard which
should infuse confidence in the national/international developers
to take up the execution of projects without loosing time in rechecks
etc.

MOWR/ CWC have issued guidelines for preparation of DPRs of
irrigation and multipurpose projects which specify the extent of
detailed surveys and investigations to be carried out for preparation
of DPR, These guidelines are to be followed by various agencies
involved in preparation of DPR. The DPRs are to be prepared
strictly as per guidelines and required investigation would be of
high quality and bankable.

In addition, a National Rehabilitation Policy has been prepared by
the Department of Rural Development and the policy will be
implemented uniformly for Hydel Projects which will reduce time
in settlement of R&R Packages for Hydro Projects. Contract
monitoring, as distinct from project monitoring is being emphasized.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44, Para No.7.20)

The Committee observe that almost all the projects being posed
and considered for development in the private sector are the ones
investigated and formulated by the State Electricity Boards or State
Government entities and most of them have been cleared by CEA for
implementation by the State Government entities in the public sector,
They have the benefit of the investigations carried out by the State
organizations. The private developers in such a project face a dilemma
in reviewing the adequacy of investigations and supplementing them
with additional investigations. The Committee opine that the private
sector entities cannot be expected to build a competent investigation,
design and engineering organization based on one or two Projects.
They presently turn to “free-lancing experts” or independent
consultancy organisations that have come up recently. In this context,
the Committee feels that institutions such as GSI, Survey of India,
NHPC, WAPCOS, CWPRS and similar organisations at the State level
involved in hydro development can provide consultancy services to

59


the private sector. It is understood that a beginning has already been
made by some of the institutions such as BBMB, NHPC and WAPCOS.
The Committee desire that this should be extended to all the institutions
and encouraged by offering incentives - financial and otherwise.

Reply of the Government

The recommendations of the committee were forwarded to GSI,
Survey of India, NHPC, WAPCOS, CWPRS, all CPSUs and to the
State Governments.

The GSI, Survey of India, NHPC, WAPCOS CWPRS and CPSUs
have intimated that consultancy is being provided by them to Private
Sector also. Separate consultancy wings have been established by
various CPSUs and consultancy is being provided by them to Private
Sector also.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No.46, Para No.7.22)

In the case of MoU route, the Committee further observe that the
purchaser (Licenser) may solicit developers for prequalification and
selection the one considered the most suitable for the specific project
using procedures which are transparent. In the case of the competitive
bidding route, the purchaser (licenser) may short list prospective
developers using the procedure and then seek bids from them. Taking
note of the fact that the bidding should be in two stages, the first
stage, relating to technical aspects and the second stage relating to
prices and contractual and financial aspects, the Committee are of the
view that on the part of the Government there is certain earnestness
and eagerness to make a success of the policies in spite of the criticism
it has attracted. The Committee find that the private sector
entrepreneurs have been cautions and more demanding in view of the
risks involved which is understandable. At the same time, the
Committee feel that the initiative’ will have to come from both sides.
While the Government should recognize that private investment against
risks involves a price — excessiveness of depending on the nature and
intensity of the risk whereas the private sector depending on the nature
and intensity of the risk whereas the private sector should not ignore
the fact that there is public accountability involved which is sacrosanct
and cannot be violated. On the choice of projects for the private sector,
the Committee note that due to long gestation period and many
uncertainties involved, hydro projects, especially mega projects, do not
find favour with the lenders. This precisely is the reason why presently

60


only 2 or 3 large hydro projects are under implementation in the
private sector. Therefore, to start with, the Committee recommend that
the hydro projects which involve lesser risk element and entail lesser
capital investment can be considered for development in the Private
Sector. The Committee observe that there are several categories of
projects which can ideally be continued to be taken up in the Public
Sector. These are (a) Multi purpose Projects (b) Projects Involving inter-
State issues and in inter-State river systems, (c) Projects involving
cooperation with neighbouring countries (e.g. Pancheshwar) and (d)
Projects for complementary peaking with regional benefits (e.g. Pumped
Storage Schemes) (e) Projects in the North-Eastern Region etc. The
Committee feel that the following type of projects may be posed for
private sector participation:

0) Extension projects where dam and other major structures
have already been constructed and the new works proposed
cover mainly power house buildings and installation of
generating equipment;

(ii) Projects at the toe of existing dams; and

(iii) Run-of-rivers schemes involving minimum underground
works.

Reply of the Government

Hydro Projects to the private sectors are allocated by the respective
State Governments and the suggestions of the Committee have been
conveyed to the State Governments for appropriate action.

[Ministry of Power RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 47, Para No.7.23)

The Committee note that under mega power policy, a hydel project
with a capacity of 500 MW is entitled to draw additional benefits of
custom duties and local levies and Taxes waiver. Inspite of much
publicized mega hydel policy, there are few takers for it and as such
it remained on the paper only. The Committee are of the considered
view that for accelerating the pace of hydel development, there is any
imperative need to revise the ceiling downwardly under mega power
policy. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all hydel projects,
except small hydel, be extended all the benefits/concessions, available
under Mega Power Policy.

61


Reply of the Government

This Ministry has already mooted a revised Mega policy cabinet
note for relaxing the existing qualifying capacities of 1000 MW for
Thermal and 500 MW for Hydro to 250 MW each. However, the
proposal did not find favour with the other ministries when it was
sent for their comments. The same is being pursued for acceptance.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-I dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 40 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51 No. 48, Para No. 7.24)

The Committee are of the opinion that if hydro power development
has to be accelerated the role and activities of the existing institutions
in the public sector should not only be continued but enlarged
substantially. Given the response of the private sector so far and their
limitations, the public sector option should not be ignored or sidelined
in the interest of accelerating hydro power development. The
Committee, therefore, feel that enormous expertise available in the
public sector institutions cannot easily be replicated in the new private
sector institutions and the country should make use of such expertise
to accelerate hydro power development.

Reply of the Government

To accelerate the development of hydro power, private developers
have been given a number of incentives to Participate in the
development of hydro sector. The role and activities of the existing
institutions in the public sector has not only been continued but they
have been encouraged to make joint ventures-with state utilities. The
shining example of this is Omkareshwar being executed by NHDC (A
joint venture of NHPC and M.PGovt.). In addition to this, NTPC has
also been mandated to participate in the field of hydro Power
development and Kol Dam HE. project (800 MW) is under execution
by them. In addition to this, Loharinagpala H.E.project (520 MW) and
Tapovan Vishnugad (360MW) in Uttaranchal have been awarded to
NTPC for implementation. Vishnugad Pipalkoti (340MW) in Uttaranchal
has been awarded to THDC for implementation. Rampur ( 400 MW)
in Himachal Pradesh is proposed for implementation by SJVNL. To
accelerate the hydro power development, outlay for central sector
projects has been increased.

62


Under 50,000 MW hydro initiative, 162 schemes spreading in 16
States with aggregate capacity of over 50,000 MW have been considered
for preparation of PFRs. National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation,
WAPCOS, North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation, Satluj Jal Vidyut
Nigam and number of State Power Utilities have been associated to
complete these feasibility studies. As a follow up of completion of
PFRs, action has been initiated for preparation of DPRs of attractive
sites through these agencies.

Hydro Electric Projects in Private Sector (after Government of India’s
Power Policy announced in 1991)

The Status of hydro electric schemes in Private Sector, after
Government of India’s power policy announced in 1991 to encourage
greater investment by private enterprises in power sector, is given
below :—

{a) Projects Already Commissioned

Three hydro electric projects aggregating to 399.5 MW viz. Tawa
HEP (2x6.75=13.5 MW) in Madhya Pradesh, Malana HEP (2x43=86
MW) in Himachal Pradesh and Baspa St-II HEP (3x100 MW) in
Himachal Pradesh have been commissioned.

(b) Cleared by CEA

Following seven Projects with total installed capacity of 2410 MW
have been cleared by CEA :—

(i) Maheshwar (10x40 MW), M.P.

(ii) Vishnuprayag (4x100 MW), Uttaranchal
(iii) Dhamwari Sunda (2x35 MW), H.P.

(iv) Shrinagar (4x82.5 MW), Uttaranchal

(v) Allain Duhangan (2x96 MW), HLP.

(vi) Jalaput Dam Toe (3x6 MW), Orissa/A.P.
(vii) Karcham Wangtioo (4x250 MW), H.P.
(c) Under Examination
- Nil -

63


(d) DPRs Taken Back in State Sector

DPRs of 4 Hydro Electric Projects with aggregate installed capacity
of 728 MW have been taken back in State Sector. These schemes
are +

(0) Uhl क्या (2x50 MW), छल.

(ii) Hibra (3x77 MW), छाए

(iii) Karbi Langpi (2x50 MW), Assam

(iv) Upper Krishna (4x70+1x7=297 MW) (Almatti)

{DPR for Cascade Scheme of Upper Krishna (810 MW), for which
In-Principle Clearance was accorded by CEA under Upper Krishna
(1107 MW = 297 MW Almatti + 810 MW Cascade Scheme) was
not received in CEA}.

The details of the above hydro electric schemes are given at Annex-
7.24.

Three Stage Development Procedure for Hydroelectric Projects in
Central Sector

Ministry of Power vide their letter No. 16/31/2000-DO(NHPC)
dated 80 June, 2001 have circulated three stage development procedure
of new hydro-electric projects in Central Sector for expediting hydro
development. The procedure is summarised below:-

Stage-I

In Stage-I, an expenditure upto Rs. 10 crs. on survey, investigation
and preparation of pre-feasibility report for hydro-electric projects
will be sanctioned by Ministry of Power subject to condition that
the proposed hydro electric project is figuring in the five year
plan or long-term hydro electric power development plan. If the
expenditure is more than Rs. 10 crs., the same would be considered
by the Committee of PIB (CPIB). The activities under Stage-I shall
be completed within one year from the date of sanction.

Stage-II

All cases of Stage-II, where the estimates of cumulative expenditure
including Stage-I exceeds Rs. 10 crs., will be considered by
Committee of PIB (CPIB). Proposals costing Rs. 20 crs. and more


will require the approval of Finance Minister. While those involving
a cost of over Rs. 50 crs. will require the approval of Cabinet/
CCEA. Project which have been found to be commercially viable
and have obtained site clearance from Ministry of Environment
and Forests would be considered for Stage-II development.

Stage-II development would involve preparation of DPR, pre-
construction works, development of infrastructure facilities and land
acquisition, etc. The activities under Stage-II shall normally be
completed within one and a half years from the date of sanction.

Stage-IIT

Stage-IIl would require approval of PIB/CCEA for investment
decision in respect of construction of the project. The approval of
the PIB/CCEA would be sought after Environment & Forest
clearances have been obtained from MOEF and TEC from CEA.

[Ministry of Power, RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 49, Para No. 7.25)

The Committee find that the major hydro potential concentration
is in the North Eastern Region. Almost all of this potential is remaining
dormant. However, there is no demand for such a large quantum of
Power in the North Eastern Region and even private sector may not
be interested in such projects. This potential should be harnessed in a
systematic manner for the benefit of the region and the surplus made
available to the other regions of the country. In fact, it would be ideal
to develop this vast potential to establish every intensive industries
like Aluminium in the region. Moreover, the excess energy can be
easily transmitted to other regions if transmission facilities are available.
The Committee note that PGCIL is already working on the concept of
a national grid. It would therefore be necessary to involve institutions
such as NHPC, NEEPCO etc. in the power development programme
in the North-Eastern Region. A comprehensive and systematic
programme of developing the hydro power projects in the North
Eastern Region should be prepared by a group of experts from CEA,
NHPC NEEPCO etc. Simultaneously a programme of developing
industrial complexes to utilize the cheap hydro power should also be
developed. The Committee is happy to learn that action in this regard
has been initiated at Prime Minister’s initiative and would like to
know the outcome of this initiative so far.

65


Reply of the Government
Steps taken for promoting Hydel Projects in NE Region:
(i) _Entrusting of Hydro Projects to Power Corporations

Govt. has taken many steps and measures to boost Hydro Power
Development in NE region. Hydro Power Corporations in the Central
Sector viz, National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC), North-
Eastern Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO) are being actively
involved in investigation and implementation of HE projects in the
Region. In Arunachal Pradesh, NHPC has been entrusted with the
responsibility of developing HE Projects in Subansiri, Siang and Dibang
basins, while development of hydro projects in Kameng basin has
been entrusted to NEEPCO. These steps are likely to give greater thrust
to the development of hydropower in the Region. Some of the major
projects being developed by NHPC in the N.E. Region include Loktak
D/S (90 MW), Siang Upper (11000 MW), Siang Middle (1000 MW),
Siang Lower (1600 MW), Subansiri Upper (2000 MW), Subansiri Middle
(1600 MW), Subansiri Lower (2000 MW). The projects being developed
by NEEPCO include Tipaimukh MPP (1500 MW) and Tuirial (60 MW)
ete.

(ii) Ranking Studies by CEA

Ranking Studies were carried out by Central Electricity Authority
in Oct, 2001, for expediting hydro power development in a systematic
manner from the balance hydro potential sites for all the basins in the
country by prioritising them for development in order of their
attractiveness and grading them in A, B and C categories. Based on
the preliminary Ranking Study, 399 schemes in all the six river systems
of the country with an aggregate installed capacity of about 106,910
MW have been prioritized for development in a phased manner which
includes 145 nos. of schemes with aggregate installed capacity of 57370
MW in NE region as per details given below:

SLNo. State Category A Category B Category C Total
Nos. MW Nos. MW Nos. MW Nos. MW

1 2 3 4 5 6 a 8 9 10
1 Arunanchal 31 509४. 55 38999 3. 5080 89 4926
2 Assam 3 247 3. 108 1 33 7 388

66


1 vs

e
Sj
a
a
i)
~

७

10

$ Manipur 3. 15 5,335 ३. W771 N24
4 Meghalaya 2 178 16 1316 4. 665 22 (2159
5. Mizoram 0 0 3. 194 3 1870 6 2064
6 Nagaland Ze 4 Bi 4. 1030 10. 1392
7 Tripura 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0

Total 41 5718 86 41203 18 10449 145 57370

(iii) 50,000 MW Hydroelectric Initiative

Govt. launched ‘50,000 MW Hydro Electric Initiative’ under which
preliminary Feasibility Reports (PFRs) in respect of 162 Hydro Electric
Projects having aggregate installed capacity of 50,000 MW were to be
prepared by different agencies in the Central/ State Sector. Under the
above programme, PFRs in respect of 62 schemes with an aggregate
installed capacity of 30456 MW have been prepared as per details
given below in N.E. region:

SLNo Name of State No. of Installed
schemes Capacity (MW)

1 Arunachal Pradesh 42 27293
2. Manipur 3 362
3. Meghalaya ll 931
4 Nagaland 3 370
5 Mizoram 3 1500

Total 62 30456

Of the above, NHPC has prepared PFRs in respect of 25 HE
Projects (17403 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh while WAPCOS have
prepared PFRs for 19 projects (8393 MW) in the region. In addition,
NEEPCO has prepared 18 no. of PFRs (4660 MW) in the Region.

Out of the above, 25 schemes with an aggregate installed capacity
of 22,339 MW, of which first year tariff has been found less than
Rs. 2.50/kwh, have been considered for preparation of DPRs.

67


(iv) Power Evacuation

CEA has worked out a master plan for development of transmission
system for evacuation of power from hydro projects in North Eastern
Region in a coordinated manner. The detailed planning and
implementation programme of the transmission system associated with
specific hydro projects and the transmission system beyond pooling
points which would form the National Grid is being worked out to
achieve the development as per the master plan. In the process,
necessary coordination with POWERGRID, NHPC, NEEPCO and other
stake holders including the State Utilities is being done by CEA.

[Ministry of Power, F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 50, Para No. 7.26 )

The Committee are happy to learn that recently hydel power PSUs
like NHPC have joined hands with the State Government of Madhya
Pradesh and West Bengal and floated Joint Venture Companies for the
execution of hydel projects. Omkeshwar and Purulia Pumped Storage,
THDC and NJPC (now SJVNL) are some of the shinning examples of
joint ventureship. The Committee welcome the new move on the part
of the Central Government. The Committee are of the view that this
is a ‘win-win’ proposition, both for the state and power PSUs. As the
State Government is unable to mobilise, financial resources for the
development of hydel power due to resource crunch, the PSUs assist
them. In return the expertise, technology and other resources available
with them (PSUs) in put to use most optimally. The Committee find
that a large number of hydel projects are languishing on account of
non-resolution of inter-state disputes. This has only deprived the State
much needed hydel power. The Committee desire that Central
Government should take proactive role in persuading the State
Governments especially those where inter-state disputes are yet to be
resolved for entering into Joint Venture with Central PSUs in Hydel
Sector. The Committee would like to await the outcome of such an
exercise by the Central Government.

Reply of the Government

Inter-State Aspects and Policy on Hydro Power Development:
Substantial power potential has remained locked up and many mega
hydel projects could not be taken up for implementation, even though
these projects are well recognised as attractive and viable, because of
unresolved Inter- State issues. Govt. of India recognises the need for
evolving an approach to ensure that the available hydro electric

68


potential is fully utilised without prejudice to the rights of the riparian
States as determined by the Awards of the Tribunals/ Agreements
arrived at among the party States for a given river basin with regard
to water sharing. The selection and the design of the project would be
based on integrated basin wise studies, so as to arrive at an optimal
decision and care will be taken that such projects do not in any way
prejudice the claims of the basin States or affect the benefits from the
existing projects. A consensus would be evolved amongst the basin
States regarding the location of such projects, basic parameters involved
and mechanism through which each project would be constructed and
operated.

As far as possible, it may be preferable to take up simple run of
the river schemes that do not involve any major storage or consumptive
uses.

Ministry of Power is taking steps along with Planning Commission
to evolve an approach for taking up projects affected by the inter-
State aspects. At the first instance, simple run of the river projects
would be taken up in the Cauvery basin and also Kishau Dam projects.

To harness the hydropower potential of Cauvery River in the stretch
between existing Shimha Power House of Karnataka and Mettur
reservoir of Tamil Nadu and with the consent of Government of Tamil
Nadu and Karnataka, NHPC has been requested to initiate action for
preparation of DPRs for four projects viz. Shivasamudram & Mekadatu
projects of Karnataka and Rasimanal & Hogenekkal Projects of Tamil
Nadu on the Cauvery river between Krishna Raj Sagar (KRS) dam
and Mettur Dam. NHPC have indicated the total installed capacity of
these projects as 1150 MW.

Status of Hydroelectric Schemes Involving Inter-State Aspects—All
India Position

33 hydro electric schemes aggregating to 6750 MW are affected
due to Inter- State issues. Status-wise details on these schemes are
summarized below:

Schemes No. of Schemes Capacity
(MW)
Sanctioned Schemes 2 62
CEA Cleared Schemes a 140
Schemes Under Examination. = =
Schemes Returned for Resubmission 29 6548
Total 33 6750

69


Brief details of interstate aspects involved are given at Annex-I
[Ministry of Power, FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 51, Para No. 7.27)

The Committee also find that the joint venture projects between
the Central Public Sector Undertakings and the State Governments are
project specific. Since, most of these projects would be completed in
near future, there may arise a situation, where these joint ventures
would not be able to meet even wage and salaries bills of manpower,
if no further projects are allotted to them. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these joint venture companies should also be allotted/
given new hydel sites for development within the same State of their
operation, so that the available manpower and infrastructure available
with them is optimally used.

Reply of the Government

The Joint Venture are being allotted / given new hydel sites for
development so that the available manpower, infrastructure available
and expertise gained by them in execution of previous project could
be gainfully utilized. The S[VNL, a joint venture of Govt. of India and
HP. has been allotted Rampur H.E. Project for execution and few
more projects are likely to be given to it for execution. Similarly THDC
has been allocated execution of Koteshwar HEP (400 MW). The work
relating to execution of Tehri Pumped Storage Scheme (1000 MW) has
also been entrusted to THDC.

For optimal utilization of the available manpower and infrastructure
available with joint ventures, the work relating to preparation of DPRs
of few projects under 50,000 MW initiative has also been allocated to
them and they have been advised to obtain the consent of the State
Governments for carrying out detailed Survey & Investigation and
preparation of DPR.

[Ministry of Power, F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 53, Para No. 8.23)

To promote Hydro Power in the NE Region, the Committee have
examined in detail the role of Brahmaputra Board. Although, the
Government have informed the Committee that enough investments
are being made so as to boost the exploitation and development of
hydro power in the country, the Committee observe that Brahmaputra

70


Board has not been provided funds to boost the tapping of hydro
power in North Eastern region. The Committee find that as per the
mandate, the Board is to prepare Master Plans for the control of floods
and bank erosion and improvement of drainage in the Brahmaputra
and Barak valleys. In preparing the Master Plans, the Board has to
plan for optimum development and utilization of the water resources
of the Brahmaputra and the Barak basins for irrigation, hydro power,
navigation and other beneficial purposes. Further, the Board is also
required to prepare detailed project reports and estimates in respect of
the dams and other projects relevant to the Master Plans and to
construct, maintain and operate such of them as may be approved by
the Central Government. Taking note of the fact that the Brahmaputra
Board, in 1986 had in their Master Plan of the main stem of the
Brahmaputra identified hydro power projects in the Brahmaputra Valley
with proposed installed capacities totaling to 41,000 MW with a plant
load capacity factor of 32% and Master Plan of Barak river system
(1998), projects with installed capacities totaling to 2,200 MW have
been identified, the Committee are unhappy to note that only 3% of
the identified potential including the ongoing projects has been
developed. The Committee cannot but deplore the way the hydro
power potential identified by Brahmaputra Board way back in 1986
and further revised in 2002 that stands out at 49,729 MW have not yet
been executed. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to take necessary steps to augment Hydro Power development in
Brahmaputra and Barak valleys and the Committee be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

Presently 3 HE schemes with an aggregate installed capacity of
2125 MW in Brahmaputra and 3 HE schemes with an aggregate
installed capacity of 234 MW in Barak valley are under various stages
of construction.

Brahmaputra

Scheme State Ic (MW)
1. Kopili Assam 25

2. Karbi Langpi Assam 100

3. Subansiri Lower Arunachal Pradesh 2000

Total 2125

ral


Barak

Scheme State Ic (MW)

1. Turial Mizoram 60

2. Loktak d/s Manipur 90

3. Myntdu Meghalaya 84
Total 234

Further, one scheme Kamang (600 MW), Arunachal Pradesh in
Brahmaputra and 3 schemes in Barak valley namely Tipaimukh (1500
MW) in Manipur, Tuivai (210 MW) in Mizoram & Bairabi (60 MW) in
Mizoram have been accorded. TEC and are awaiting investment
sanction. Bottleneck in development of hydro power in north eastern
region includes law and order problem particularly in Manipur and
difficult accessibility of the project sites.

To augment hydro power development in Brahmaputra & Barak
valleys under “50,000 MW hydroelectric initiative”, Preliminary
Feasibility Reports for 55 schemes with an aggregate installed capacity
of 29132 MW in Brahmaputra and 17 schemes with an aggregate
installed capacity of 2793 MW in Barak valleys have been prepared
and action for DPR preparation initiated.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 54, Para No. 8.24)

The Committee are perturbed to note that agencies/bodies like
Brahmaputra Board which is preparing DPR of 11 hydro projects with
a total installed capacity of 11,451 MW to be assigned to NHPC,
NEEPCO, etc. for execution has received only Rs. 99 crore during the
last five years which is reported to be just sufficient to cover the
salary part of the staff. What is more sad to know is that the agency
has not executed any hydel project since inception, although it is
required to do so, as per its mandate. The Committee also note that
NTPC a ‘navratna’ have also forayed into hydel sector and are
executing Kol Dam in the State of Himachal Pradesh. NTPC is also in
the process of undertaking hydel projects in the State of Uttaranchal.
The Committee welcome this move of NTPC in entering into hydel
sector. The Committee are of the view that for improving hydel share
in the country, more and more organisations need to be involved so
that the large hydel potential available in the country could be tapped

72


and projects executed in a shortest span of time. The Committee have,
however, noted that Brahmaputra Board which is involved in
preparation of Detailed Project Reports for hydro project and control/
deration of floods in Brahmaputra Valley and is capable of executing
hydel power projects is surviving entirely on Government of India’s
budgetary support. The Board is not receiving adequate funds. Taking
into consideration, the technical infrastructure and manpower available
with the Board, the Committee recommend that the Government should
make available sufficient funds to Brahmaputra Board so that it can
prepare DPRs and they should be allowed to execute hydel power
projects.

Reply of the Government

Govt. has taken many steps and measures to boost Hydro Power
Development. Hydro power corporations in the central sector and the
joint sector (central and state) viz., National Hydro-electric Power
Corporation (NHPC), North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation
(NEEPCO), Nathpa-Jhakri Power Corporation (NJPC) now SJVNL and
Tehri Hydro Development Corporation (THDC) have been created.
Besides, NTPC has also been authorised to take up hydro projects.
Narmada Hydro Development Corporation (NHDC), a joint venture
of NHPC and MP Govt. has been constituted to implement
Narmadasagar (1000 MW) and Omkareshwar (560 MW) HE projects

The 50,000 MW Hydro-electric Initiative was launched by Hon’ble
Prime Minister which covers preparation of PFRs for 162 hydro-electric
projects spreading in 16 States with aggregate capacity of over 50,000
MW. National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation, WAPCOS, North-
eastern Electric Power Corporation, Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, HPSEB,
UJVNL and KPCL were associated to complete these feasibility studies.
These feasibility studies were being coordinated, monitored and
appraised by the Central Electricity Authority. As a next step the
preparation of DPRs for 73 low tariff hydro electric schemes from
these PFRs have been taken up by the above agencies and also by
NTPC and THDC.

At present, the Brahmaputra Board is investigating and preparing
DPRs for 11 projects in the North-Eastern Region with installed capacity
of 11451 MW. The Brahmaputra Board is also considering a proposal
for revamping the Board so that they can borrow money from the
market and take up hydro projects in future.

An outlay of Rs. 414 crore has been made for Brahmaputra Board
for the X Plan of which Rs. 102 crore is for the continuing scheme for

73


survey and investigation and balance of Rs. 321 crore for execution of
projects.

All the mega projects being investigated by Brahmaputra Board
for hydel power development require huge investment for execution
of such projects. In the changing scenario, if Bharhmaputra Board is to
enter into construction activities of hydro electric projects with hydel
power as major component, the Bharhmaputra Board would be
seriously handicapped to execute such projects for want of funds. For
undertaking such activities the possible way out is to arrange the
funds by way of borrowing money from the market. The construction
of multipurpose projects with hydro-power as a major component
would also help in realizing the identified hydropower potential in
the region and earn revenue for repayment of borrowed loan. For
borrowing money, necessary amendements in the related provisions of
the Brahmaputra Board Act will have to be made. Brahmaputra Board
has already initiated action to revamp the Board by way of redrafting
the Brahmaputra Board Act. The revamping proposal after approval
by the Brahmaputra Board and Ministry of Water Resources will be
submitted for consideration and approval of the Parliament.

[Ministry of Power E.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 47 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 55, Para No. 8.25)

The Committee find that Water and Power Consultancy Limited
(WAPCOS) agency of the Ministry of Water Resources have undertaken
feasibility study, prepared DPR and are also executing a number of
hydel projects in Bhutan. This agency has also been nominated as
consultant for preparation of feasibility report/DPR under the 50,000
MW hydel Power initiative. However, the execution of hydel project
has not been assigned to WAPCOS in the country although they are
undertaking such work in Bhutan. The Committee desire that WAPCOS
should be involved in execution of hydel projects. Adequate funds
should also be made available to them for the purpose.

Reply of the Government

For exploiting the large potential in a short period, the upgradation
of the capabilities of the existing organisations will be necessary.

74


_ WAPCOS has already established a sound base in the design and
construction consultancy.

WAPCOS is in the process of taking up the execution of a small
project in Afghanistan and could eventually develop the necessary
skill base for becoming an executing agency. However, the financial
base of the agency needs to be expanded for enabling the agency to
handle the massive investments required for the hydro development.
The progress in this direction will be made as the agency is already
involved with the development of Pre Feasibility proposals and will
also be involved with the preparation of a few Detailed Project Reports
for some of the more promising schemes studied by them. The role
for execution can be considered for some of the projects for which the
development plans have been prepared by the agency.

The 50,000 MW Hydro-electric Initiative was launched by Hon’ble
Prime Minister which covers preparation of PFRs for 162 hydro-electric
projects spread over 16 States with aggregate capacity of over 50,000
MW. WAPCOS were given 71 schemes for preparations PFR which
has since been completed.

Recently, WAPCOS has been assigned the work of preparation of
DPR of Bichlari (35 MW) H.E. Project in J&K subject to the consent of
the State Government.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 56, Para No. 8.26)

The Committee find that inaccurate and unscientific Survey &
Investigations have made many of the Detailed Project Reports
unreliable. In this context, the Committee desire that accurate, latest
and scientific Survey & Investigation tools/equipments/instruments
should be used. Improvement in terms of accuracy, quality, automation
and production capability has been achieved by deploying the state of
art survey instruments like ‘Total Stations, electro planimetres, digitized
cameras, computers, scanners, plan printers etc. Such gadgets and
equipments should be used while conducting Survey & Investigation.

Reply of the Government

Generally, hydro schemes are located in remote/inaccessible areas
wherein carriage of heavy equipments for S&I poses a great problem.
The investigation activities are therefore required to be carried out
based on the latest state of art technology using latest/modern
instruments.

75


All State utilities /CPSUs/Organisations are being advised to use
modern gadgets and equipments while conducting Survey &
Investigation. While clearing estimates of S&I of CPSUs under 3-stage
of clearance procedure, efforts are being made to see that the estimates
include/use of all modern gadgets and equipments, the state of art
technologies such as satellite imageries for the studies of the project
area.

Highlights of initiative taken in India by various executing Agencies
in this field are given below:

Surface Geological Exploration

Large scale geological mapping with intensive field traverses by
experienced engineering geologists is carried out wherein detailed
delineation of bed rock and overburden characteristics are made and
picked up systematically on contour plans or survey sheets. The kind
of survey is carried out in detail for all the important components of
the projects like Dam, tunnels, channels, powerhouse complex, tailrace
system, reservoir etc.

The rock mass is being classified as per the International Standards
which becomes basic quantitative parameters for further designing of
hydro power project components.

The Remote Sensing technique involving aerial photographs and
satellite imagery are extensively used to understand and assess the
overall geological set up of the project area in a faster manner which
are otherwise located in far flung areas. Use of this technique is done
by the internal experts or the work is got done with the assistance of
expert organizations like National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA),
Hyderabad or any other Regional or State Remote Sensing Departments,
nearby the respective projects.

Sub-surface Geological Exploration
Geophysical Survey

The geophysical survey is a great aid for sub-surface geological
investigation. The following technology /equipments have been acquired
in India:

48-channel (Terraloc Mk-6) seismographalong with high resolution
seismic tomography, sparker source, high frequency hydrophones and
3D borehole geophones (ABEM, Sweden) for Seismic refraction/reflection
for land and water covered areas.
76


SAS-4000 Terrameter with imaging system with latest software
RES2DINV and RES3DIN (ABEM Sweden) for Resistivity sounding and
2D/3D resistivity imaging for subsurface exploration.

Drilling and Drifting

This is another important technique of sub-surface geological
investigation. On an average more than 1000 to 3000 m of drilling and
300 to 500m drifting are being done depending upon the magnitude
of the project in a comprehensive 1'/, to 2'/, years period. The latest
survey equipments like Distomat, Total stations, GPS and state-of-the
art drilling equipments are in use.

Seismological Studies

This is an important aspect of any hydroelectric project for its safe
design. During the course of investigation, every project is studied
geologically and geo-tectonically from this point of view in a systematic
manner. Relevant data is collected from India Meteorological
Department (IMD), Geological Survey of India (GSI), and systematic
studies are carried out for evolving site specific seismic design
parameters with the assistance of expert organizations like Department
of Earthquake Engineering, IIT, Roorkee; CWPRS, Pune etc. and the
seismic co-efficient/parameters are further submitted to National
Committee on Seismic Design Parameters (NCSDP) and their approval
is obtained before implementation of the Project.

Rock Mechanic Testing

The other important part of geotechnical investigation wherein
physical and mechanical properties of rock and soil samples in the
laboratory as well as at site (in-situ) are got tested. This requires an
expert group. Services of reputed Govt. organizations like CSMRS,
New Delhi, CMRI, Dhanbad, and NIRM, Karnataka, availed regularly
and such tests are done at each and every project. Results of these

tests are used for reliable design of foundation, slopes stability and
underground openings.

[Ministry of Power F. No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 57, Para No. 8.27)

The Committee also observe that the North-Eastern Region has
one of the lowest pre-capita income. In view of this, the Committee
desire that special attention is néeded to exploit hydel power potential
in the region to make the region self-dependent. The development of

77


hydro power could not be achieved in the region because the demand
is low. The demand is low because the Government failed to set up
industries in the North-East region and constraints of evacuating power
from the region to other power deficit regions pending setting up of
proper transmission facilities. This all have resulted in low demand of
the power generated/to be generated in the region. This vicious circle
thus goes on unabated. It can be broken only with the intervention of
the Central Government. As such, the Committee feel there is a need
to have a relook and examine the policy in a broader perspective
rather than pure economics. The development of hydel power in the
North-East Region is likely to have the multiplier effects not only in
this region but in the whole country. Moreover, the Hon’ble Prime
Minister has already given a direction to all the Ministries/Departments
that 10% of their budget should be spent in the North-East Region.
The Committee feel that this amount can be spent by various Ministries
on the various projects relating to hydel power development in the
region and they can take care of subjects like security, diversion or
roads, construction of bridges and protection of environment, etc. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Power should review
the policy of 12% free power to home State. In this connection, the
Committee desire that the element of 12% free power be backloaded
till the repayment of loan is completed. As such State be pursued to
defer 12% free power for some initial period which can later on be
brought to 12%. level gradually. This will make a number of. projects
viable. The Committee feel that Union Government have to treat the
investments made in the North East Region as an investment for the
future which will yield handsome returns later on.

Reply of the Government

The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to
Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry of Heavy Industry. The
Ministry of Power is allocating more than 25% of the budget on
development of H.E. Projects in N.E. States against the directives of
10%.

The Ministry of Power has also mooted a proposal to stagger the

12% free power keeping it low in the initial years and raising it
gradually to 12% in order to keep the initial tariff viable (backending
of tariff) during the loan repayment period. The matter is taken up

+ with the State Government on case to case basis. The Government of
J&K has agreed to forego its share of 12% free power from Baglihar

78


HLE. Project and Govt. of M_P. has also agreed to forego its free power
share in case of Omkareshwar HLE. Project.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 62, Para No. 10.7)

The Committee observe that Renovation and Modernization (R&M)
has been recognized world over as a well proven cost effective
technique for improving the performance/efficiency of older power
plants. The Committee feel that the useful life of the plants is increased
by R&M and the plants yield benefits in the shortest possible time at
a reasonable cost. Taking note of the recommendations of the National
Committee & subsequent reviews, the Committee find that 55 hydro
schemes with an aggregate capacity of 9653 MW were identified under
Phase-I for implementation. The cost of Renovation, Modernisation and
Uprating (RM&U) work on these 55 hydro schemes was estimated at
Rs. 1493 Crore with an expected benefit of 2531 MW ie. more than
25% of aggregate installed capacity. The Ministry of Power have further
informed that a Standing Committee comprising members from CEA,
PEC, SEBs/PSUs to identify new hydro R&M schemes to be taken up
for execution under Phase-II has been set up. The Standing Committee
had recommended 67 hydro schemes with an aggregate capacity of
10318 MW and implementation of RM&U work under Phase-II with
an estimated cost of Rs. 2161.00 Crore to accrue a benefit of 3685 MW.
The Committee expect that the necessary budgetary support to these
R&M Schemes will not be a hindrance for implementation of these
schemes. The Committee would like to know the planned allocation
of budget for Phase-II, R&M Programme.

Reply of the Government

Renovation and modernization of old power plants in the present
scenario of severe resource constraint is considered to be the best option
for bridging the gap between the demand and supply of power as
R&M schemes are cost effective and quicker than the setting up green
field power plants.

Recognizing the benefits of R&M programme, Govt. of India set
up a National Committee in 1987 to formulate strategy on renovation
and modernization of hydro power plants. Based on the
recommendations of the National Committee and subsequent reviews,

79


55 hydro schemes were identified under Phase-I for implementation of
renovation, modernization and up-rating work.

Government of India in its policy on hydropower development
declared in 1998 has laid stress on need for renovation and
modernization of hydro power plants. Accordingly, Government of
India set up a Standing Committee to identify new hydro R&M
schemes to be undertaken for implementation under Phase-II. R&M
proposals were received from various SEBs/Utilties for consideration
of the Standing Committee. These proposals were discussed with the
SEBs/Utilities for finalizing hydro renovation, modernization and
uprating programme to be undertaken in the next 10 to 12 years by
the end of XIth Plan (2011-12).

The National Perspective Plan document for hydro power stations
has been prepared by CEA during the year 2000, considering the
remaining schemes recommended under Phase-I by the National
Committee works on which were either ongoing or yet to be
undertaken in the near future and new hydro R&M schemes proposed
for implementation under Phase-II. The National Perspective Plan
describes the total potential available for additional generation through
R&M/Life extension and uprating of old units and the investment
requirements during Xth Plan and XIth Plan.

The status of the hydro R&M schemes identified by CEA under
the National Perspective Plan (Phase I & Phase II) and not completed
till the end of 2001-02 was further discussed with the concerned SEBs/
PSUs/PFC while finalizing the Xth & XIth Plan programme. As per
the Xth Plan programme, a total of 74 hydro R&M schemes (11 nos.
under Central Sector and 63 nos. under State Sector) have been
identified for implementation/completion. For the XIth Plan, a total of
31 hydro R&M schemes (2 nos. under Central Sector and 29 nos.
under State Sector) have been identified for implementation/completion.
The progress of R&M activities during the first two years of the Xth
Plan being slow, CEA reviewed the Xth/XIth Plan programme in April/
May, 2004 by convening meetings of the representatives of concerned
SEBs/PSUs/PFC/REC. After taking into consideration the views of
the utilities for the delays in completion of the schemes under
implementation as well as submission of some new R&M proposals
by them, the Reviewed Xth/XIth Plan has been formulated.

As per the Reviewed Xth/XIth Plan Programme, a total of 62
schemes (11 in Central Sector and 51 in State Sector) are programmed
80


for completion during the Xth Plan. 50 Schemes (3 in Central Sector
and 47 in State Sector) are programmed for completion during the
XIth Plan.

Plan-wise summary for renovation, modernization, up-rating and
life extension of hydro power stations in the country (as on 31.08.2004)
is given as hereunder:—

SINo. Plan Period No. of Schemes Installed Cost Benefit
Capacity (Rs. in Crs.) (MW)
(uw)

Central State Total न--
Sector Sector Actual Estimated

1. UptoVIllth Plan 2 au 13 1282.00 127.37 429.00
(Completed)

2. एक Plan 8 12 20 4832.10 567.5712 1338.03
(Completed)

3. Xth Plan
(i) Programmed ab 51 62 9977.50 2299,487 1516.31
(ii) Completed as 2 12 14 1338.80 541.515 393.20
on 31.8.2004
(iii) Balance 9 39 48 8638.70 1757.972 1123.11

4. XIth Plan 3 47 50 8534.30 2888.63 5315.65
(Programmed)

No direct budgetary support has been provided by the Govt. of
India for implementation of the Phase-II R&M hydro schemes. There
was no budgetary support for R&M hydro schemes under Phase-I as
well. The funds for implementation of R&M schemes are generally
arranged from PFC & REC and Govt. of India is Providing interest
subsidy under the Accelerated Generation & Supply Programme
(AG&SP). An action plan for assessing the requirement of funds under
AG&SP for hydro R&M schemes during the Xth Plan has already
been finalised by CEA in consultation with the SEBs/Utilities/PFC.

During the Year 2000-01, under the Govt. of India’s Accelerated
Power Development Programme (APDP) for hydro R&M schemes, an
amount of Rs. 58.99 Cr. as Grant and Rs. 58.95 Cr. as soft loan was
sanctioned for implementation of R&M hydro schemes. The Govt. of
India has since withdrawn the APDP for hydro R&M schemes.

[Ministry of Power कफ. No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
81


Recommendation (SI. No. 63, Para No. 10.8)

Consequent upon the recommendation of Standing Committee on
Energy contained in the 11 Report (127 Lok Sabha) on R&M of Power
Plants, the Committee are happy to note that “Perspective Plan for
Hydro R&M Schemes has been formulated by CEA in June, 2000 for
implementation of the proposals under Phase-II along with the left-
out schemes of National Committee (Phase-I) under implementation/
yet to be implemented. The schemes identified by CEA under the
National Perspective Plan (Phase-I+ Il) & not yet completed were
further reviewed in CEA in consultation with SEBs, PFC, PSUs during
April, 2002 and at the time of framing the 100 & 11% Plan Programmes.
As per the programme, the Committee observe a total of 34 schemes
(2 numbers under Central Sector & 32 nos. under State Sector) with
a total installed capacity of 4631 MW with an estimated cost of
Rs. 2012.65 Crores to accrue a benefit of 3935.50 MW have been
identified for implementation during 7 Plan. 72 schemes (10 in Central
Sector and 62 in State Sector) with a total installed capacity of 8088.05
MW with an estimated cost of Rs. 2801.547 Crores to accrue a benefit
of 2886.82 MW have been identified for 10th Plan. The Committee
have been apprised of by the different hydel project authorities that
due to pilling of sediments/silt in the reservoir/dam of various hydro
projects, the generation of power as well as turbines have been affected
badly. The Committee, therefore, desire that steps such as modifications
in the layout of dams to handle sediments/silt in the reservoir i.e. low
level spillways combining the function of flood release and silt
management, use of new materials (high strength concrete, shotcrete,
rockbolts etc.) for construction of surface and underground works,
increased flexibility in adaptation of designs of the project with respect
to available geological condition e.g. concrete faced rockfill dam with
cut-off wall as in Dhauliganga project because of deep overburden in
riverbed and non-availability of core material in the vicinity of the
projects, replacement of conventional excitation system by static
excitation system, replacement of all conventional machine governors
by electrical governors and re-engineering the designs of the turbines,
etc. as suggested by the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
(NHPC) for deployment and up-gradation of technology of Hydro
Plants in the country are needed to be stepped up. The Committee
desire that Ministry/PSUs should draw-up an action plan to implement
suggestions referred to above in a time bound manner and the
Committee be apprised of the action taken thereon.

82


Reply of the Government

The progress made in respect of R&M hydro schemes during the
first year 2002-03 of the Xth Plan programme was vigorously monitored
and due to slow progress in some schemes, the programme framed
earlier in April, 2002 was reviewed in CEA during the meetings held
with the SEBs/PSUs in May, 2003. Based on these discussions, 74
schemes (11 in Central Sector & 63 in State Sector) with a total installed.
capacity of 8082.45 MW with an estimated cost of Rs. 2712.237 Crores
to accrue a benefit of 2446.87 MW were finalised for implementation/
completion in the Xth Plan. CEA again reviewed the progress of R&M
activities of hydro schemes in April/May, 2004 on completion of the
first two years of the Xth Plan. The views of the concerned SEBs/
PSUs for the delays in completion of the schemes under implementation
as well as submission of some new R&M proposals submitted by the
SEBs/PSUs were considered and the Reviewed Xth/XIth Plans
programme was formulated. A total of 62 schemes (11 in Central Sector
& 51 in State Sector) with a total installed capacity of 9977.50 MW
with an estimated cost of Rs. 2299.487 Crores to accrue a benefit of
1516.37 MW were finalised for completion during Xth Plan. 50 schemes
(3 in Central Sector & 47 in State Sector) with a total installed capacity
of 8534.30 MW with an estimated cost of Rs. 2888.63 Crores to accrue
a benefit of 5315.65 MW have also been identified for implementation/
completion during the XIth Plan.

Some of the suggestions given by the Committee such as use of
high strength concrete for construction of surface & underground works,
high efficiency runners etc. have been already covered in the National
Perspective Plan for R&D in Indian Power Sector. Besides these, other
areas where R&D/technology up-gradation in Hydro Power generation
sector is required which are identified in the Perspective Plan are
given below:

R&D / Technology Improvement relating to Electro-Mechanical Plants
& Equipments.

(i) Hard coatings for turbine runners and other underwater
parts.

(ii) New materials & alloys for turbines.
(iii) High efficiency turbine runners.

(iv) Adjustable speed generating units for pumped storage and
conventional hydroelectric plants.

83


v) Split runners.
vi) Self-lubricated thrust bearings for hydro turbines.
vii) On-line monitoring devices for hydro generating plants.

R&D / Technology Improvement relating to Civil Works :

i) Lining material for water conveying tunnels.
ii) Large size underground caverns
iii) Investigation in civil structures of hydro power projects.

iv) Polymer trash racks for extreme cold situations and trash
raking machines at inlet of water intakes.

v) Arch dams.
vi) Roller compacted concrete dams.
vii) Instrumentation in hydro power projects.

viii) Numerical 3-D modeling & structural non-linear analysis of
fill and concrete dams under seismic conditions.

Action Plan for R&D Schemes

Out of the various schemes listed above, three schemes relating to
R&D have been prioritized and are proposed to be implemented by
allocating sufficient monitory resources by GOI to organizations in
Public Sector & Autonomous bodies like BHEL, CSMRS, NHPC &
TIFAC. The Schemes are :—

i) Development of hard coatings for turbine runners & other
underwater parts.

ii) Development of new materials & alloys for turbine & other
underwater parts.

iii) Use of high dose of fly ash in RCC Dams.
The time period for these schemes is 3 to 4 years.
[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51. No. 64, Para No. 10.9)

The Committee also take a strong note of the fact that R&M of
hydel plants such as Maithon which were proposed to be completed

84


in Phase-I, yet not completed and slipped to the Phase-Il. Further,
there are certain hydel projects, which have stated to be slipped to
11" Plan from the 10% Plan as originally targeted. The Committee
failed to understand how these projects have been reported to be
slipped to 11" Plan although there are yet three years left in the 10
Plan. The Committee are perturbed to note that there are certain hydel
schemes of the Phase-I of R&M such as Poringalkuthu in Kerala,
Umium StI and Kyredemkulai in Meghalaya in which even DPRs are
yet to be prepared or submitted. Further, for Subernrekha (2x65 MW)
project in Jharkhand and Hirakud-I (2x37.5 MW) in Orissa under Phase-
1 R&M have reported to be slipped from 10" Plan and for Subernrekha
project even information is also not forthcoming. The Committee cannot
but deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Government/SEBs/Power
Utilities to carry out the R&M work of hydro Projects in a time bound
manner and urge the Government to take all necessary steps so that
the R&M of all pending projects are completed as per the revised
targets. The Committee also recommend that funds should not be the
constraints to carryout R&M activities. At the same time, the Committee
would like to know the details of allocation of funds to the tune of
Rs. 2801.54 Crore required during the 10% Plan to accrue benefits of
2886.82 MW by carrying out Renovation, Modernisation & Uprating
works. The Committee desire that the Government should draw up
an advance action plan for R&M during 11" Plan.

Reply of the Government

The Maithon (3x20 MW) scheme of DVC was initially posed for
Renovation, Modernization, Up-rating & Life Extension (RMU&LE) for
all the 3 units during the Phase-I programme. DVC, thereafter, decided
to take up the RMU&LE works of one unit (i.e. unit 2) first alongwith
refurbishment of cranes and intake service gates, tailrace gates etc.
and to watch the performance of Unit-2 for about 7 months before
commencement of the R&M works of Units 1&3. The ongoing
RMU&LE works of Unit-2 were programmed for completion by the
end of Jan, 2004. The RMU&LE works were completed in May, 2004
and this unit was re-synchronized on 30/31-05-2004. But on 1.6.2004,
the unit had to be emergency tripped while approaching towards full
load due to damage of thrust cum guide bearing. The damaged bearing
has been replaced by the re-furbished spare one and the unit is teported
to be re-synchronized by 30.09.2004, For carrying out the RMU&LE
works of Units 1&3, the DVC authorities have now proposed to carry
out the RLA studies for which NHPC has been engaged as the
consultant. The RMU&LE works of U-1&3 are yet to commence and
are tentatively scheduled for completion during the year 2007-08.

85


Certain hydro R&M schemes were originally targetted for
completion during the Xth Plan but their completion schedules were
changed to XIth Plan based on the detailed discussions held with the
concerned SEBs/Utilities at the time of finalizing the Xth Plan
programme in April, 2002 and subsequent discussions during May,
2003 and April-May, 2004 duly taking into consideration the changes
in the scope of works of such schemes and the work priorities indicated
by the SEBs/Utilities.

ADB financing is proposed for the R&M of Poringalkuthu (4x8
MW) scheme and the study report of M/s. Cresil Nexant, the consultant
for ADB, is under consideration of the KSEB before finalizing the
DPR. This scheme is programmed for completion during the XIth Plan.

Umium St. (2x9 MW) is a new scheme under Phase-II programme
and not under Phase-I. Special Assistance for Project Formulation
(SAPROEF) study has been conducted by TEPCO& Co. Ltd. Japan under
the JBIC grant to ascertain the scope of work. Loan agreement has
been signed on 31.03.2004 between JBIC, MeSEB and GOI. Tenders for
engagement of consultant are under evaluation. The scheme is
programmed for completion by 2008-09 of the XIth Plan. The RM&U
works of the Kyrdemkulai (2x30 MW) scheme are proposed to be
taken up for implementation by MeSEB after completion of Umium
St.Il works. The scheme is targetted for completion during the XIth
Plan.

The Subernarekha (2x65MW) scheme of Jharkhand was posed for
certain R&M works under the Phase-I programme and then the Life
Extension works were proposed under Phase-II programme. Inspite of
repeated efforts, no information is forth coming from the Project. Hence
it appears that the state authorities are not interested in implementing
the scheme.

Regarding the Hirakud-I, U-5&6 (2x37.5 MW) scheme of Orissa
under Phase-I, the OHPC authorities are proposing to implement the
life extension of units and complete the same by the year 2007-08 of
the XIth Plan. RLA studies have been completed and the report is
expected by end of 9/2004. Offers for engagement of consultant have
been invited by OHPC.

No direct budgetary support has been provided by the Govt. of
India for implementation of the R&M hydro schemes. The funds for
implementation of R&M schemes are generally arranged from PFC &
REC and Govt. of India is providing interest subsidy under the
Accelerated Generation & Supply Programme (AG&SP). An action plan
86


for assessing the requirement of funds under AG&SP for hydro R&M
schemes during the Xth Plan has already been finalised by CEA in
consultation with the SEBs/Utilities/PFC.

Advance action in regard to implementation/completion of hydro
R&M schemes during the XIth Plan has already been initiated in CEA.
A total of 50 existing hydro schemes (3 in Central Sector and 47 in
State Sector) with an installed capacity of 8534.30 MW to accrue a
benefit of 5315.65 MW at an estimated cost of Rs. 2888.63 Crores
(approx.) have been tentatively identified for RMU&LE under this plan.

[Ministry of Power RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 66, Para No. 11.12)

The Committee further observe that the incidence of inter-state
disputes are more to be seen in the Southern Region where projects
with 3900 MW capacity have been held up. Projects of 1760 MW
capacity which have been held-up are in Cauvery basin itself. Although,
the Committee welcome the initiative of the Government to enter into
MoU with State Government of Karnataka to execute four projects
through NHPC subject to mutual satisfactory agreement on sharing of
power projects between the party States 1.९ Tamil Nadu and Karnataka,
the Committee are constrained to note that consents of one of the
State Government could not be obtained resulting in lack of any activity
on the projects so far, The Committee find similar response from
Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu for execution of Pardiyar
Punna-Puzha (200 MW) Cholatepuzha (60MW) and Nirar Nallar
(250MW) Projects. The Committee feel that Central government should
intervene more actively and only then it is possible that some inter-
State projects can be taken up by NHPC. This would generate
confidence in the states concerned of protecting and safeguarding of
their interests and benefits. The Committee would await any further
action taken by the Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government

Govt. of India recognises the need for evolving an approach to
ensure that the available hydro electric potential is fully utilised without
prejudice to the rights of the riparian States as determined by the
Awards of the Tribunals/ Agreements arrived at among the party States
for a given river basin with regard to water sharing. The selection and
the design of the project would be based on integrated basin wise
studies, so as to arrive at an optimal decision and care will be taken
that such projects do not in any way prejudice the claims of the basin
States or affect the benefits from the existing projects.

87


Ministry of Power is taking steps along with Planning Commission
to evolve an approach for taking up projects affected by the inter-
State aspects. At the first instance, simple run of the river projects
would be taken up in the Cauvery basin and also Kishau Dam projects.

To harness the hydropower potential of Cauvery River in the stretch
between existing Shimha Power House of Karnataka and Mettur
reservoir of Tamil Nadu and with the consent of Government of Tamil
Nadu and Karnataka, NHPC has been requested to initiate action for
preparation of DPRs for four projects viz. Shivasamudram & Mekadatu
projects of Karnataka and Rasimanal & Hogenekkal Projects of
Tamil Nadu on the Cauvery river between Krishna Raj Sagar (KRS)
dam and Mettur Dam. NHPC have indicated the total installed capacity
of these projects as 1150 MW.

A Core Group has been set up by the Ministry of Power under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) to develop, construct, operate
and maintain hydroelectric projects by National Hydroelectric Power
Corporation Limited (NHPC) in the Cauvery Basin. The Group includes
representatives from Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of
Environment & Forests, NHPC and the concerned Departments of the
State Governments of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

The NHPC is preparing a plan for optimal utilization of the
untapped hydroelectric power potential estimated at 1150 MW of the
Cauvery River. NHPC would be prepared to execute the four projects,
which would generate cheap power, subject to the Government of
Karnataka and the Government of Tamil Nadu coming to a mutually
satisfactory agreement on sharing of power from these projects.

A meeting of the Core Group for development of hydro electric
project in the Cauvery basin is proposed to be held under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) on 27.10.2004.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 68, Para No. 11.28)

On hydro power generation in the context of Indus Water Treaty,
the Committee observe that under the provisions of the Treaty, India
is at full liberty to exploit the water resources of the Eastern Rivers
(Satluj, Beas and Ravi) inchiding the hydroelectric generation. The treaty
entitles to put as many as hydel power projects — either storage or
run-of-the-river projects — as possible. As per the available information,
against 11,219 MW hydroelectric potential at 60% load factor on the

88


Eastern Rivers, projects having 4500 MW installed capacity have already
been completed and projects having 3500 MW installed capacity are in
different stages of construction. The Committee are, however, unhappy
to note that against expected 8769 MW of power at 60% load factor
from Western Rivers (Indus, Jhelum and Chenab) projects with installed
capacity of only about 1425 MW (like Salal, Lower Jhelum, Uri) have
been completed and projects having installed capacity of about
1290 MW (like Dulhasti, Baglihar, Kishenganga) are in different stages
of construction or proposed. The committees are further perturbed to
note that although data of 27 hydroelectric projects on the Western
Rivers have been communicated to Pakistan under the provisions of
the Treaty, India has so far not constructed any storage work on the
Western rivers, although, the treaty permits storage of 1.50 Million
Acre Fee (MAF). It is only now Kishenganga HE Project on
Kishenganga river, a tributary of river Jhelum with a storage of 0.14
MAF is proposed to be taken up. As regards to difficulties in
implementation of hydel projects in Jammu & Kashmir on account of
Indus Water Treaty, the Committee observed that although the Treaty
provides for either country to seek data of projects proposed to be
undertaken by the other, which in its opinion may adversely affect its
interest and India as the upstream nation has been under an obligation
under the Treaty to provide data of projects proposed to be undertaken
on Western Rivers, the Committee are dismayed to note that Pakistani
authorities non-cgoperative approach ignoring sound engineering
economics and practices have stalled the development of infrastructure
projects in the State. In view of the fact, that no formal clearance is
required from Pakistan for such projects, yet India’s obligations under
the Treaty make them a subject of endless debate putting hurdles to
implementation. The Committee are of the view, that the Government
should take immediate necessary steps by invoking the relevant
provisions of the Treaty, so that ongoing Baglihar HE Project (450
MW) and Kishenganga HE Project (330 MW) are not further delayed.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take all
necessary steps with the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir to
commission the Baglihar and Kishenganga Projects which were given
cabinet approval, way back in May, 1994, In this context, the Committee
recommend that these projects should be treated as Fast Track Projects
of National importance and extended benefits/concessions available
for a hydel mega project. These projects should now be executed
without any further loss of time.

Reply of the Government

The Indus River System including its five tributaries, viz. the Sutlej,
the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum constitute a common

89


river system between India and Pakistan. Development of water
resources of this river system for multi-purpose is governed by the
Indus Waters Treaty, 1960. As per the Treaty, India has exclusive right
to utilise entire waters of the Eastern Rivers, viz. Sutlej, Beas and Ravi.
The water resources projects in India on the Western Rivers (i.e. Chenab,
Jhelum and Indus) have to conform to the provisions of the Treaty in
regard to the Project parameters, consumptive and non-consumptive
water areas. The Treaty also places restrictions on the storages that
could be created on these rivers.

The Treaty provided for creation of institutional arrangement in
the form of Indus Water Commission to serve as a regular channel of
communication on all the matters relating to the Treaty. On the Indian
side the Commissioner (Indus Waters) in the MoWR is the nodal officer
for matters related to the Treaty.

Active efforts are being made for accelerating the development
efforts of Baglihar and Kishenganga projects. Interpretation of Indus
‘Treaty in an appropriate manner is being attempted by continuously
engaging the counterpart Pakistani agencies in a meaningful dialogue.
A senior level delegation recently visited Pakistan and explained the
stand of India in the context of the above projects. All help is being
provided to the project implementing agencies to facilitate the speedy
resolution of issues and execution of the projects.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 69, Para No. 11.29)

The Committee has been apprised of precarious power situation
in the State of J&K, especially winters. As against, the demand of 1615
MW, the availability of power is to the tune of 1010 MW in summer.
It drops down to 740 MW during Winters due to low discharge and
freezing of the rivers. State experience shortage of around 800 MW
during winters and the available hydel capacity go down by 66 %. To
meet the peaking demand during extreme winters gas turbines are
switched on entailing huge expenditure. During the tour of the Standing
Committee on Energy to J & K ( Srinagar) in June, 2003, the State
Government expressed their reservation over Indus Water Treaty, on
the grounds that it puts unreasonable restriction on storage capacity
of the rivers system of Jhelum, Chenab and Indus as only Run-of-the-
rivers-type schemes are permitted. The State Government was of the

90


opinion that had there been no such restriction, as envisaged in the
Treaty, energy loss to the tune of 15% and 44% in case of Uri and
Salal Hydel Projects respectively could have been avoided. Further,
because of this treaty, the Tulbal Navigation Lock which is under
suspension would have stabilized lower Jhelum Hydro Project & Uri-
I, especially during winters. The State also opined that had storage
been allowed, the stored flood discharge could have been utilized
during winters to meet the peaking demand. The Committee have
taken note of the sentiments of the State Government of J & K and
desire that Union Government should consider the need to review the
provisions of Indus Water Treaty, especially in the context of under
exploitation and utitlization of water resources in the river system of
Indus, Chenab and Jhelum. Taking note of under storage of run-of-
the-river schemes and also under exploitation of water resources for
the generation of hydel power, both in Eastern and Western flowing
river system, the Committee recommend that more sites should be
surveyed and investigated in these river systems so that full hydel
potential is harnessed and new hydel stations set up. At the same
time, the Committee recommend that full storage capacity to the tune
of 2 MAE, be utilized either by commissioning new hydel stations or
re-rating/upgrading the capacity of the existing hydel units. The
Committee are of the views that these measures are pre-requisite for
exploiting the hydel potential in J & K and also meeting the power
demand of the State. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Government in the matter.

Reply of the Government

Presently, 3 HE schemes namely Dulhasti (390 MW), Sewa ना (120
MW) and Baglihar-I (450 MW) are under various stages of construction
whereas, 2 No. of schemes namely Kirthai-I (240 MW) and Kirthai-II
(360 MW) are under Survey & Investigation.

Exploitation of hydro potential in J&K has also been duly
incorporated in the 50,000 MW hydro initiative under which Pre
Feasibility Reports for 13 projects in J&K aggregating to an installed
capacity of 2675 MW have been prepared.

As regards re-rating/uprating (RM&U) of existing stations in J&K,
it is stated that 5 Nos. of schemes of J&K having installed capacity of
855.9 MW are programmed for implementation during 10th Plan. These
projects are likely to accrue benefit of 146.63 MW at an estimated

91


cost of Rs. 221.572 Crs. The details of these 5 schemes are given

below:
SINo. Scheme (Inst. Cap. Est. Cost Category Benefits. Status of Year of
in MW), Ex. Agency (७. cts.) in MW Works — Comple-
tion
Central Sector
1, Salal, (6x115) NHPC 87.28 R&M+ 69 (Rest- Yet to 2006-07
Restoration oration) + commence
of Cap.
State Sector
2. Lower Jhelum (3x35), 65.19 RM&U+ 9 (UR}+ Ongoing 2004-05
J&KPDC Restoration 25 (Res.)
of Cap.
3. Chennai (5x4.66) 23.86 RMU&LE —- 2.33 (UR) Yet to 2004-05
J&KPDC 23.3 (LE) commence
4. Ganderbal (2x3+2x4.5) 2887 RM&LE 15(LE) —Yet to 2004-05
J&KPDC Commence
5. Sumbal Sindh (2x11.3) 16.372 RM&U (UR) Yet to 2004-05
J&KPDC Commence
Total (IC 855.9) 221.572 146.63

Note

the

92

: R - Renovation, M - Modernisation, U- Uprating, LE- Life Extension

Above measures are likely to improve the power availability in

State.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]


CHAPTER वा

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.40)

The Committee are glad to note that the Ministry of Power set an
agenda of providing ‘Power for all by 2012’ and as per the present
target 50,000 MW of Hydel Power is targeted to be generated by 2012
against the total additional capacity addition targets of 1,00,000 MW.
The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that only 14,393 MW
of hydel power is estimated during the 10% Plan period although
about 13294 MW of this hydel power is likely to be generated from
the ongoing 35 hydro electric projects as 1050 MW of power has already
been commissioned. From the State-wise figures of status of Hydro
electric potential development, the Committee observe that although
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura have got about
80% and above of the available potential hydro power developed in
their States, states like Jammu & Kashmir, West Bengal, Sikkim,
Manipur, Nagaland have less than the 10% development of the assessed
potential. The Committee are distressed to note that although CEA
have cleared schemes of 242.63 MW in Kerala, only 2.28 MW of hydel
potential is under development in the State. Similarly, for Jharkhand,
West Bengal, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram, the CEA have
cleared hydro power schemes of 190.50 MW, 111.50 MW, 256.67 MW,
743.00 MW and 142.50 MW and the hydel potential under development
is reported to be 4.29 MW, 8.11 MW, 0.0 MW and 2.12 MW respectively.
The hydro power schemes under execution account for 5.75% of the
total assessed potential. The Committee, cannot but deplore the way
in which low hydel power generation targets have been fixed during
10" plan as against the total targets of 50,000 MW to be achieved by
the end of 129 Plan and would like to know the reasons for this slow
development in some of the States. At the same time, the Committee
would like to know the steps taken by the Government for speedy
implementation of hydel power projects in these States. The Committee
take a strong note of the fact that CEA has identified a total of 168
hydro schemes for benefits during 110 and 120 Plan with capacity
addition of about 20,000 MW and 26,5000 MW respectively, during
above Plan period and in addition to this 158 hydro schemes

93


aggregating to 45208 MW are presently under Survey & Investigation
based on the information furnished by the project authorities/SEBs/
(9595, the work on hydro power schemes, is moving at snail’s pace.
The Committee recommend that Central Government should take
proactive action to ensure that the planned schemes are executed as
per their targeted schedules.

Reply of the Government

The Working Group on Power for 10% Plan constituted by Planning
Commission in its report submitted in October 2001, has estimated a
feasibility capacity addition of 46,939 MW during 10" Plan. This was
further discussed in the National Conference on Capacity Addition
during 10" Plan and advance action for 110 Plan during July 8-9,2002.
The capacity addition during 10 Plan was finalized at 41110 MW
which included 18,659 MW from ongoing projects, 9,193 MW from
projects cleared by the CEA and 13,258 MW from new schemes. A
summary on the feasible capacity addition of 41,110 MW is given
below:

Status wise benefits during the Tenth Plan (MW)

Source Ongoing/ CEA-cleared New Total
sanctioned schemes schemes
schemes
Hydro 9/184 3,962 1,247 14,393
Thermal 8,175 5,231 12,011 25,417
Nuclear 1,300 - s 1,300
Total 18,659 9,193 13,258 41,110

Out of the total addition of 41,110 MW envisaged for the Tenth
Plan period, Hydro Capacity has been fixed as 14393 MW, the sector-
wise breakup is given as under:—

Sector-wise Capacity Addition during the 10% Plan (MW)

Source Central State Private Total

Hydro 8,742 4481 1,170 14,393

A major portion of this incremental capacity can materialize only
during the later years of the Tenth Plan.

94


For execution of the projects as per schedule, stronger monitoring
mechanism for construction/execution of the hydro Projects has been
put in place by Ministry of Power/Central Electricity Authority to
realize the target set for 107 Plan. Nodal officers for each project have
been identified both in the construction stage as well as during
execution. Nodal officers are regularly visiting the project sites so as
to identify problem areas and also give regular feed back about the
progress made and corrective steps to be taken to streamline the
execution of the projects.

REASONS FOR SLOW PACE OF DEVELOPMENT

Notwithstanding availability of vast potential and operational
advantages, the pace of hydro development in the country has been
slow. The hydro share in the total installed capacity at present accounts
for only 26.60%. The main reasons for the slow development of hydro
power are as under:—

(a) Capital intensive nature of projects and longer gestation period

Hydel projects are comparatively capital intensive. The thermal
Projects get priority in fund allotments with a view to get early
benefits, as the gestation period of thermal plants is comparatively
short.

(b) Rehabilitation problem

The progress of some of the projects has been severely affected on
account of opposition to the construction by environmentalists and
project affected people. Sardar Sarover, Indira Sagar, Bansagar Tons
and Tehri are some of the hydro projects where the progress has
been severely hampered from sustained opposition to project
construction. Rehabilitation is becoming a major issue in the
implementation of storage-based hydro development and many
times, it is one of the main reasons for the delay in the execution.

(c) Dearth of Good Contractors

A matter of concern in the execution of large hydro-electric projects
is the dearth of competent and resourceful contractors. This is one
of the main reasons for time and cost over-runs of hydro Projects.

(d) Inter-State Aspects

A large number of hydro projects having common river systems
between adjoining States are held up on account of inter-State
aspects. Some of these projects have received the techno-economic

95


clearance of CEA but the investment sanction could not be accorded
due to inter-States aspects. Many projects have not been accorded
CEA clearance on account of inter-State issues. This being a
contentious matter, the resolution of inter-State issues could be
achieved through mutual discussions or by constitution of tribunals
acceptable to all so that the attractive projects held up for long
could be taken up quickly in the overall interest of the country.

(e) Environment & Forest Aspects

Hydro-electric projects involve submergence causing displacement

of project area people and often require forest land for their
implementation. The impact on ecology, monuments, seismicity,
resettlement and rehabilitation, catchment area treatment, flora and
fauna are assessed in the environment appraisal of the project.
Forest clearance requires compensatory afforestation on the non
forest lands. These aspects need to be looked into carefully to
avoid undue problems during execution of the projects. The
progress of some of the projects has been affected on account of
opposition to the construction by environmentalists and project-
affected people.

(f) Law & Order Problems

Disturbed law & order is one of the factors causing delay in project
execution and ever suspension of work. Some of the hydro-electric
projects suffered due to these problems are Dulhasti, Upper Sindh,
Doyang, Dhansiri etc.

(g) Land Acquisition Problems

The problems arising in acquisition of land for hydro- electric
project construction are causing suspension and delay in the
construction activities. Some of the projects affected by this include
Thein Dam, Doyang, Ghatgar PSS etc.

(h) Geological Surprises

The features of the hydro-electric projects, being site specific,
depend on the geology, topography and hydrology at the site. The
construction time of a hydro project is greatly influenced by the
geology of the area and its accessibility. Even when extensive
investigation using new techniques of investigations are undertaken,
an element of uncertainty remains in the sub-surface geology and
the geological surprises during actual construction can not be ruled


out. It is, therefore, essential that state-of-the-art investigation and
construction techniques are adopted to minimise geological risks
as well as the overall gestation period of hydel projects.

(i) Difficult/In-accessible Potential Sites

The untapped resources lie mainly in the hilly States of North and
North-Eastern Regions which have low power demand and also
lack in financial resources, besides countering power evacuation
difficulties from North-East Region. Most of the left over sites are
difficult sites and need special attention and approach for their
development.

STEPS TAKEN FOR INCREASING THE HYDRO CAPACITY
(i) Creation of Power Corporation

Govt. has taken many steps and measures to boost Hydro Power
Development. Hydro power corporations in the central sector and
the joint sector (Central and State) viz, National Hydro-electric
Power Corporation (NHPC), North-Eastern Electric Power
Corporation (NEEPCO), Nathpa-Jhakri Power Corporation (NJPC)
now SJVNL and Tehri Hydro Development Corporation (THDC)
have been created. Besides, NIPC has also been authorised to
take up hydro projects. Narmada Hydro Development Corporation
(NHDC), a joint venture of NHPC and MP Govt. has been
constituted to implement Narmadasagar (1000 MW) and
Omkareshwar (560 MW) HE projects.

(ii) Policy Liberalisation

To bring in additional resources for the capacity addition in the
Power Sector, a policy to encourage greater participation by private
entrepreneurs in India and abroad in electric power generation
has been announced. Govt. has issued tariff notification for hydro
projects incorporating several incentives to private developers which
broadly cover incentives for better availability of machines, for
generation of extra energy above design energy, compensation for
hydrological risks, etc.

(iii) Policy on Hydro Power Development

A Hydro Policy has also been announced in Aug.’1998 on hydro
power development incorporating several steps and measures. The
Hydro Policy among others lays emphasis on basin-wise
development, evolving consensus on inter-State issues, mitigation

छा


98

of geological risks, simplified procedure for transfer of clearances,
promoting joint venture arrangements etc.

(iv) Three Stage Clearance Procedure

The Government has also approved a Three Stage Clearance
Procedure for hydel projects to be executed by CPSUs in
consultation with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Environment
and Forests. Under Stage-I, the CPSUs will incur expenditure on
survey, investigation and preparation of pre-feasibility report. Under
Stage-II, the CPSUs will undertake activities relating to detailed
investigation and preparation of Detailed Project Report. During
this Stage, pre-construction activities and infrastructure development
including land acquisition will also be undertaken. Under Stage-
Ill, the investment decision will be accorded after obtaining the
approval of PIB/CCEA.

(v) Ranking Study

With the objective of expediting hydro power development in a
systematic manner, the Central Electricity Authority undertook a
Ranking Study of the balance hydro potential sites for all the basins
in the country. The ranking of hydro sites had been carried out,
by 2001-02, based on weightage criteria for various aspects involved
in the development of hydro schemes. Considering these aspects,
the schemes have been graded in A, B and C categories in order
of their priority for development.

Based on the preliminary Ranking Study, about 400 schemes with
an aggregate installed capacity of about 107,000 MW have been
prioritized in all the six river systems of the country. Out of this,
98 schemes with probable installed capacity of 15,650 MW fall
under “A” category, 247 schemes with probable installed capacity
of 69,830 MW under “B” category and 54 schemes with probable
installed capacity of 21,420 MW under “C” category in order of
their priority for development.

(vi) 50,000 MW Hydro-Electric Initiative

To give necessary fillip for development of hydro sector, Central
Electricity Authority in the year 2001-2002 completed Ranking Study
to determine the inter-se priority of balance hydro electric schemes
for taking up their development in appropriate sequence. The
schemes considered attractive in the Ranking Study have now been
taken up for the purpose of preparation of Preliminary Feasibility
Reports (PFRs).


The 50,000 MW Hydro-electric Initiatives was launched by Hon'ble
Prime Minister in May 2003 which covers preparation of PFRs for
162 hydro-electric projects spread in 16 States with aggregate
capacity of over 50,000 MW. National Hydro-Electric Power
Corporation, WAPCOS, North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation,
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam and number of State Power Utilities were
associated to complete these feasibility studies. These feasibility
studies were coordinated, monitored and appraised by the Central
Electricity Authority. The preparation of Feasibility Reports of
162 H.E schemes with an aggregate installed capacity of
47970 MW has since been completed.

The initiative has evoked interest in the country as also in the
international community with regard to enormous potential
opportunities to the equipment suppliers, construction agencies,
financers and prospective independent power producers.

The PFRs will provide useful information to prospective developers
for taking up detailed Survey & Investigation and DPR formulation
and facilitate the accelerated development of balance Hydro Electric
Potential in the country. This is considered essential to generate a
shelf of projects which could be taken up for execution during
11% and 12" Plan and beyond. Implementation agencies viz. PSUs,
State Utilities and other organizations will be identified later to
develop these projects.

DPR Preparation

As a follow up of preparation of PFR, it is proposed to take up
preparation of DPRs for 73 attractive schemes with first year tariff less
than Rs. 2.50/kwh. The aggregate installed capacity of these schemes
is about 33000 MW.

Additional Steps taken for Promoting Hydel Projects in NE Region

Govt. has taken many steps and measures to boost Hydro Power
Development in NE region & Sikkim. Hydro Power Corporations in
the central sector viz, National Hydro-electric Power Corporation
(NHPC) and North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO) are
being actively involved in investigation and implementation of HE
projects in the regions. In Arunachal Pradesh which accounts for more
than 85% of the identified potential, NHPC have been entrusted with
the responsibility of developing HE Projects in Subansiri, Siang and
Dibang basins while Kameng basin has been entrusted to NEEPCO
which is likely to give greater thrust to the development of hydro

99


power in the region. Out of 162 H.E schemes for which PFRs has
been prepared 72 nos. of schemes with aggregate installed capacity of
31925 MW are in NE region and Sikkim as per details given below:

S.No Name of State No. of Installed
schemes Capacity
(Mw)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 42 27293
2. Manipur 3 362
3. Meghalaya i 931
4. Nagaland 3 370
5. Mizoram 3 1500
6. Sikkim 10 1469
Total 72 31925

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No. 2.44)

The Committee observe that re-assessment studies of hydro-electric
potential of the country, completed by Central Electricity Authority in
1987, have placed the hydro power potential at 84044 MW at 60%
load factor. The Committee have further been apprised by the Ministry
of Power that a total of 845 hydro-electric schemes have been identified
in the various basins which will yield 442 billion units of electricity.
With seasonal energy, the total energy potential is assessed to be 600
billion units per year. In addition, the reassessment studies have also
identified 56 sites for Pumped Storage Schemes (PSS) with total
installation of about 94,000 MW. The hydro potential of 84044 MW at
60% load factor when fully developed would result in the installed
capacity of about 150000 MW on the basis of probable average load
factor. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the present
Hydro potential developed at 60% load factor is only 14299.02 MW
against the total assessed potential of 84044 MW at 60% load factor
which accounts for only 17.01% of the total. As regard to basin-wise
hydel potential developed, the Committee are further perturbed to
note that although in case of western flowing rivers and east flowing
rivers, 59.94% and 42.73% of assessed hydro-electric potential has been
developed, it is 1.92%, 16.38% and 17.82% for Brahmaputra, Indus and
Ganga Basins, respectively. The development of these basins has still

100


not been geared up and only 0.84%, 7.73% and 12.90% of the
Brahmaputra Basin, Indus and Ganga basins respectively are reported
to be under development. The Committee fail to understand as to
why the Government have not planned the development of Hydro
schemes in these three basins and desire that a separate perspective
plan be drawn for development of Mega Hydro Power Schemes in
these three basins for implementation in the next two plan periods.
The Committee would like to emphasise that Central Government
should set up River Basin Authorities, for these three basins, on the
lines of Narmada Authority, for the development of hydro-potentials
in these River Basins. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

The total HE potential of the country has been assessed by CEA
at 84044 MW at 60% load factor corresponding installed capacity of
about 150,000 MW on the basis of probable average load factor. As on
01.09.2004, potential of 15157.73 MW at 60% load factor (18.04% of the
assessed potential) has been developed. Further, as on 01.09.2004, in
case of West flowing and East flowing rivers 60.24% and 43.02% of
the assessed hydro electric potential has been developed. While in
case of Brahmaputra, Indus and Ganga Basins, the potential developed
is 1.89%, 18.67% and 17.74% respectively. Presently 2.26%, 6.36% and
12.76% of the assessed potential in Brahmaputra, Indus and Ganga
basin respectively are under development. Development of hydro
electric potential in Indus and Brahmaputra basins has been slow due
to law and order, land acquisition problems and long transmission
lines. The detailed status of basin-wise H.E. potential development is
given as below:

Basin Pot. Pot. % — Pot. Under % %
Assessed Developed Develo- development under —_Balance

at at ped at Develop-

60% == 60% LE 60% LE ment

LE MW MW

MW
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
INDUS 1988.00 3730.85 1867 12222 6.36 497
GANGA 1071500 195 1774 (1366.72 12.76 69.50
CENTRAL 2740.00 1059.85 ३68. 1147.12 41.87 19.45
INDIAN
RIVERS

101


1 2 3 4 5 6 7

WEST FLOWING 6149.00 3704.17 60.24 4053 0.66 39.10
RIVERS

EAST FLOWING 9532.00 4100.78 43.02 211.07 22 477
RIVERS

BRAHMAPUTRA 34920.00 660.83, 189 79043 226 95.85

TOTAL $4044.00 15157.73 1804... 4828.08 5.74 76.22

MEASURES TAKEN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF H.E. POTENTIAL

The following measures have been taken for developing the hydro
electric potential:

Preliminary Ranking Studies:

With an objective of expediting hydro power development in a
systematic manner, Central Electricity Authority undertook a ranking
study of the balance hydro potential sites for all the basins in the
country. The Ranking of hydro sites has been carried out based on
weightage criteria for various aspects involved in the development of
hydro schemes. Considering these aspects, the schemes have been
graded in A, B and C categories in order of their priority for
development.

Based on the Preliminary Ranking Study, about 400 schemes with
an aggregate installed capacity of about 1,07,000 MW have been
prioritized in all the six river systems of the country. Out of this,
98 schemes with probable installed capacity of 15,640 MW fall under
“A” category, 247 schemes with probable installed capacity of
69,850 MW under “B” category and 54 schemes with probable installed
capacity of 21,420 MW under “C” category. The basin wise details of
ranking study are given below:

Sl River system Category A Category B Category C Total

“s Nos. MW Nos. MW Nos. MW 1७. MW
1 डर 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1. Indus TL 4088 518811 17 — 6080 79 18979
2. 2 Ganga 2 208 & HUGS (“OT 20 2023 54 9616 1 600 75 12239

102


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

3. Central India 3 283 9 145 1 186 13. 1894
4, East Flowing 11 1412 26... 6469 2 88 39. 7969
5. West Flowing 1 35 10 958 14. 1508 2 20
6. Brahmaputra 52 7800 97 42574 19 12954 168 63328

Total 98 15641 247... 69853 54 2146. 39 106910

Preliminary Feasibility Report:

The benefits of hydro power as the clean environment friendly
and economically attractive have now been sufficiently recognized. With
a view to promoting the hydro development on sustainable basis, the
50,000 MW Hydro initiative was launched by the Ministry of Power
in May 2003 for preparation of Feasibility Reports for the projects
which were identified by CEA in the hydro-electric survey and as
well as some schemes identified by State authorities.

With a view to take up the balance hydro electric project in a
systematic manner and to create shelf of hydro electric project which
could be offered for development to prospective entrepreneurs, the
work of preparation of PFRs of hydro electric projects was taken-up
by CEA. The PFRs would provide information on Hydro Electric
Schemes which are yet to be developed and enable their prioritization
for further action for implementation. The PFRs would also provide
useful information to prospective developers for taking up detailed
Survey & Investigation and DPR formulation. The results of Studies
would thus facilitate development of balance hydro electric potential
of the country in order of viability / attractiveness.

This is considered essential to generate a shelf of projects which
could be taken up during 11", 12" plans & beyond.

This initiative envisaged preparation of Preliminary Feasibility
Reports (PFRs) of 162 Hydro Electric Projects having aggregate installed
capacity ‘of 50,560 MW located in 16 States. This work has since been
completed. 134 schemes out of 162 schemes with aggregate installed
capacity of about 45,212 MW are located in Brahmaputra, Indus and
Ganga basin. The details are given below:

Name of the Basin No. of Schemes 10 (MW)
Brahmaputra 70 32107
Indus 25 6731
Ganga 39 6374
134 45212

103



Survey & Investigation and Preparation of DPR

As a follow up of preparation of PFRs, it is proposed to take up
implementation/preparation of DPRs for attractive schemes selected
from PFR schemes thereby providing a shelf of projects for execution
in the near future. Out of 162 schemes of PFRs, schemes have been
selected in the order of their relative attractiveness for taking up of
detailed S&I and preparation of DPR/implementation. At first instance,
based on their preliminary techno-economic analysis, 73 schemes whose
first year tariff works out below Rs. 2.50/kWh have been considered
as low tariff H.E. schemes. The aggregate capacity of these projects is
likely to be of the order of about 33,000 MW which could yield benefits
during 17 12" & 13% plan periods. Out of these 73 schemes,
70 schemes (32000 MW) are located in Brahmaputra, Indus and Ganga
basins.

The proposal envisages carrying out detailed survey & investigation
and preparation of bankable DPRs in association with other concerned
organisations such as CPSUs, State Govts./PSUs/SEBs etc. and have a
shelf of the duly investigated projects for offering to the prospective
developers. CEA in association with other Government agencies besides
providing technical support, would render overall coordination and
quality control services for preparation of DPRs.

Implementation of Hydro Projects by Corporations/State Utilities and
State Deptts.

For speedy implementation of hydro projects, many Central/Joint
sector corporations have been created for taking up projects in Indus,
Ganga and Brahmaputra basins. In the Satluj sub-basin (Indus basin),
SJVNL (Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited) has been formed. Similarly
in Ganga basin , THDC ( Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd.)
has been created. Besides, many projects in these basins have also
been taken up by NHPC ( National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation
Ltd). In North Eastern Region (mainly Brahmaputra Basin), Projects
are being implemented by NEEPCO (North- Eastern Electric Power
Corporation Ltd.) and NHPC. In addition to these, NTPC has also
been entrusted with the Hydro Power Development in the country
and has taken up a number of projects in these basins.

The Hydro development in the States falling under these basins is
also being taken up by State Electricity Boards/State Power Deptts.
etc.

Keeping in view the position explained above, there appears to be
no necessity to set up separate River Basin Authorities. However, since

104


the setting up of River Basin Authorities is under the purview of
Ministry of Water Resources, the recommendations of the Committee
have been forwarded to Ministry of Water Resources also for taking
necessary action.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.46)

While examining status of ongoing Hydro Electric Project in the
country, the Committee have noted serious lapses on the part of
executing as well as coordinating agencies resulting in huge cost and
time overruns of hydro projects. The Committee note that for
Dhauliganga-I (NHPC) project in the Central Sector the ongoing cost
of Rs. 601.98 crore has been revised to Rs. 1578.31 crore and the
commissioning schedule delayed by about six years. The reason for
delay is reported to be acquisition to private land. Further, as regard
to Dulhasti (NHPC) project, cost estimated at Rs. 1262.97 crore in 1994-
95 has been revised to Rs. 3559.77 crore with target of completion by
2003-04. The reasons for delay are reported to be geographical problem,
law and order problem etc, The present status of Purulia (4 x 225)
MW Pump storage scheme in West Bengal further indicate that the
cost has been revised from Rs. 1456.5 crore with targets of completion
during 2002-03 to Rs. 3188.90 with revised completion targets at 2006-
07. Regarding status of Purulia Pump Storage Schemes, the Committee
have been informed that OECF loan agreement with signed in March,
1995. An MOU was signed on 25.5.01 between Govt. of W.B. and
NHPC with a joint venture company namely NPSDC. CCEA clearance
for joint venture is awaited but the infrastructural works at site is in
progress. The reasons for delay are reported to be loan agreement
with OECF signed after one year of sanction, delay in placing order
for civil works due to litigation, delay in availability of additional
forest land.

Reply of the Government
DHAULIGANGA HE PROJECT:

1. The reason for delay in execution of the project was paucity
of funds in the initial stages. Construction of the Project
could not be taken up on account of change of policy of
financing the public sector power projects.

2. During the period 1991-1994, the debt equity ratio was 3:1
and public sector concerned was to arrange for financing
the project at its own strength.

105


3.

A proposal for funding was submitted by Ministry of
Finance to Govt. of Japan for consideration of JBIC assistance
for the year 1995-96 JBIC loan package. Thereafter the first
tranche loan became effective on 23.5.96 and subsequent
loans have been arranged for the project..

The commissioning schedule of the project is March, 2005.
The latest sanctioned cost of the project is Rs. 1578.31 cr. at
Aug. 99 PL. All the units are likely to be commissioned as
per schedule.

DHULHASTI HE PROJECT:

1.

Due to Law & order problem in Project Area and adverse
geological conditions encountered in HRT this project has
been delayed.

All the project components are since completed except 10586
m long Head Race Tunnel. Excavation of tunnel has been
completed and 6588.5 m overt lining has also been done by
July 2004.

The work is in progress and is expected to be completed
by March 2005.

PURULIA PUMP STORAGE SCHEME:

1.

106

The project is under execution by Government of West
Bengal. An MOU has been signed between NHPC and
GOWB on 25.5.01 to execute Purulia Pumped Storage
Scheme through a Joint Venture Company.

Possibilities of setting up other Pumped Storage Schemes,
through the Joint Venture Company (JVC) in a time bound
manner are being explored.

The formation of Joint Venture and Revised Cost Estimate
of Purulia Pumped Storage Scheme is under consideration
of PIB.

The meeting for formation of Joint Venture and Revised
Cost Estimate for Purulia Pumped Storage Scheme was held
on 24.3.04.

Action is being taken to resolve the issues raised in the PIB
meeting i.e in principle approval of Planning Commission,
pattern of routing of JBIC loan and pattern of funding
through NHPC before another meeting of PIB is held.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]


Recommendation (51. No. 14, Para No. 3.14)

The Committee find that CWC/Ministry of Water Resources is
continuously observing hydrological data on various rivers/basins, and
this data is available in the form of water year books for practically
all the river basins. During preparation of DPR, hydrological and hydro-
meterological data collected by CWC/Ministry of Water Resources for
various basins of the country are fully utilized. The Committee have
been apprised that in respect of details of collection of
hydrometerological data, Central Water Commission/Ministry of Water
Resources maintains 953 sites throughout India to collect the
hydrological data of all the river basins. The Committee find that a
major role of CWC is by way of contribution to the design consultancy
for different hydroelectric projects which has been of the order of 35%
of the potential developed. The Committee, however, are not satisfied
with the reported normal time of 5-20 years for carrying out Survey
and Investigation (S&I) including preparation of Detailed Project Report
(DPR) by Central Water Commission (CWC). The reasons forwarded
by the Ministry of Water Resources from time and cost overrun of S&I
such as insufficient basis hydrological data required for input of design
of structures and power potential studies. Geological surprises met
during the course of investigations necessitating additional sub surface
explorations. Remoteness of areas — interior, lack of basic infrastructure
facility, health hazards, snow bound, tough hilly terrain, etc. also does
not sound convincing to the Committee as such data is already
available with Ministry of Water Resources/CWC in the form of water
year books. The Committee, however, appreciate the new initiative
taken by the Government by providing state of the art equipments,
following standardized procedure for data collection dissemination of
the data to users and its availability on web site and feel that these
steps will at least now reduce the total time taken in carrying out
Survey and Investigation (S&I) activities and preparation of DPR. The
Committee would like to know the impact of these steps assessed by
the Government on the new schemes identified for Survey and
Investigation (Sé&l).

Reply of the Government

(a) Central Water Commission is continuously observing
Hydrological data at limited key gauging stations on national
network of major rivers, near the origin of the river, near
the confluence with major tributaries and at locations where
river crosses the State boundaries with the objective/
assessment of national water resource. These data are

107


108

(०

(d)

(१)

(०)

(9

available/published in water yearbooks. The data so
collected is not with respect to any site specific/project
specific location/requirement. When projects are proposed
at sites without adequate hydrological data, it requires longer
time for hydrological data collection. Generally, water
resources projects are in far flung areas which require time
for establishment of approaches and basic infrastructure.

The state of art data collection, validation and dissemination
system under Hydrology Project I has covered Peninsular
India excluding Narmada for improving hydrological data
status. Other parts of the country still follow the
conventional system.

In the Hydrology Project-I, the emphasis was on the
strengthening of network by the State Water Resources
Departments, sustainability of this extended network on long
term basis for collection of quality data.

The existing key gauging network of CWC is not sufficient
for site-specific studies/DPR preparation and project specific
observations are required. The time period of DPR
preparation can be reduced if a reliable and adequate
database for hydrological parameters is built up in advance.

The Hydrological parameters are estimated under data
constraints and these limitations are brought out in the
report. DPRs based upon short-term data needs to be revised
during detailed design before construction is taken up. The
action taken/compliance of the observations on data
collection is known only when the DPR is re-submitted at
a later date by the project authorities. In many such cases,
the observations are not complied with adequately and again
the projects remain under data constraint scenario. To
overcome this limitation, a master plan of data collection,
which fits into the master plan of the basin as well as
catering to the recent Pre-feasibility Studies taken up for
162 hydropower projects, needs to be drawn up and
executed. CWC will need appropriate resources for
implementing the same.

The other reasons attributable to some delays in completion
of DPR are inter state and international issues which are to
be resolved for finalising the project Proposals for DPR and
at times, additional investigations need to be taken up for
studying other alternate technically sound and economic
propositions. This leads to time over run.


(g) The quality of DPR is expected to improve with the use of
state of the art equipments for topographical survey and
hydrological investigations.

[Ministry of Power E.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 3.16)

The Committee have been apprised that there is very good
coordination between the two organizations i. CEA and CWC.
Chairman, CEA takes frequent review meetings for expediting techno-
economic clearance. Although, for multipurpose projects in inter-State
rivers, clearance of CWC/Ministry of Water Resources is mandatory.
Examination/clearance by CEA is limited to power component.
However, for single purpose, hydro-electric projects techno-economic
clearance is accorded by CEA for which civil aspects are examined by
CWC. Further, clearance of multipurpose project is given by CWC.
However, during examination of the project, the aspect of power
generation including electro-mechanical equipment is examined by CEA.
Similarly, for single purpose hydro-electric project, clearance is accorded
by CEA but during examination, hydrology, civil design, inter-State
matters, civil estimates, etc. are examined in CWC/Ministry of Water
Resources and CEA. The Committee are however, distressed to note
the derating of hydro-electric project by CEA due to low discharge of
water although CWC who have conducted hydrological studies. The
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of Ministry of Water
Resources that hydrological studies at times are carried out with
limited/scanty data and this limited data do not reflect the complete
hydrological cycle of the basin or the effect of changes in rainfall
pattern, if any, or the upstream development and recommend. that
proper care should be taken to carry out hydrological studies so as to
overcome the problem of derating of hydro potential of the projects at
the time of execution. The Committee would like to know the present
system of hydrological studies carried out in other countries and the
steps taken by the Government to overcome the reported problem.

Reply of the Government

(a) CWC carries out hydrological analysis using standard
procedures, The need for derating could be due to low discharges due
to the fact that project planning is carried out with limited/inadequate
data and also due to the reasons as explained in the preceding
paragraphs. The hydrological analysis in other countries is by and
large on same principles. There is no flaw in the procedures adopted

109


in India but the results depend on the size and quality of data. The
problem could be partly overcome if data of sufficient length (of time)
is available and the data collection at all project locations is made
scientifically. A detailed study of the reduction in water availability
will be done if specific cases, where derating has been recommended
by CEA, are referred.

Hydrology is a dynamic process. The review of Hydrology becomes
vital and necessary under the following circumstances:

(i) When new set of data are made available or some
extraordinary event (in case of severe flood event) is
observed.

(ii) There is change in the procedures or due to technological
changes.

(iii) Impact of man made changes in the basin.

(iv) Possible effects of climate changes.

Under no circumstances the hydrological parameters estimated in
the project planning stage can be taken as applicable forever. Climatic
changes do occur in nature and they are in the early stages of detailed
evaluation.

(b) Hydrological studies carried out with scanty data do not reflect
the complete variability in flows. For example if data length is of 10
years assuming that all the data are acceptable (which is generally not
the case) the 90% dependable flow is the ninth value when flows are
arranged in descending order. It may so happen that these 10 years
are all normal years and no bad hydrological years (sometime
consecutive bad years) are reflected in the data. This may lead to over
estimation of flows. The case may be otherwise also. A mechanism
needs to be in place where on site data collection is made for
sufficiently long period before finalising the hydrological parameters.
Hydrological data collection must be independent of other investigations
and started sufficiently in advance of other activities.

(c) Of late, it has been noticed that for fast track clearance of the
project, the assurances are provided by the project authorities that the
changes/ additional studies suggested by CWC and CEA will be taken
care of at the time of detailed designs. Since most of these projects are
not designed by CWC/CEA, no feedback is received on whether the
required studies have been carried out and the impact of the results
on the capacities. Having no control over the assessment of the detailed

110


designs and studies at the time of implementation of the project, the
issues are known only when any issue of need for derating arises. It
is felt that a process to this effect is required to be established for
avoiding such problems in future.

[Ministry of Power RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 3.17)

The Committee find that at time hydel projects have derated their
capacity owing to low discharge of water. This problem is acute in
Jammu & Kashmir and North Eastern region of the country. It has
been brought to the notice of the Committee that when the hydrological
studies are reviewed with the availability of additional data over and
above the additional study, the hydrological parameter has got changed.
This may be both on the positive side as well as negative side.
Considering the importance of hydrology, in project planning and their
operations, the Committee suggests that arrangement for collection,
processing and publication of data needs to be strengthened. Wherever
necessary, advance action should be taken for setting up of proper
hydrometric stations for specific project planning. The Committee are
not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Water Resources that
hydrological studies at time are carried out with limited/scanty data
and this limited data do not reflect the complete hydrological cycle of
the basin or the changes in the rainfall pattern if any or the upstream
development. The Committee feel that the projects based on such
studies are bound to cause difficulties later on. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Water Resources and CWC have
to take responsibility for the information provided and should be
accountable to the developers of the projects especially when it is in
the private sector.

Reply of the Government

(a) Strengthening of hydrological network has been done under
Hydrology Project Phase-I in Peninsular India. As regards
the remaining part of the country, the hydrological data
falls under the category of classified data. Hydrology Project
Phase-II for some of the northern river systems is under
preparation.

(b) As regards impact of hydrological studies on limited or
scanty data, this aspect is invariably brought out in the
hydrological examination and it is always proposed to start
the hydrological data collection so that before formulation

441


of design parameters some additional data is available for
firming up the design parameters using project specific data.
The feed back mechanism on the compliance of such
observations is being worked out.

(c) Under Prime Minister’s initiative for hydropower, about 162
projects have been taken up for pre-feasibility studies. The
database available for the projects is not up to the
requirements for detailed project reports. It would be
prudent to set up modern hydrometric stations for these
projects so as to provide much needed database pending
formulation of detailed project reports by any agency. In
addition, detailed modeling studies in respective design
offices have to be launched for hydrological and geo-
technical aspects of the projects. CWC would be in position
to take up such additional work with strengthening by
adequate resources in terms of manpower and funds.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 5.86)

It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry
of Environment & Forests seek voluminous and too minute a detail
from the project proponents prior to according site and environment
clearances. They note that MoEF have devised questionnaires which
the project proponents had to respond while submitting the application.
For instance, existence of National Park, Sanctuary/Tiger Reserves,
Buffer Zone of Biosphere Reserve, Habitat for migratory birds,
Archaeological site, mangroves within 7 Kms of the project site (item.
No. IX), description of fauna-rare and endangered species requiring
management, species of economic significance, migratory route of
terrestrial, aquatic as well as avi-fauna (Item No. XI) are insisted upon
for site assessment. Similar, minute details are often sought while
seeking environment clearance. On the top of it, a large number of
studies are required to be got conducted by the project proponent
which at times are rejected by MoEF. For instance, the Wildlife
Conservation Plan in case of Teesta Stage-V H.E. Project got prepared.
by the Wildlife Division of Sikkim Forest was not accepted by MoEF
on the ground that the study did not address all the aspects required
for the purpose. The details of such minute details sought while
according environment and site clearances have been pointed out by
various Central Hydel PSUs and are contained in this Chapter. The
Committee note that such detailed and not too relevant information
are either available within the public domain or with the specialized

112


agencies of MoEF, viz. Botanical Survey of India, Zoological Survey of
India, Forest Survey of India, etc. The Committee are of the view that
by subjecting the project developer to collect such information when
these are available with MoEF and their agencies or when such studies
can be got conducted through the agencies of MoEEF, the Ministry
usually end up contributing to cost and tie overruns of the project.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoEF should review /revise
their questionnaire required for obtaining environment and site
clearances in the light of suggestions made by the Central Hydel PSUs
50 as to reduce time taken for appraisal of hydel projects. They, at the
most, may seek specific information about the project only. They should
not insist for these information/data which are available either with
the State Government/Central Government or their agencies. Taking
into consideration that studies/survey, etc, at present are conducted
by the agencies of MoBE, a project developer need not be insisted
upon such studies. Instead, MoEF should themselves get such studies /
survey commissioned, which are absolutely necessary and appropriately
charge on actual basis from the project developers. In this context, the
Committee do not concur with the reasoning of MoEF in regard to
undertaking of Studies/Surveys by them that they (MoEF) cannot take
on themselves the job of proponent as well as approving authority. In
this connection, the Committee would like to point out that when a
project proponent is allowed to reimburse for Catchment Area
Treatment Plan and Compensatory Afforestation, there is no rationale
of reimbursement method not being made applicable for Survey/
Studies including ELA/EMP. The Committee also recommend that MoEF
should create a data bank of their own where detailed information
about flora, fauna, etc. at various sites can be maintained.

Reply of the Government
A. Regarding environmental clearance

The point regarding seeking minute details which are considered
not relevant has been looked into. Detailed exercise has been
undertaken to revise the questionnaire proforma. The attempt will be
to simplify and collect essential information on the project particulars.
Information relevant to the data available with the agencies of the
Government will be pooled together. As some of the specialized
agencies come under the administrative control of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, Ministry has now proposed setting up of
Environmental Information Centers which will function as Data Bank
to collect and disseminate the relevant information required by the
project authorities. This would eliminate some of the problems

113


encountered by the project proponents and the consultancy
organizations in accessing relevant data. This is in line with the above
recommendation that MoEF should create Data Bank for detailed
information about flora and fauna, endangered species, etc.

As regards the detailed studies, surveys, etc., the Ministry of
Environment & Forests will extend necessary technical guidance and
information in framing the scope and terms of references for
undertaking the tasks. This would help the proponents to identify
competent expertise in the field and commission preparation of focused
study on specific aspects.

B. Regarding forestry clearance

¢ Forests are the complex eco-systems which comprise
important flora and fauna, sources of gene pool, micro-
habitats, various food chains, nutrient cycles, water cycle
ete.

* For the facts stated above, it is necessary to consider some
minimum essential detail before according approval for
diversion of forest land. However, the information sought
is not very cumbersome and it cannot be dispensed with in
the interest of environmental considerations.

* As far as the creation of the data bank by the Ministry of
Environment & Forests is concerned, the data at the macro
level is maintained by the State Forest Departments, Forest
Survey of India, Botanical Survey of India, and Zoological
Survey of India, which make the part of the report of the
project proponents. However, the micro level information
can be gathered at the local level only on the case to case
basis.

[Ministry of Power No. 16/19/2004-H-I dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 5.87)

The Committee note that a hydel project is also required to seek
approval from the State Pollution Control Board. The Committee do
not approve of the action on the part of the State Pollution Control
Board as no hydel plant has been ever reported to cause pollution.
Taking into consideration that hydel units do not cause pollution and
there is also no consumptive use of water, the Committee recommend
that no hydel power proponent be required to obtain approval/
clearance from State Pollution Control Boards. The Committee desire

114


that the Ministry of Power should take up the mater with the concerned
State Governments to ensure that this clearance is not insisted upon.

The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the
matter.

Reply of the Government

Under the provisions of EIA notification, the State Pollution Control
Board has been empowered to conduct mandatory public hearing. For
this purpose, the Project proponent has to approach the State Pollution
Control Board with all the relevant project documents. Pollution Control
Board then notifies the date for public hearing in local newspapers. In
case of hydroelectric project, approval from State Pollution Control
Board is not required. Under the provisions of the Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003 dated 17,3.2003,
hydroelectric projects are exempt from the levy of Water Cess.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 25, Para No. 5.89)

The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of
Environment & Forests often raise queries/seek clarification from the
project authorities in piecemeal. This also causes delays. The Committee
recommend that MoEF should endeavour to seek all details/
clarifications about a hydro project from the concerned project
authorities in one go.

Reply of the Government
A. Regarding environmental clearance

The Ministry has, in its revised EIA procedures, proposed that at
the time of Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), the Ministry of
Environment and Forests would frame the Scope and Terms of
Reference for the EIA/EMP Studies to be submitted by the project
proponents. This will ensure that all the necessary information required
for environmental clearance would be made known to the project
authority at one time.

B. Regarding forestry clearance
* Forest (Conservation) Rules provide a prescribed format for
the preparation of project proposals. Normally, the Ministry

of Environment & Forests does not seek additional

115


information from the project proponent except in exceptional
cases where substantial adverse impact on flora, fauna and
environment is apprehended.

* If the project is complete in all respects as per the guidelines
issued under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, no further
information is normally asked from the User Agency.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 28, Para No. 5.92)

The Committee have been informed that site visits are generally
undertaken by MoEF long after the submission of application by project
proponents. This, in turn, leads to avoidable delays in obtaining the
environmental clearance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
such site visits, if considered essential, should be undertaken within
one month from the date of submission of application.

Reply of the Government
A. Regarding environmental clearance

The time-limit suggested for undertaking site visits, if considered
essential, would be adhered to. This would be incorporated in the
environmental clearance procedures now under review.

B. Regarding forestry clearance

¢ For the purpose of forestry clearance, Ministry of
Environment & Forests conducts Site Inspection of the
project site through its Regional Office as soon as the project
is received for forestry clearance. Site inspection is
mandatory only in cases where extent of forest land to be
diverted exceeds 100 hectares. In the cases involving less
than 100 hectares the site visits are done only rarely and in
very important cases.

¢ For forestry clearance, Central Government has fixed time-
limit of 90 days to dispose of the proposal including Site
Inspection.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]

116


Recommendation (SI. No. 30, Para No. 5.94)

The Committee note that forest clearance is accorded to a hydel
project in two stages, viz., Stage-I (in principle) and Stage-II (formal).
In Stage-I approval, conditions are stipulated which are required to be
fulfilled by the State Government project proponent. After receipt of
the compliance report, formal approval is issued and only thereafter
the land is transferred for non-forestry purpose. This process, besides
causing delays, is also leading to cost overruns. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that prior to according formal clearance, MoEF
should allow diversion of forest land for pre-constructive activities on
the basis of in-principle clearance once non-forest land certified for
compensatory afforestation has been transferred to the Forest
Department and funds for raising compensatory afforestation deposited
by the project proponent. This will enable the project proponent to
develop the infrastructure and accelerate the project construction work.
In this connection, the Committee have been informed about the
creation of a forest bank by the Public Sector Undertakings under the
purview of the Ministry of Power dealing with hydro power to facilitate
instant payment for the use of forest land for development of
infrastructure faculties. The Committee desire that the modalities of
this issue be finalized by the Ministry of Power in consultation with
MoEF. The Committee also recommend that the application for forest
clearance be processed by the Forest Wing of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests (MoEF) and that of environment clearance by
the Impact Assessment Division or any authority which, they deem
fit, separately as parallel activity. Both Wings being part of MoEF,
better coordination may be done to reduce time for simultaneous
Processing for issue of clearances.

Reply of the Government

* It is true that Forestry clearance is given in two stages. In
the first instance the “In principle” or Stage I clearance is
given with certain stipulations. Payment of the charges for
compensatory afforestation is the major but not the sole
stipulation. The ‘final’ or Stage Il clearance is given
immediately on the receipt of the compliance of the
conditions of Stage I approval.

* There is no delay at the level of Ministry to accord
Stage Il clearance as soon as compliance report is received.

* As far as parallel processing of the Project proposals from
forestry and environment angle is concerned, it is already

117


in place. However, environmental clearance is issued after
forestry clearance has been accorded.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]

Recommendation (SI. No. 31, Para No. 5.95)

The Committee note that the proposals for forest clearances are

examined by various agencies at the State and Union Government
levels. This is contributing to enormous delays. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a Joint Committee be constituted involving
representatives of all concerned Departments of both the State and
Central Governments to consider proposals seeking forest clearance.
With the constitution of such a Committee, all the issues relating to
forest clearance project can be considered at one place which will go
a long way in reducing delays.

118

Reply of the Government

“Land” is the State subject and therefore it is within the
powers of the State/UT Governments to examine the
utilization of forest land for non-forestry purposes.

Besides taking up development projects, it is also the
mandate of the State/UT Governments to maintain a good
forest cover.

Central Government has constituted a Forest Advisory
Committee (FAC) under Section 3 of Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980, which is a Statutory Body. However, as a routine
practice, user agencies and representatives of concerned
Department/Ministry are invited for discussion in the FAC
meeting. As for Hydro-Power, the user agency is invariably
invited for discussion during the FAC meeting. Therefore,
there is no need to have a Joint Committee as the proposals
are examined as per the provisions of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 and Rules therein.

While examining the project proposal, the State/UT
Governments try to complete the information which are not
submitted by the user agency but required as per the
guidelines issued under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

Since, the project proposal involves large area with forest
cover, it necessitates the various field inspections,
enumeration of trees, effect on wildlife, site specificity,
examination of alternatives for which sufficient time is
needed, etc.


¢ The complete proposals are examined by the Central
Government. A time-limit of 90 days is fixed for the Central
Government to take decision on the complete and flawless
proposal.

* Normally the delays are either at the level of State
Government or the User Agency. Though a time-limit of
210 days has been prescribed under the Forest Conservation
Rules for the State Governments to process the case at their
end and forward it to the Central Government, it may be
useful if the matter is chased up by the user agency with
the State Government.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 32, Para No. 5.96)

The Committee find that the Action Plans related to Catchment
Area Treatment (CAT), Bio-diversity Conservation and Resettlement &
Rehabilitation are submitted as a part of the Environment Management
Plans for obtaining environmental clearance for a hydel project. The
plans are discussed at length by the members of the Environment
Appraisal Committee (EAC) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
(MoEF) and changes, if any, suggested by the members of EAC are
incorporated in the plans. The Committee further find that the Forest
Advisory Committee also discuses the same plan and at times their
views are different from those of EAC and the project proponents is
asked to review the Action Plan. The Committee are of the opinion
that once a Technical Committee of Environment Wing of MoEF has
already deliberated upon certain management plans, the same plans
should be deemed to have been approved by the Ministry and need
not be discussed by the other Committee of the Forest Wing of MoEF.
The Committee, therefore, desire that there is a need to have a better
coordination between the two wings of MoEF so that there is neither
any duplication of work nor any undue harassment to the project
proponent. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

* There is no duplication of work between Forest Advisory
Committee (FAC) and Environment Appraisal Committee
(EAC).

* For diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes, it is
essential for the User Agency to submit Catchment Area
119


Treatment Plan, Bio-diversity Conservation Plan, and
Resettlement & Rehabilitation Plan where ever required.

* Forest Advisory Committee ensures that these plans are
submitted with the proposal. Generally, FAC does not go
into details of these plans as these plans are thoroughly
examined by the EAC.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 35, Para No. 5.99)

The Committee find that no minimum qualification has been
prescribed for environment consultants preparing the Environment
Impact Assessment Study Report on behalf of the project proponent.
Often, Environment Impact Assessment Report is not prepared by
competent consultants and even the prescribed forms are not filled
correctly. The Committee desire that some minimum qualification
should be prescribed for environment consultants so that quality
assessment can be carried out by them.

Reply of the Government

The hiring of consultants for preparing the Environment Impact
Assessment Study Report is a choice exercised by the project proponent.
MoEF can only advise and guide the project proponents in this regard.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 36, Para No. 5.100)

The Committee find that where forest land is diverted for a Hydel
Project, premium as well as lease rent @ 10% is charged. The Committee
do not approve of charging premium as well as lease rent for diversion
of forest land. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should review their policy in the matter.

Reply of the Government

* As already emphasized that ‘Land’ is the State subject and
therefore it is within the powers of the State/UT
Governments to examine the utilization of forest land for
non-forestry purposes.

* State/UT Governments are within their powers to charge
the lease rent, land premium etc.

120


* Central Government normally does not interfere in the State
matters.

* Central Government is stipulating the condition for charging
Net Present Value (NPV) of diverted forest land to comply
with the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated:
30-10-2002 & 1-8-2003 in IA No. 566 in Writ Petition (C)
No. 202 of 1995.

* It is also true that some of the State Governments are
charging premium as well as lease rent at the rate of 10%
of. the premium per annum. The annual lease rent appears
on higher side. This needs to be discussed with the State
Governments and a rational view taken.

[Ministry of Power, FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 39, Para No. 6.5)

The Committee find that the wheeling /transmission charges in the
North-Eastern Region, is one of the highest due to its geographical
disadvantages. Taking into consideration that 37% of total hydel
potential exist in the region with practically very low demand, the
rationalization of wheeling charges in the region is required. This is
one of the reason which has dissuaded many hydro proponents to
develop hydel project in the region. The Committee are constrained to
note high wheeling charges for projects in North-Eastern such as
Tipaimukh where transmission charges are expected to as high as
Rs. 1.60 per unit. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that
geographical disadvantage should not be a cause of inaction on the
part of the Government in not rationalizing the transmission/ wheeling
charges. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Central Government
should rationalize the wheeling /transmission charges in North-Eastern
Region, so that affordable power is made available across the country.
The Committee feel that the Power Grid Corporation should also take
minimum margin of profit on their investments in the North-East
Region especially during the first few years of the Project’s life and
may increase it gradually over the years when the business picks up.
Similarly, PTC, whose business depends solely on the availability of
transmission lines, may also be asked to examine the feasibility of
investments in such projects.

121


Reply of the Government

POWERGRID has invested around Rs. 1450 Crore in North-Eastern
Region (NER) for implementing various transmission projects and is
presently operating about 5000 ckt. kms. of inter-State transmission
lines and 13 sub-stations. The transmission system was evolved after
discussions in the meetings of North Eastern Regional Electricity Board
(NEREB). This transmission system currently caters to the evacuation
requirement of existing hydro/ gas generating stations at Kathalguri
(294 MW), Doyang (75 MW), Ranganadi (405 MW), Kopili (200 MW),
Agartala (84 MW). It has also been envisaged that these transmission
systems shall also facilitate evacuation & dispersal of power from
Kameng (600 MW), Damwe (520 MW) and Amguri (100 MW) with
marginal investments.

The transmission charges payable to POWERGRID (all over the
country except NER) are decided based on Government of India (Gol)/
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) tariff Notifications.
The transmission charges in NER are paid based on the principles of
Uniform Common Pool Transmission Tariff (UCPTT) system, finalised
in 1987 as per the decision of NEREB and was adopted in 1990, ie.,
prior to transfer of transmission assets to POWERGRID in 1991. The
tariff of 35 paisa/KWh as per UCPTT was applicable for fixing of
tariff for all the assets commissioned till 1४ April, 1998 only.

Since 1997, POWERGRID has made requests, time and again, in
NEREB meetings for inclusion of new transmission assets in UCPTT
commissioned after 01.04.1998 and every time it was decided that the
tariff would be pegged at 35 paisa/unit only. It may be mentioned
here that the new transmission projects commissioned/ to be completed
after 1.4.1998 are either linked with generation projects or categorized
as system strengthening/augmentation of transmission capacity and
were implemented at a cost of about Rs. 1008 Crore.

After the constitution of CERC, POWERGRID approached CERC
for fixation of tariff for the new assets commissioned after April, 1998,
who also directed POWERGRID to continue billing as per UCPTT
even after commissioning of new assets and this is resulting in a
substantial revenue loss to POWERGRID.

In egard to high transmission charges in NER, it may be noted
that there has been considerable delay in implementation of generation
projects in NER, which is beyond the control of POWERGRID. If all
the generation projects as envisaged at the time of finalisation of
transmission system had materialized, the transmission tariff would
122


have come down to the level comparable to the tariff being levied in
other Regions.

Presently, based"on the investment made by POWERGRID in NER,
the annual transmission charges works out to Rs. 261.83 Crore whereas
the permissible billing in NER based on pegged transmission tariff of
35 paise per unit works out to Rs. 167.16 Crore. This is causing a loss
of Rs. 94.67 Crore annually to POWERGRID.

POWERGRID is a Central Sector company implementing its projects
without any budgetary support. It does not have the capacity to absorb
the deficit arising out of pegging of tariff at a level lower than it is
entitled as per norms, applicable elsewhere in the country. This deficit
has also affected POWERGRID’s balance sheet adversely and impacted
upon its capacity to invest further. In addition, it is also impacting its
capacity to carry out O&M and service the debt. Therefore, to offset
this deficit, POWERGRID had been requesting Government of India
for a suitable compensation. The proposal of POWERGRID is under
consideration.

The matter regarding compensating POWERGRID for the losses
being suffered by the Company in this regard was considered in the
past but the proposal was not agreed to by the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance. For finding a solution to the problem of
losses being incurred by POWERGRID in NER, the following options
are being examined in Ministry of Power:

i) POWERGRID may be compensated through grant for its
financial losses in NER.

ii) The amount of shortfall in realization of tariff by
POWERGRID due to pegging of transmission tariff in NER
may be spread over to the transmission tariff in the rest of
the country on the pattern of cross-subsidy being provided
in the petroleum sector.

iii) The investment made by POWERGRID on transmission
system in NER may be converted into 5% equity and 95%
long-term soft Government loan or any other financial
re-engineering model without any direct subsidy.

The implications of these options are being analyzed on the basis
of the latest tariff and interest rates.

[Ministry of Power, RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
123



Recommendation (SI. No.43, Para No.7.19)

The Committee note that the private sector entrepreneurs have
been cautious in making their proposals and the regulators and the
sanctioning authorities both in the Central and the State Governments
have been equally cautious in evolving procedures and evaluating and
approving the proposals. The Committee, however, feel that induction
of private sector does not mean the end of public sector involvement.
The Committee are of the view that the public sector involvement in
hydro development should continue and there are types of projects
which can be taken up only in the public sector domain. Considering
that the public sector has played a major and almost exclusive role in
developing hydro power, the world over including the developed
countries and the fact that hydro in the privately owned IPP mode is
still to catch on, the Committee recommend for a judicious mix of
both the options, ensuring maximum thrust for accelerating hydro
development. In pursuing the private sector option, the Committee
recommend that it is necessary to generate confidence in the prospective
entrepreneurs/developers and offer terms and conditions which will
be attractive and cover undue risks without jeopardizing consumer
interests. The Committee desire that the Government should frame
guidelines for development of Hydro Projects by Private Producers on
the lines prevalent in United States of America where under
development rights are decided mostly on the basis of qualification
auctions, the evaluation of bids done on the basis of their qualification
and credibility as developer with an objective of encouraging only
those entities having experience in hydro development and impeccable
track record. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government

In the notification of the Electricity Act, 2003, it has been explicitly
stated that “the appropriate Regulatory Commission shall adopt the
tariff, if such tariff has been determined through transparent process
of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
Government.” This provision of the Electricity Act under Section 63
provides for automatic adoption of tariff if determined through the
competitive bidding process. The guidelines for competitive bidding
are being framed for development of all power projects, including
Hydro Power Projects, in a transparent and credible manner.

[Ministry of Power, ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
124


Recommendation (SI. No. 45, Para No. 7.21)

On procedures for selection of project developers in the private
sector, ‘the Committee feel that it is in the best interest of the purchaser
(licenser) [State Government in this case] to choose developers who
have undergone and satisfied a rigorous technical and financial
pre-qualification procedure. Since the projects are generally undertaken
in a difficult and hostile environment and those involving underground
works face uncertainties and involve, risks, the Committee feels that
for their successful implementation and operation, these projects require
specialised resources and skills. The Himalayan terrain presents a
tremendous challenge to project developers and unless the developers
have the technical ability and the financial and other resources to
meet these challenges, the projects may become non-starters. The
Committee, therefore, suggest that it is necessary to draw up a
comprehensive procedure of a rigorous technical and financial
pre-qualification which the prospective developers will have to go
through and satisfy. The Committee would like to know the
comprehensive procedure and plan drawn for the purpose.

Reply of the Government

The features of the hydro-electric projects, being site-specific,
depend on the geology, topography and hydrology at the site. The
construction time of a hydro project is greatly influenced by the geology
of the area and its accessibility. Even when extensive investigations
using new techniques are undertaken on element of uncertainty remains
in the subsurface geology and the geological surprises during actual
construction which could cause time and cost overruns, cannot be
completely ruled out. The cost escalations on account of inadequacies
in Sé&I have contributed to certain misgivings and misapprehensions
regarding hydro power development. It has therefore become necessary
to expedite S&I with the latest state of the art and prepare a shelf of
Bankable DPRs of projects for execution over a decade or more.

Allocation of projects for development under Private Sector is the
subject matter of State Governments. The recommendations of the
Committee have been forwarded to all State Governments.

[Ministry of Power, F. No. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 58, Para No. 8.28)

The Committee find that the North Eastern Council (NEC) was set
up for the overall development of the region. NEC is funding various

125


infrastructure projects, including power. Taking note of the contribution
of NEC in development of hydro power in North-East Region, by
carrying out Survey & Investigation, providing funding support for
implementation of hydro-electric power project and setting up
transmission lines to evacuate power within the region, the Committee
appreciate the role of NEC in overall development of the North-East
Region. NEC has also informed the Committee that they have made
proposal to fund contribution of about 90 kilometers road for
Tipaimukh Hydro-Electric Project way back in July, 2000 which has
yet to be considered by the Government/NEEPCO. With the helping
hand rendered by the NEC for development of hydro projects in the
region, the Committee expect that the Government/NEEPCO will
atleast now consider their (NEC) suggestion. The Committee also
recommend that the Government should provide more funds to NEC
so that the projects languishing for funds constraints could be executed
expeditiously. The Committee would like to await the outcome thereof.

Reply of the Government

It has been informed by NEC that the allocation of funds is made
by NEC on the recommendations of the State Government. Due to
paucity of funds, the State Government gave priority to other schemes.
The proposal of fund contribution for construction of about 90 kms of
road for Tipaimukh HEP was not approved by the Council.

[Ministry of Power, 8. No. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 65, Para No. 11.11)

The Committee observe that several hydro-electric projects have
been delayed and held up due to water disputes that have arisen
amongst the basin States with regard to the use, distribution or control
of the water in respect of these inter-State rivers/river valleys on in
the interpretation of the terms of any agreement relating to the use,
distribution or control of such water or in thé implementation of any
such agreement or in the levy or any water rate in contravention of
various prohibitions. The Committee are unhappy to note that 33 Hydro
Electric Projects conceived more than five years ago with a total
installed capacity of 6085 MW are held up due to non-resolution of
inter-State aspects. What have further shocked the Committee is that
in spite of constitutional provisions of adjudication of disputes relating
to waters of inter-State river or river valley through Boards/Tribunals
constituted under Inter-State River Water Dispute Act, 1956 and the
fact that certain Boards/Tribunals do exist, they have failed to give
timely award or got them implemented. It is only in the Year 2002,
126


that the Government have enacted Inter-State River Water Dispute
(Amendment) Act whereby Water Dispute Tribunals have been asked
to work in a time limit for giving their awards. The Committee
appreciate this amendment and feel that at least now the hydro projects
will not be delayed on account of adjudication of dispute of inter-
State rivers and the Tribunals will get their awards implemented within
a time limit set for it.

Reply of the Government

In pursuance of certain recommendations of Sarkaria Commission
in Chapter XVII of its report as endorsed by the Inter-State Council
and accepted by the Ministry of Water Resources, the Inter-State Water
Disputes Act, 1956(presently Inter-State River Water Disputes Act) was
amended on 28.3.2002. The title of the Act was changed to the
Inter-State River Water Disputes Act. Some of the major amendments
carried out in the Act are as under :—

(i) Section 4(1) of the Act has been amended to specify a time
frame of 1 year for setting up of a Tribunal after receipt of
the application from any disputant State. Section 4(1) of the
Act has also been amended to ensure that any dispute
settled earlier by a Tribunal constituted under the Act is
debarred from being reopened.

(ii) Section 5(2) of the Act has been amended to provide that
the Tribunal should give its award within 3 years. However,
the amendment in Section 5(2) also provides for extension
of further 2 years for a Tribunal to give its award that if
the award could not be given within the first spell of 3
years.

(iii) Section 6 of the Act has been amended to provide that the
award of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official
Gazette by the Central Government shall have the same
force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court.

(iv) Section 9(1) of the Act has been amended to add a provision
. for requisitioning of any data as may be required by the
Tribunal from the State Governments. A new Section 9A
has been added in the Act to provide for a data bank and
an information system to be maintained by the Central
Government at the national level for each river basin.

[Ministry of Power, KNo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]

127


Recommendation (51, No. 67, Para No.11.27)

The Committee note that the Government is contemplating to
develop various hydro power potential with the neighbouring countries
like Nepal, Bhutan, etc., for the mutual benefit of people of both the
countries. Pancheswar Multipurpose project aiming at creation of power
potential of 5,000 MW have been initiated in June, 1997 under Mahakali
Treaty. Although, all investigations have reportedly to be jointly
completed, Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Project is yet to be
finalized pending resolution of certain issues. The Committee desire
that the Government should take necessary steps to resolve all issues
relating to Pancheswar project with the Government of Nepal at the
earliest. At the same time, the Committee would like to know the
present status of Sapta Kosi High Dam multipurpose project for which
Rs. 30 crore has already been provided in the 10% Plan to carry out
joint inspections and preparation of Detailed Project Report. The
Committee would also like to know the present status of all projects
taken up as Joint Venture with the neighbouring countries with reasons
for delay, if any, in the execution of these projects. The Committee
also desire that the Government should explore the possibilities of
tapping hydel resources in other SAARC countries for the benefit of
the region, as a whole.

Reply of the Government
Pancheshwar Multi-purpose Project

As mutually agreed, a Joint Project Office-Pancheshwar
Investigations (JPO-PI) was opened at Kathmandu in Dec.,1999 and
field investigations for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR)
for Pancheshwar Multi-purpose Project on river Mahakali (Sarda) have
been jointly carried out by India & Nepal. JPO-PI works were funded
by GOI. The JPO-PI was closed on 31.7.2002.

The DPR of the project is under preparation and would be finalized
after resolving the issues regarding re-regulating dam site, cost
apportionment between irrigation and power components and between
India and Nepal. Meeting of the Joint Group of Experts will be
organised to discuss and settle various outstanding issues facilitating
preparation of a joint DPR.

An expenditure of Rs. 14.26 crore has been spent on the activities
undertaken by Joint Project Office—Pancheshwar Investigations for the
preparation of joint DPR. In addition, Govt. of India is also incurring
expenditure on continuation of hydro-meteorological observations at

128


Pancheshwar on Indian side since 8" Plan to generate long term data
to facilitate finalisation of project parameters.

Sapta Kosi High Dam Multi-Purpose Project & Sunkosi Storage cum
Diversion Scheme

An agreement was reached between India & Nepal to establish a
Joint Project Office at Birat Nagar in Nepal for taking up field
investigations/ studies and preparation of the DPR of Sapta Kosi High
Dam Multi-purpose Project and Sunkosi Storage cum diversion Scheme.

The proposal for detailed field investigations/ studies and the
preparation of DPR of the above project has been approved by Govt.
of India for Rs. 29.34 crore. The field investigations and preparation of
DPR will take 30 months. The Joint Project Office has since been set
up in Birat Nagar in Nepal on 170 Aug. 2004.

Upper Karnali HE Project (300 MW) and Burhi Gandaki HE Project
(600 MW)

On the request of Govt. of Nepal, it has been decided to take up
the implementation of the Upper Karnali HE Project by NHPC. As
regards Burhi Gandaki Hydro-electric Project, a Technical Team from
Ministry of Water Resources held discussions with HMG/ Nepal in
Oct., 2003 in order to work out modalities with Nepal regarding taking
up field investigations and preparation of Detailed Project Report. It
was inter-alia agreed to take up the above work by an Indian agency
after signing of MOU between the two Governments.

MOWR is the Nodal Ministry dealing with development of Water
Resources Projects in Nepal. As regards possibility of tapping hydel
resources in other neighbouring countries, NHPC is preparing PFR for
Tamanthi HE Project (1200 MW) in Myanmar. Development of
Punatsangchu (870 MW) in Bhutan is presently under consideration
by MEA and investigation of the project has been taken up.

The activities in other countries like Bhutan where the potential
exists for such development, the progress, is substantial. Chukha HEP
Stage I (336 MW) has been generating the power since 1986. Kurichu
HEP (60 MW) has been completed in 2003. Tala HEP (1020 MW) is
under construction and is scheduled for completion in about 2 years.

[Ministry of Power, F.No. 16/19/2004-H-I, dated 08.10.2004]
129


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 3.15)

The Committee note that CWC/Ministry of Water Resources has
been associated with almost all the hydroelectric projects in the country
and has reportedly built up expertise out of intensive activity during
the last 5 decades. Being a Government organization the consultancy
charges are raised on man-days spent on designs and preparation of
specification and construction drawings of the projects. However, on a
number of occasions, the consultancy has been taken up through
competitive bidding. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee
that the total consultancy charges for any project (are much less than)
the commercial charges for the works when done through private or
international agency. Further, the design consultancy for hydroelectric
projects are being taken up by WAPCOS through National /International
bidding. CWC/Ministry or Water Resources helps WAPCOS in the
design consultancy works, like preparation of technical specification,
issue of specification and construction drawings, etc. The experience is
thus shared between the two organizations. The Committee have been
informed by Ministry of Water Resources that in normal course the
project components are always safeguarded against normal natural
calamities like flood and earthquake, etc. The measures adopted depend
on the importance factor and nature of the components (like permanent
and semi-permanent). All the components are designed for earthquake
as per standard norms, procedures and codes. Safeguarding the
structure against maximum probable flood/natural calamities is done
as per established procedures, adopted in design. Taking note of the
fact that CWC/Ministry of Water Resources is the principal consultant
associated with the design of the civil component of Nathpa Jhakri
Hydroelectric project and has representation of Member (D&R) in the
Board of Directors of SJVNL, the Committee cannot but deplore the
casual reply of the Ministry of Water Resources as regards to steps
taken by CWC to ensure that projects are not affected due to natural
calamities.

130


Reply of the Government

(a) The CWC follows practices established world over and
various BIS codes on the subject matter of design of various
water resources projects. The unprecedented and extreme
natural calamities, that too at construction stage, would cause
certain damages. However, prudent project management and
timely actions by the project authorities would help in
minimising the extent of damages.

(b) A suitable flood forecasting system is being planned in Satluj
basin for the operation stage.

Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) is participating in project
named Hydrology Project, Phase-Il which is being undertaken by the
Ministry of Water Resources. Scope of the proposal is indicated as
under:

* Installation of Telemetry System in the catchments of Sutlej
and Beas rivers for improvement of water management
through effective early flood warning system with the help
of automatic sensors and satellite based data communication
system. The main objective of the scheme would be to have
following inputs on Real Time basis:—

(a) Discharges in the river Beas and Sutlej upstream
Bhakra, Pandoh and Pong Dams.

(b) Rainfall in corresponding runoff in the Beas and Sutlej
catchments.

(c) Rainfall and corresponding runoff in the Sutlej
catchment.

(व) Atmospheric temperatures in the catchments.
(e) Relative humidity.
(f) Wind Velocity (Speed and Direction).

* Estimation and forecasting of rainfall & snowfall and
corresponding runoffs.

* Installation of state-of-art automatic electronic gauge
recorders at various gauge discharge sites on rivers/channels

downstream of Dams along with Real Time Data
Communication System.

Setting up a Central Control Room at Nangal for real time display
of observed data of catehcments, dams and various rivers/channels.

[Ministry of Power, E.No. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
131


Conments of the Committee
(Please see para 23 & 24 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 37, Para No. 6.3)

The Committee observe that benefits from hydro power such as
clean and environment friendly power with no fuel cost and non-
consummative use of water are recognized world over and there is a
need to accelerate development of identified hydro power schemes in
the country. At the same time, the Committee find that many of the
hydel projects are located in troubled areas infested by militancy and
terrorist activities. The Committee are of the view that maintaining
law and order being the responsibility of the Government, there is an
urgent need to amend the present policy of the Government in regard
to charging the entire security expenditure from concept and uptill
commissioning — on the project cost. However, the recurring expenditure
incurred on security, once a hydel project goes on stream should
continue to be charged on the project developer. In the absence of
such a change, the Committee feel that a large number of the hydel
power projects would become unviable. This has become more so
important, in view of adverse thermal hydel mix in the country, and
untapped hydel potential in Jammu & Kashmir and North Eastern
Region—both the areas under threat of militancy /insurgent activities
from time-to-time. The Committee therefore, recommend that Planning
Commission, the Ministry of Finance and Home Affairs (Internal
Security) should allocate separate funds for providing security to these
infrastructure projects, including power. The Committee would await
the action taken by the Government in this regard.

Reply of the Government

This Ministry had mooted a proposal for off-loading cost of security
and other indirect costs from the project cost in order to bring down
the tariffs to make the Hydro projects, specially in the Northeast,
commercially viable. This was to be applied on a case-to-case basis for
development of hydel projects located in remote and disturbed areas.
The note was circulated to other Ministries for their comments. The
proposal did not find favour with the other Ministries including
Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Home
Affairs who have all not agreed to the proposal and maintained that
these costs be borne by the project only. The proposal is being further
pursued with the Stake holders for acceptance.

Ministry of Finance is of the view that all components which are
directly related to the project have to be a legitimate charge on the

132


project budget. These include R&R costs, security costs and flood
mitigation measures, etc. At best, security costs should be borne by
the State Government which benefits from the Project.

[Ministry of Power, ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II, dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 38, Para No. 6.4)

On cost of access roads being included in the Project cost, the
Committee find that hydroelectric projects are generally in remote,
inaccessible locations having either substandard roads or no access
roads. In order to develop the project, main trunk roads are either laid
afresh or widened and improved to reach the project site. These roads
used by the public and State authorities involved in development of
the area. This results in economic benefit to the State due to triggering
of economic and commercial activities around the project site. After
construction, these roads are used by the public and other development
agencies. The Committee further observe that roads such as 284 kms
road being widened and improved for Dhauliganga H.E. Project in the
State of Uttaranchal through Boarder Roads Organization (BRO) and
cost thereof, which is of the order of Rs. 65 crore is being borne by
NHPC, Similarly, for Bursar project in Jammu & Kashmir, 80 km of
fresh road is to be built and 30 km of road is to be improved, which
is estimated to cost about Rs. 165 crore. The Committee feel that since
these roads are not specific to the project and serve the public of the
State at large, their cost should not be charged to the project cost. The
Committee are constrained to note that although the project authorities
are bound to be liable for compensation for land and property which
is directly attributable to the project and had to bear the cost of
development of catchment area, even then as per the current practice,
12% free power is to be given to State throughout the life of the
project. The Committee also feel that since development of hydro
projects in a State results in economic benefit to the State due to
triggering of economic and commercial activities around the Project
site and R&R, flood moderation costs are also included in the capital
cost of the project, the provision of 12% free power need reconsideration
as the provision does not apply to thermal power projects. In this
context, the Committee would likesto bring to the notice of
Government, the trend setting examples of Baglihar Hydro-Electric and
Purulia Pump storage Hydel projects, where under the free component
of 12% had to be sacrificed by the State Governments, so as to make

133


them viable. The Committee are of the considered view that economics
should be one of the prime guiding philosophy, while determining
tariff and production cost. The Committee therefore, recommend that
the States may be pursued to forgo the provision of 12% free power
for initial some years so as to make the projects economically viable.
As explained earlier, free power can be taken up to 12% level over a
number of years gradually after the initial few years.

Reply of the Government

The proposal of off-loading cost of highways/roads from the project
cost was also included in the Cabinet note mentioned in para 6.3
above. However, the same was not agreed to by the Ministry of
Finance, Planning Commission and Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways. Their comments are reproduced below:

Comments of Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure

“Alternate highway development due to submergence of a highway
as a. direct consequence of a hydro project as in the case of
‘Tipaimukh’ project has to be an integral part of the total project
cost and must be included accordingly”.

Comments of Planning Commission

‘Planning Commission has consistently maintained that all costs
such as roads, mitigation of environmental or ecological damage,
security, R&R etc. that are directly resulting from the project should
be included in the project cost. This is in accordance with the best
international accounting practice and will preclude development
of uneconomic and unsustainable sites based on erroneous or
incomplete cost numbers’.

Comments of Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways

1. We have no comments on the loading or otherwise of the
cost of alternative highway development on the power
component cost of a hydro electric project as long as specific
funding is provided for such highway development.

2. The Ministry has no objection to the proposal of special
Government loans having low interest rates and long
moratorium periods.

This Ministry also is pursuing with the State Governments to agree
to stagger the 12% free power keeping it low in the initial year and

134


raising it gradually to 12% in order to keep the initial tariffs viable.
However, the State Governments are yet to agree to the Proposal even
on a case by case basis. However, the Govt. of J&K has agreed to
forego its share of free power from Baglihar H.E. Project and the
Govt. of M.P. has also agreed to forego its share of 12% free power
from Omkareshwar H.E. Projects. The Ministry of Power is taking up
the matter with concerned State Govt. on case to case basis wherever
necessary.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 52, Para No. 8.22)

The Committee find that due to poor industrialization,
comparatively less population and the potential being far in excess of
the local need, speedy exploitation of hydel power in the North-Eastern
Region has not taken place. Besides, the high transmission cost, the
Committee note that Rehabilitation & Resettlement is also one of the
major problems that stands in the way of implementation of many of
the otherwise attractive hydel projects. In view of the above, the
Committee recommend the Government to develop on a priority basis
the National Grid for transmission of power with adequate capacity to
cater to the need of requirement of massive power evacuation from
the region to bring down the transmission cost component of the
individual projects of the region. In this regard, the Committee further
desire that a perspective plan may immediately be drawn for
investment in transmission projects in the North-Eastern Region by
the Power Grid Corporation for the next 10 years so as to easily
evacuate the power generated. The Committee feel that Power Grid
Corporation should at least provide transmission facilities for these
projects in the North East which the Government propose to take up
during the 100 & 11% Five Year Plans. In the addition the PGCIL
should identify and provide trunk routes in the North East in advance.
Taking into account the technical difficulties due to the difficult and
unaccessible geographical terrain, the Committee would also like to
know the details of latest technological advancements and technical
manpower for development of these projects. The Committee are
constrained to note that although Ministry of Power have initiated
generation of 50,000 MW of hydro power and has identified 162
projects, the agencies actually involved have not been entrusted to

135


prepare the prefeasibility reports of the projects. Thirteen projects like
Hutong, Kalai, Dimwe in Arunachal Pradesh, Seshen, Umjaut, Umduna
etc. in Meghalaya for which Survey & Investigation. were carried out
by Brahmaputra Board or Meghalaya State Electricity Board have now
been entrusted to either Water and Power Consultancy Services (India)
Limited or National Hydroelectric Power Corporation for preparing
prefeasibility Reports. The Committee fail to understand why the
original Survey & Investigation agencies have not been associated with
preparation of the Pre-Feasibility Reports (PFRs) of these projects when
they have already done a lot of work in the field. Taking the factual
position in consideration, the Committee strongly urge the Government
to immediately associate Brahmaputra Board or MSEB, as the case
may be, to submit the Pre-Feasibility Reports (PFR) of most of the
projects under either investigation, which are in a very advanced stage
and they be given added responsibilities.

Reply of the Government

In regard to high transmission cost related to NER and perspective
transmission plan for investment in transmission projects in NER by
POWERGRID for next 10 years, it may be mentioned that for optimal
development and utilization of transmission system, which are key
factors for providing adequate transmission system at a lower cost, it
is very important that the commissioning of various generation projects,
for which transmission systems are required to be planned, are known.
For example, in the past, due to technical considerations and judicious
utilization of Right of Way in NER, Misa - Badarpur - Bongaigaon -
Malda 400 kV D/c line was constructed, considering the power
evacuation requirement of various generation projects, like, Kaithalguri,
Kameng, Doyang, Damwae, etc. Out of this, only Kathalguri, Ranganadi
(full generation from the project is delayed) and Doyang could
materialize leading to incidence of high transmission cost. Therefore,
for optimal development of transmission scheme connecting NER to
National Grid, it is very important to identify and firm up generation
capacity, time frame and allocation of power from different generation
schemes so that a long term cost effective perspective plan with phased
development can be worked out. In case these issues are not firmed
up and generation additions plan is not available, proper transmission
development for the region would be difficult.

Further, it may be mentioned that in NER as well as in Chicken
Neck area, there are serious Right of Way bottlenecks and hence it
would not be desirable to develop transmission scheme for each
generation project, separately. The approach has to be to pool power
from various generation projects in NER and transfer it to different
regions with high capacity transmission links. To utilize these high
capacity transmission links to its full capacity, it is very important that

136


a large no of generation projects are planned in similar time frame
otherwise a high capacity transmission link, planned to conserve Right
of Way, would have low utilisation initially and would lead to incidence
of high transmission cost.

Regarding providing transmission facilities by POWERGRID for
those projects which are expected to be taken up during 10% and 11%
plan, it is to mention that POWERGRID has already submitted
Feasibility Report for the transmission system associated with
Monarchak Gas Based Project of NEEPCO, likely to come up by the
end of X or early XI plan. Similarly, POWERGRID is in the process of
evolving transmission system for Lower Subansiri (2000 MW)
generation project of NHPC, Tipaimukh (1500: MW) & Kameng (600
MW) of NEEPCO.

The transmission system planning for the National Grid is being
carried by CEA in coordination with POWERGRID and other
stakeholders e.g. NHPC, NEEPCO, and also the State Utilities. The
various transmission lines and grid substations which would collectively
form the National Grid, are being planned as evacuation system for
new generation projects as well as, as system strengthening schemes
for the various regions for enabling increased trade in electricity across
regions. The development of National grid network is being
programmed in a phased manner to match with commissioning of
generation projects. Additional transmission capacity is also being
provided in the regional networks of Northern, Western and Southern
grids for import of power. This additional transmission capacity in the
regional networks would help in reducing incremental transmission
requirement for hydro projects in North Eastern Region/ Arunachal
Pradesh, which in turn enhance the commercial viability of the hydro
Projects.

Under 50,000 MW initiative, 162 schemes spreading in 16 states
with aggregating capacity of over 50,000 MW have been considered
for preparation of PFRs. The studies/PFRs for all 162 schemes have
been completed. National Hydro-EFlectric Power Corporation, WAPCOS,
North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation, Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam and
number of State Power Utilities have been associated to complete these
feasibility studies. As a follow up of completion of PFRs action has
been initiated for preparation of DPRs of attractive sites through these
agencies.

[Ministry of Power No. 16/19/2004-H-IT dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
137


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.43)

The Committee take strong note of inaction on the part of
Government in not harnessing the Pump Storage potentials of the fact
that these are essential in optimizing energy generation from base
load thermal stations and in meeting peak load and system
contingencies. As on date, only 2.45% of total identified potential of
94,000 MW Pump Storage Schemes have been harnessed and another
2.5% under construction. The Committee are of the view that since
Pump Storage Schemes are relatively free from the environmental &
forest hindrances which a green field hydel project is subjected to, a
new programme/ Action Plan, scheme be launched, exclusively for PSS,
so that the vast untapped potential is exploited expeditiously. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in the matter.

Reply of the Government

Pumped Storage Schemes work on the principle of surplus power
available during the off-peak period being used to pump water from
a reservoir at a lower height to a reservoir at a higher level. During
peak hours the water in the higher reservoir is used to generate power
thereby increasing the available peaking power in the grid. The cost
of peaking power obtained through the pumped storage scheme, is
high as it includes the cost of the power (off-peak), losses in
transmission and in the pumping operations (of the order of 30%) and
the cost of operations of the pumped storage schemes. The Indian
Power Industry has not enhanced sufficiently to have a high enough
differentiation in price between peak and off-peak power to allow
commercial operation of pumped storage schemes. As a result, in spite
of best efforts the Tehri Pumped Storage Scheme which is sought to
be set up on commercial lines has not yet fructified since the beneficiary
States are unwilling to offer off-peak power at low prices (marginally
above the cost from thermal units) and purchase the peaking power
at rates including the cost explained above.

138


According to re-assessment study of H.E. potential of the country
carried out by CEA during 1978-87, 56 Nos. pumped storage schemes
with probable aggregate installed capacity of 94,000 MW were
identified. At present 8 no. of pumped storage schemes with installed
capacity of 2454 MW are under operation. This works out to 2.61 %
of the total installed capacity as per CEA studies. Details of the schemes
in operation are given below :

S. No. Scheme Installed Capacity
MW
Te Kadana St. I&II - Gujarat 240
25 Paithan — Maharashtra 12
3 Nagarjuna Sagar + Andhra Pradesh 700
4. Kadamparai - Tamil Nadu 400
5s Panchet Hill - DVC 40
6. Ujjani - Maharashtra 12
bc Bhira PSS —Maharashtra 150
8. Srisailam LBPH - Andhra Pradesh 900
Total 2454

At present 3 no. of pumped storage schemes with total installed
capacity of 2350 MW are under construction. This works out to 2.5%
of the total installed capacity as per CEA studies. The details of the
schemes under construction are given below :

S. No. Scheme Installed Capacity
a Sardar Sarovar - Gujarat 1200
ar Ghatgar — Maharashtra 250
3. Purulia — West Bengal 900
Total 2350

In addition, one scheme namely Tehri St II in Uttaranchal with an
installed capacity of 1,000 MW has been accorded TEC by CEA and
is awaiting investment decision.

In this connection, it may be imentioned that pumped storage
schemes may also involve environmental/forest hindrances similar to
conventional hydro electric projects.

139


Since Pumped Storage Schemes stabilise the grid, increase the
efficiency and reliability of thermal plants by sharing peak and
fluctuating load, the operation of pump storage projects would need
to be rationalised to give a proper weightage for these factors and
also for the prime power available during peak demand from pumped
storage projects. The weightage to the following factors would be quite
justified considering that Pumped Storage Project will obviously be
costly as the fuel cost would be added for pumping which would be
about 50% of total cost of energy, besides lower efficiency in pumping
mode etc:—

* Weightage for stabilizing grid and frequency variation in
the entire system and thus saving infructuous power
consumption

* Weightage for optimum utilization of thermal Plants and
ensuring effective fuel economy

* Increasing longivity and reducing damage to the thermal
plants

* For assuring industrial growth by providing stable & reliable
power

By giving weightage to the above aspects, the PSS may become
economical & reasonably comparable with the other modes of feasible
Peaking Power.

In Eastern and Western regions of India, where hydro capacity
compared to thermal is very small (12-13%), the induction of more
and more pumped storage plants would need specific consideration.
In these regions, due to less demand during off-peak hours, thermal
plants are forced to operate at part loads causing considerable efficiency
loss and reduced PLE. The operation of pumped storage plants would
provide much needed load in the off-peak hours to enable efficient
operation of thermal plants and provide premium peaking power
during peak hours.

[Ministry of Power FNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
140


Recommendation (51, No. 10, Para No. 2.48)

The Committee are further distressed to note that the cost of
Nathpa Jhakri Hydro electric project in Kinnuar district of Himachal
Pradesh has been raised from Rs. 1678.02 crore to Rs. 7686.31 crore.
This project has been delayed from 1996-97 to 2003-04. The Committee
observe that consequent on flooding on 01.08.2000, the restoration of
infrastructural works in dam and intake areas, desilting chamber and
power house have been completed. Diversion tunnel was reported to
be made operational again on 18.9.2002 after repair of coffer dam. All
units are now scheduled to be commissioned by 12th December, 2003
and efforts are being made to rotate/commission Units 5&6 by
March,2003, completion of Desilting Chamber No. 4 was scheduled by
03/03. As regard to the cost escalation of Nathpa Jhakri Hydro electric
Project, the Committee are further perturbed to note the escalation
which is about Rs. 6000 crore and the project has been delayed by
seven years. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Government that flash floods on 19 August,2000, have caused severe
damage to the project as this apprehension was raised by the Standing
Committee on Energy during their study visit to the project during
May-June,2000 and the project authorities failed to take timely action.
The committee failed to understand as to way technical and civil
aspects being looked after by Central Electricity Authority and Central
Water Commission, have been neglected and no precautions were taken.
The Committee feel that both CEA and CWC owe an explanation for
this and the Government should fix the responsibility in the matter.
The Comunittee, therefore, recommend that DPRs cleared by CEA and
civil work carried out under supervision of CWC should be examined
thoroughly and minutely and the lacuna in the clearance system should
be brought to the notice of the Committee with the steps taken to
avoid such recurrence in future.

Reply of the Government

The Nathpa Jhakri Project got delayed due to the following
reasons:

- Massive rock slides in July, 1993 and March, 1996 at the
Dam site and their consequent removal.

- Consequent increase in the length of the Diversion Tunnel
from 400m to 700m.

- Strengthening of both the right & left banks of river satluj
with cable anchors.

144


- Emergence of shear zones at Nugalsari, Sholding, Manglad
and Rattanpur ends.

- Presence of hot water springs and extremely hot working
temperature in the HRT at Wadhal downstream.

- Massive floods in August, 1997 and 1st August, 2000.

All the units of Nathpa Jhakri have been commissioned during
2003-04,

The reasons for delay and time & cost overruns are being looked
into by the Standing Committee of the Ministry of Power in which
the representatives of CEA, CWC, Planning Commission etc. are also
members. The responsibility for lapses, if any, on the part of any
organization or individuals will be fixed by the said Standing
Committee.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paras 23 & 24 Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 2.50)

Taking into account the world scenario in Hydro Department, the
Committee find that countries like Bhutan, Congo, Paraguay have 100%
hydro power in their countries and share of hydro capacity in the
total installed capacity of Norway, Switzerland and Brazil is of the
order of 99%, 85% and 95% respectively. As against, this the hydro
power share in India at present is less than 25% in spite of their
repeated recommendations to raise the share and attain optimal thermal
hydel mix ratio of 60:40. From the present status of potential being
harnessed, the Committee are dismayed to note that although some
important projects to harness hydro potential totaling 20,000 MW have
reported to be planned, the pump storage scheme which have a total
potential of 94,000 MW, only one project, Sardar Sarovar of 1000 MW
capacity has been stated to be planned for execution. The Committee,
therefore, cannot but deplore the way Pump Storage Schemes are being
developed for tapping the desired potential and feel that there is total
lack of thrust for developing hydro schemes. The Committee, therefore,
urge that Government should take all necessary steps for speedily
development of Hydro Schemes including Pump Storage Schemes, draw
a perspective Plan to implement them and apprise the Committee of
the action taken thereon.

142


Reply of the Government

The development of pumped storage schemes has attracted
attention in recent past because of important role these plants are
capable of playing in evening out energy generation from base load
thermal stations and in meeting fluctuations in power demands and
system contingencies. The pumped storage stations as means of meeting
peaking requirement, in large power supply system with different
characteristics are now becoming desirable as the peak demands are
rising fast. Pumped storage schemes could be considered in systems
with predominant thermal/nuclear generating capacity in which the
requirements of peaking capacity cannot be met from conventional
hydro projects. The advantage of these plants are enumerated below:

(i) The pumped storage plants have the same favourable
operating characteristics as of a conventional hydro-plant,
quick start-up and rapid loading-unloading and shutdown
and low outage rates.

(ii) They offer flexibility in sitting than a conventional hydro
plant and involve less hydrological risks.

(iii) They are normally used to provide a balancing load to base-
load thermal and nuclear plants during off-peak hours, and
thus reduce severe cycling of these units and improve their
efficiency, durability and reliability.

(iv) They could also be designed for synchronous condenser
operation.

(v) Pumped storage plants can be introduced to improve system
performance and reliability.

Since Pumped Storage Schemes stabilise the grid, increase the
efficiency and reliability of thermal plants by sharing peak and
fluctuating load, the operation of pump storage projects would need
to be rationalised to give a proper weightage for these factors and
also for the prime power available during peak demand from pumped
storage projects. The weightage in following areas would be quite
justified considering that Pumped Storage Project will obviously be
costly as the fuel cost would be added for pumping which would be
about 50% of total cost of energy, besides lower efficiency in pumping
mode, ete.

* Weightage for stabilizing grid and frequency variation in
the entire system and thus saving infrauctuous power
consumption

143


* Weightage for optimum utilization of thermal Plants and
ensuring effective fuel economy. .

* Increasing longibility and reducing damage to the thermal
plants.

* For assuring industrial growth by providing stable & reliable
power.

By giving weightage to the above aspects, the PSS may become
economical & reasonably comparable with the other modes of feasible
Peaking Power.

In Eastern and Western regions of India, where hydro capacity
compared to thermal is very small (12-13%), the induction of more
and more pumped storage plants would need specific consideration.
In these regions, due to less demand during off-peak hours, thermal
plants are forced to operate at part loads causing considerable efficiency
loss and reduced PLE. The operation of pumped storage plants would
provide much needed load in the off-peak hours to enable efficient
operation of thermal plants and provide premium peaking power
during peak hours. However, states are not willing to purchase costly
pumped storage peaking power.

The reassessment studies of CBA acknowledged the need for
identifying PSS sites and identified 56 sites for Pumped Storage
Schemes (PSS) with total installation of about 94,000 MW. Presently, 8
PSS with aggregate installed capacity of 2454 MW are in operation. 3

1 PSS with total capacity of 2350 MW (Sardar Sarovar 1200 MW, Ghatgar
250 MW and Purlia 900 MW) are under construction and further 1
PSS ie, Tehri PSS (1,000 MW) have been approved by CEA for
implementation.

Pumped Storage Schemes work on the principle of surplus power
awaitable during the off-peak period being used to pump water from
a reservoir at a lower height to a reservoir at a higher level. During
peak hours the water in the higher reservoir is used to generate power
thereby increasing the available peaking power in the grid. The cost
of peaking power obtained through the pumped storage scheme, is
high as it includes the cost of the power (off-peak), losses in
transmission and in the pumping operations (of the order of 30%) and
the cost of operations of the pumped storage schemes. The Indian
Power Industry has not enhanced sufficiently to have a high enough
differentiation in price between peak and off-peak power to allow
commercial operation of pumped storage schemes. As a result, in spite

144


of best efforts the Tehri Pumped Storage Scheme which is sought to
be set up on commercial lines has not yet fructified since the beneficiary
States are unwilling to offer off-peak power at low prices (marginally
above the cost from thermal units) and purchase the peaking power
at rates including the cost explained above.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51 No. 26, Para No. 5.90)

The Committee have noted that various authorities such as the
Central Electricity Authority, the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, etc. are involved in the appraisal of a hydro
power project before it is certified for development. The Committee
desire that there is a need to have a single window dispensation/
authority so that a project is cleared without much hassles. In this
context, the Committee recommend that any hydel project submitted
for clearance should receive all the statutory/non statutory clearances/
approvals within six months of submission of the proposal. The
certification of commercial viability be given within 15 days, especially
to private developers. The Techno-Economic, MoEF and CCEA
clearances be given within 1, 2 and 2 months respectively. The
Committee also recommend that MoP should work out a shelve of
hydel projects cleared from all angles. MoEF be also involved in the
appraisal process. The Committee further find that the Government
have launched 50,000 MW hydro-electric initiative under which work
on Feasibility Studies for 162 Hydro-electric Projects would be taken
up by the Central Electricity Authority in association with Central/
state Power Utilities as consultants. The Committee in this context
desire that the Government should involve MoEF in advance for
undertaking Impact Assessment Studies of fauna/flora, CAT in various
river basins through their own institutional arrangements in a fixed
time frame. This will ensure that the Hydro-Electric Projects are
appraised from environment and forest angles expeditiously. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

Reply of the Government
A. Regarding environmental clearance

In the reengineering of environmental clearance procedures, it is
proposed that the MoEF would initially prescribe the Terms of

145


Reference (TOR) for carrying out the EIA/EMP studies. This will ensure
that the parameters for the preparation of documents are fixed initially.
There would be no scope for asking for additional details or new
information once the TOR has been agreed to. The revised procedure
when implemented would ensure that there is no delay in carrying
out environmental appraisal once the documents are prepared
conforming to the TOR.

B. Regarding forestry clearance

* The ‘Land’ is a State subject and hence it is the State/UT
Government who first decide on the possible utilization of
forest land for non-forestry purpose.

* The project proponents may take up essential studies in
advance which are in the interest of conservation of forests
and environment, prior to submission of the project to the
State/UT Government.

* When the State/UT Governments recommend the project,
the Central Government considers it in a time bound manner
under the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

* A time limit of 210 days has been prescribed for the State
Governments/UTs to process the forestry clearance cases at
their various levels and forward it to Central Government
for their consideration.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41, Para No. 6.7)

The Committee find that one of the causes which retards early
execution of a hydel project is delay on account of acquisition of land.
The process of land (both private and Govt.) acquisition for a project
differs form State to State as per Land Acquisition Act. It is simple in
States like Andhra Pradesh but very difficult and time consuming in
the States of North Eastern Region. Acquisition of land for Ranga
Nandi Hydro-Electric project of the North-Eastern Electric Power
Corporation (NEEPCO) in Nagaland took 5 years which had a
deleterious impact on the project cost and tariff. The Committee have
further found that delay often takes place in deciding the title holder,

146


Classification of land and fixation of compensation. The Committee
have also found that the land records are not properly maintained
and updated by the revenue authorities. Sometimes it is found that
the same land exists in the names of more than one person. Besides,
there is no standard for fixation of rate of land. Land owners often
accept compensation under protest and then move the court. The
Committee recommend that in order to expedite the acquisition of
land, more flexibility should be given to the Project Authorities to
acquire land by negotiations. At the same time, the land records should
be updated and computerized so that time is not wasted in deciding
the title holder. The procedure for fixation of compensation for land
should be streamlined so that it is transparent and unambiguous and
not at the whims and fancy of revenue officials. The Committee also
desire that in order to mitigate the problems encountered while
acquiring land, the Government should amend Land Acquisition Act
and include hydro power project in the priority list and the State
Government be persuaded to provide land to the project authority in
agreed time frame to facilitate shifting of Project Affected Persons
(PAPs). In case of project in the hilly States, forest land should be
made available by the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the
State Government for the construction of project as well as the
rehabilitation and resettlement of PAPs. Further, in order to expedite
the outcome of land disputes, pertaining to power projects, ‘Special
Courts’ be constituted.

Reply of the Government

The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to
the State Governments, The Department of Land Resources, Ministry
of Rural Development and MoEF for implementation.

[Ministry of Power RNo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 59, Para No. 9.21)

The Committee find that Tipaimukh Hydro Electric (Multipurpose)
Project situated near Manipur-Mizoram border at 500m downstream
of confluence of river Barak with Tuivai in Churachandpur district of
Manipur envisages construction of 162.8 high Rockfill Dam on River
Barak to generate 1500 MW of power with 5 units of 250 MW each
having firm power of 434.44 MW. The Committee are, however,

147


unhappy to note that Tipaimukh Scheme which was thought of way
back in 1954 and the project investigated in 1955-56 by the erstwhile
Central Water and Power Cofnpany and then by Central Water
Commission is yet to see the light for execution. The committee are
further perturbed to note that although the first DPR was ready in
1984, the execution of the project could not take place due to one or
the other reason. The Committee can not but deplore the way hydel
projects are being executed in the country especially in North-Eastern
Region which need special attention due to socio economic
backwardness and geographical alienation from the rest of the country.

Reply of the Government

The Central Electricity Authority has accorded techno-economic
clearance to Tipaimukh HLE. project on 2.7.2003 at a cost of Rs.5163.96
crore (which includes Rs.288.76 crore on flood moderation, Rs.280.59
crore on security and Rs.105 crore on diversion of national highway).
As the security problems in and around the project area are very

" serious in view of large number of insurgent groups active in the
area, it is essential to provide security not only in the project area but
the long approach road as well. However, the loading of such indirect
costs on the project is making the tariff unviable. In its present form.
the tariff (18 year) works out to Rs.3 per unit (approx) at the bus bar.
It is necessary for the tariff of Tipaimukh HEP to be brought down to
below Rs.1.50 per unit to make it commercially viable and saleable
after adding the transmission costs as the Power would need to be
wheeled out of the NE Region.

Ministry of Power has already mooted a general proposal for off
loading the cost towards security and other indirect costs from the
cost of Hydro-electric projects in order to ensure their viability. The
concerned Ministries/Departments have expressed reservations in
making provisions in their budget for meeting expenses on security,
flood moderation and diversion of national highway.

Ministry of Power has been considering various financial models
and also exploring the possibility of the State Government agreeing to
stagger the 12% free power by keeping it low in the initial years and
raising it gradually to 12% in the seventh year or so and keeping it
constant thereafter. However, the Government of Manipur and the
Government of Mizoram are yet to agree to do so.

It is felt that since the State Governments are also the major
beneficiaries of irrigation/flood control components of hydel power
Project, this cost should be perhaps alternatively be borne by
148


State Government without being loaded on to the cost of power. A
meeting with the concerned State Governments/Central Ministries is
being organized.

In the meantime, NEEPCO has been directed to complete the field
studies for the project at site including updating the DPR data. CEA
had planned to visit the project site to estimate the expenditure in
September/October, 2004 but the Government of Manipur has advised
that the visit be called off for the time being and re-scheduled to end
October, 2004 after necessary arrangement for security etc. have been
tied up with the Govt. of India by the State Government.

N.E. Region has the highest untapped potential and, therefore,
special thrust is being given to development its potential. Central
Electricity Authority has carried out a ranking study to prioritise
various hydro-electric projects identified in the country, out of which
145 projects totally 57,370 MW are in the N.E. Region. Under the
50,000 MW Hydro Initiative, Pre-Feasibility Reports of 62 schemes with
an estimated capacity of 30,674 MW in the North Eastern States have
since been prepared and the process of preparing DPRs in respect of
attractive projects has already been initiated. The Central Sector HEPs
being developed by NEEPCO are Turial (60 MW) in Mizoram, Kameng
(600 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh, Tuivai (210 MW) in Mizoram,
Tipaimukh (1500 MW) in Manipur, Ranganadi (130 MW) in Arunachal
Pradesh, Lower Kopili (150 MW) in Assam and Dikrong (110 MW) in
Arunachal Pradesh. NHPC is developing Loktak D/S (90 MW) in
Manipur, Subansiri Lower (2000 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh, Subansiri
Middle (1600 MW), Subansiri Upper (2000 MW), Siang Middle (1000
MW), Siang Lower (1600 MW), Dibang (3000 MW) and Siang Upper
Siang Intermediate (11000 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh.

[Ministry of Power F.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (SI. No. 60, Para No. 9.22)

The Committee are further perturbed to note the lack of co-
ordination amongst various agencies associated with the execution of
the ancillary works at and near the project site. As regard to
realignment/shifting of NH-53, the Directorate General, Border Roads
Organization (BRO) have informed the Committee that BRO was ready
for joint survey of NH-53, but due to insurgency in the area or other
related problems, representatives of NEEPCO & State Government could
not reach site and carryout survey. The Committee note that on
20.09.2001 at a High Level Meeting at New Delhi, it was decided for
improvement of NH-53 to (Double Laning) to be carried out without

149


considering effect to Tipaimukh dam as final investigations after
obtaining required statutory clearance. NEEPCO, however, vide their
letter No. ED (C)/RCE-9/1164-68 dated 2.6.2002 has desired that joint
survey could be done as and when the situation improves. Further,
the work of Double Laning of NH-53 is reported to be in progress
now. According to BRO, nothing can be committed at this stage on
cost and quantum of realignment of NH-53 required to be planned to
avoid submergence of the road due to the construction of Tipaimukh
dam, till joint survey is completed. The Committee are constrained to
learn that it was only after 9 months of the High Level Committee
meeting held in September, 2001 which decided for improvement of
NH-53 that the NEEPCO had responded for a joint survey in June,
2002. The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that no
seriousness has been shown by the Ministry of Power and NEEPCO
in undertaking survey works. The Committee recommend the
Government/NEEPCO to take necessary steps and complete the joint
survey and investigation of the project.

Reply of the Government

NEEPCO has been directed to complete the field studies for the
project at site including updating the DPR data. CEA had planned to
visit the project site to estimate the expenditure in September/October,
2004 but the Government of Manipur has advised that the visit be
called off for the time being and re-scheduled to end October, 2004
after necessary arrangements for security etc. have been tied up with
the Govt. of India by the State Government.

[Ministry of Power E.No. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]
Recommendation (51, No. 61, Para No. 9.23)

In regard to the security for Tipaimukh Hydro Electric Project, the
Committee have been informed by Ministry of Home Affairs that a
survey team of CRPF had assessed the requirement of force deployment
as three Battalions and two Companies, till the work of the project is
completed and on completion two Battalions and three Companies to
be deployed on permanent basis. The Ministry have further added
that as per the policy of the Government, dedicated security for the
infrastructure projects such as hydro electric projects is provided only
on payment basis. According to the existing policy, the cost for
dedicated security has to be met by the Project authorities. The
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs was candid enough to admit that
this is the policy which is laid down and it can be changed if the
Finance Ministry decided that no charge is to be levied. According to
150


him, the other possibility is, the Department of North-East Affairs may
agree for the security related aspects and pay it out from its own
fund. The Committee are unhappy to note that the projects which will
yield huge benefits to the country are held up due to loading of cost
‘on account of flood moderation, diversion of roads/highways, security
etc. The Committee strongly urge the Government that these factors
should be taken care of by the State/Central Government, for
development of infrastructure projects in the State affected by
insurgency so that cost of delivered power is not on higher side and
the projects become viable. The Committee also note that the Ministries
of Home and Surface Transport have not accepted the request of the
Ministry of Power in this regard. The Committee suggest that the
Ministry of Power should take up this matter with the highest
authorities iz. PMO, etc. and present this case strongly and ensure
that the concerned Ministries participate in power project. The
Committee are of the view that no development project, including
Hydel in North Eastern be allowed to languish on account of security.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
make necessary changes in the present policy for development of
projects in the North Eastern Region as well as in the State of Jammu
& Kashmir immediately to help their social and economic development
as well as exploitation of huge hydro power potential in the area.
Taking note of the fact that Tipaimukh project will not only meet the
demand supply gap of Manipur and other North Eastern States
particularly Barrack valley of Assam but would also be beneficial to
the people of Manipur from view point of sustained socio-economic
development and help flood moderation in the downstream plain of
Assam, development of pisciculture, tourism, water transportation,
drinking water etc., the Committee recommend the Government to
take all possible steps immediately to ensure that the project is cleared
by PIB and CCEA. The Committee would like to be appraised of the
action taken by the Government in this regard within 3 months.

Reply of the Government

In its present form, the tariff (1° year) of Tipaimukh HEP works
out to Rs. 3 per unit (approx) at the bus bar. It is necessary for the
tariff of Tipaimukh HEP to be brought down to below Rs. 1.50 per
unit to make it commercially viable and saleable after adding the
transmission costs as the Power would need to be wheeled out of the
NE Region.

Ministry of Power has already mooted a general proposal for off
loading the cost towards security and other indirect costs from the

151


cost of Hydro-electric projects in order to ensure their viability. The
concerned Ministries/Departments have expressed reservations in
making provisions in their budget for meeting expenses on security,
flood moderation and diversion of national highway.

Ministry of Power has been considering various financial models
and also exploring the possibility of the State Government agreeing to
stagger the 12% free power by keeping it low in the initial years and
raising it gradually to 12% in the seventh year or so and keeping it
constant thereafter. However, the Government of Manipur and the
Government of Mizoram have yet to agree to do so.

Tt is felt that since the State Governments are also the major
beneficiaries of irrigation/flood control components of hydel power
project, these cost should be perhaps alternatively be borne by the
State Governments without being loaded on to the cost of power.

In the meantime, NEEPCO has been directed to complete the field
studies for the project at site including updating the DPR data. CEA
had planned to visit the project site to estimate the expenditure in
September /October, 2004 but the Government of Manipur has advised
that the visit be called off for the time being and re-scheduled to end
October, 2004 after necessary arrangements for security etc, have been
tied up with the Govt. of India by the State Government.

[Ministry of Power ENo. 16/19/2004-H-II dated 08.10.2004]

New (राजा; GURUDAS KAMAT,
1S July, 2005 Chairman,
14 Asadha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

152


ANNEXURE I

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD ON 13TH JULY, 2005
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ’E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1600 hours to 1700 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

2. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

3. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

4, Shri Prashanta Pradhan

5. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

6. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

7. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

8. Shri G. Venkataswamy

9. Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

10. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

11. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

12. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

13. Shri Bimal Jalan

14. Shri Motilal Vora

15. Shri Jesu Das Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. K. Bhandrai — Director
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
(2004-05) welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. The
Committee condoled the death of Shri PK. Vasudevan Nair, Chairman,

Standing Committee on Labour, Lok Sabha. The Members stood in
silence for two minutes in remembrance of the departed soul.

3. The Committee then took up for consideration draft Action
Taken Report on Forty-second Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject “Hydro Power - A Critique’.

153


4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Report with minor
additions/deletions /amendments.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Report after making consequential changes arising
out of factual verification by the “concerned Ministry and to present

the same to the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

154


ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

IL.

ig.

Iv.

Total No. of Recommendations made

Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government

(Vide recommendations at 51. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 9,
11, 13, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 29, 33, 34, 40, 42,
44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 62,
63, 64, 66, 68 and 69)

Percentage of total

Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to persue in view of the Government's
replies

(Vide recommendations at 51. Nos. 2, 6, 8, 14,
16, 17, 22, 23, 25, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36, 39, 43,
45, 58, 65 and 67)

Percentage of total

Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee

(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 15, 37, 38
and 52)

Percentage of total

Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited
(Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5, 10, 12,
26, 41, 59, 60 and 61)

Percentage of total

RECOMMENDATION CONTAINED IN THE FORTY SECOND
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY

69

36

52.17%

21

30.43%

5.8%

11.6%

155