STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

BIOMASS POWER/CO-GENERATION
PROGRAMME—AN EVALUATION

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

EIGHTH REPORT

सयमेब जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2005/Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka)


EIGHTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

BIOMASS POWER/CO-GENERATION
PROGRAMME—AN EVALUATION

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.8.2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.8.2005

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2005/Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka)


Price : Rs. 32.00

© 2005 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Pace
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON Non-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY
Sources (2004-05) (vii)
INTRODUCTION ....... (ix)
REPORT
PART-I
Cuarter [ Introductory i
Cuaprer ID Biomass Potential and Present Status of
Utilization 6
Cuarrer TI Incentives and financing for Biomass Power
Projects... 18
Cuapter IV Research & Development in the Biomass Power
Co-generation .... 25
Carrer V Other Schemes Under Biomass Power
Programme ..... 35
PART-II
I. Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations of the
Standing Committee on Energy contained in the Report... 49
Il. Minutes of the sitting of Sub-Committee on Non-
Conventional Energy Sources and Standing Committee
on Energy relating to the subject 67



छ फ़ पक एफी ७

BrP eS
PoenRES

15.

22.
23.
24.
25,
26.
27.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MemMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkataswamy

Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

Dr, (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan

(iii)


(iv)

28.
29,
30.
31.

Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
3. Shri PK. Bhandari — Director
4. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Neena Juneja — Senior Executive Assistant


22.
23.
24.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05)
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
‘MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkataswamy

Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

(v)


(vi)

25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan
Dr. K. Kasturirangan

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam


COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES (2004-05)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

Dr. K. Kasturirangan — Convenor

Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

=P 4

एक कुक जय छू का #%

(vii)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorised by the Committee (2005-2006) to present the Report on
their behalf, present this 8th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject, “Biomass Power Co-generation Programme—An evaluation’.
The task of examining the subject, “Biomass Power Co-generation
Programme—An evaluation” and preparing a report on the above
subject was entrusted to a Sub-Committee-III of Standing Committee
on Energy (2004-05).

2. The Sub-Committee held 3 sittings in all out of which 1 sitting
was devoted to evidence of official witnesses.

3. The Committee wish to thank the representatives of the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources who appeared before the
Committee and placed their views on the subject. They also wish to
thank the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources for furnishing
the replies on the points raised by the Committee.

4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 23rd August, 2005.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Detui; GURUDAS KAMAT,
23 August, 2005 Chairman,
1 Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(0


REPORT
PART 1
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

Energy is a basic requirement for economic development. Every
sector of Indian economy—agriculture, industry, transport, commercial
and domestic, needs inputs of energy. The consumption of energy in
all forms has been steadily rising all over the country. This growing
consumption of energy has also resulted in the country becoming
increasingly dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. Rising
prices of oil and gas and potential shortages in future lead to concerns
about the security of the energy supply needed to sustain our economic
growth. Increased use of fossil fuels also causes environmental problems
both locally and globally.

1.2 Fortunately, India is blessed with a variety of renewable energy
sources, the main ones being biomass, the sun, wind and small
hydropower. Municipal and Industrial wastes can also be useful sources
of energy but are basically different forms of biomass.

1.3 The main advantages of biomass energy over the other
renewable and conventional sources:

— Ability to produce ‘firm’ power as compared to wind power
whose capacity utilization factor in the country is between
17-18 per cent;

— Amenability to storage and use as per power demand;

— Broadly similar combustion characteristics as that of coal
which may even enable partial co-firing;

— Less polluting when compared to fossil fuel.

— Generates additional employment through local collection,
storage, handling and transportation of biomass for power
projects.

Biomass as an Energy source

14 Biomass is renewable organic substance of plant and animal
origin. It includes agricultural and forestry residues, animal and human
wastes, urban and industrial wastes etc. Biomass resources are available
locally within or around the villages and energy production distribution


and provision of energy services can be managed by the village
communities. Besides combustion for direct thermal applications,
modern biomass technologies can convert biomass to solid, liquid or
gaseous fuels at improved efficiencies for thermal, mechanical and
electrical energy production such as:—

* Charcoal, briquettes

* Liquid fuels such as vegetable oils, bio-diesel, ethanol from
oil seeds, crop residues.

* Biogas from anaerobic digestion of animal and other organic
wastes/residues.

* Producer gas through biomass conversion in small gasifiers.
Biomass Potential and Resource Assessment

1.5 The annual generation of surplus agro residues and the wastes
from forestry and plantations (principally rice husk, rice straw, bagasse,
sugarcane tops and leaves, trash, groundnut shells, cotton stalks,
mustard stalks, etc.) that can be utilized for generating power is
estimated between 120-150 million tonnes, which translates into a
potential for about 16,000 MW grid-interactive power generation. In
addition, there is an estimated potential of around 3,500 MW grid-
interactive power generation through cogeneration in sugar mills in
the country. The States having good potential for bagasse based
cogeneration include Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka & Andhra Pradesh, while those having good potential for
biomass based power generation include Andhra Pradesh, Tami! Nadu,
Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Punjab, etc. The total estimated potential
of Biomass Power in India is as under:

(i) Power generation from plantations in 60 million hectares of
wasteland at 70% PLF-100000 MW @ 1 MW/600 hectares.

(ii) Biomass based power generation from surplus biomass (crop
and agro industrial residues excluding bagasse)—16,000 MW.

(iii) Additional power generation through optimum bagasse
cogeneration-3500 MW.

1.6 As stated by the Ministry accurate information on availability
of biomass in different parts of the country which could be made
available for energy purposes, is a pre-requisite for promotion of
commercial projects intending to use this biomass. With this in view
during the Ninth Plan, the Ministry had sponsored 500 taluka level

2


biomass assessment studies in 23 States to compile data on availability
of biomass.

1.7 As an extension of this effort, a project for preparation of
“Biomass Resource Atlas for India” has been jointly sponsored to Indian
Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, and Regional Remote Sensing
Service Centre (RRSSC), Bangalore, which aims at integration of the
data on biomass availability obtained from taluka-level studies and
from other reliable sources, with information on crop distribution
pattern derived from GIS-based maps provided by RRSC.

The Ministry’s Programmes on Bio Energy

1.8 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have
following programmes on Biomass energy:

(i) Biomass Energy and Co-generation Programme.

(ii) Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial Wastes through
combustion and biomethanation route.

(iii) Village Energy Security based on biomass
(iv) Biofuel for stationary, portable and transport applications.
(v) Biogas for domestic use and power generation.

(vi) Bio-energy Research, Design, Development Demonstration
and Commercialization (RDDDC).*

Biomass Energy and Co-generation Programme

1.9 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources is
implementing Biomass Energy and Co-generation programme. This
programme covers megawatt scale electricity generation from biomass
through either direct combustion route (combustion of biomass in a
boiler whose steam is used to run a turbine coupled to a generator)
or gasification—gas turbine route and though the cogeneration route.
Only surplus biomass is used for generation of grid-interactive
electricity. The combustion route is being employed both in the biomass
power and bagasse cogeneration programmes. The programme was
initiated a decade ago and achievements have since been made towards
commercializing biomass/cogeneration power.

*All RDDDC activity has been centralized under one development programme except
for bio-fuels which is being dealt by another development group. Similarly, publicity for
all programmes has been centralized under the information and publicity group.



1.10 With the advancement in technology for generation and
utilization of steam at high temperatures and pressures, the sugar
industry cannot only produce electricity and steam for its own
requirements but can also produce significant surplus electricity for
sale to the grid, using the same quantity of bagasse. if steam generation
temperature/pressure is raised from 400° C/33 bar to 485°C/66 bar,
more than 80 kWh of additional electricity can be produced for each
tonne of cane crushed. The sale of surplus power helps a sugar mill
to improve its viability apart from adding to the power generation
capacity of the country, provided crushing season extends upto 180
days as against the average of upto 150 days. Long crushing duration
is generally obtained in the coastal belt.

Biomass Energy and Co-generation Programme has two main
components viz:

(a) Biomass Power/Cogeneration and
(b) Biomass gasification
(a) Biomass Power/Co-generation Programme

1.11 The overall objective of the Biomass power/co-generation
programme is to catalyze commercialization of biomass based grid
interactive power. The major activity under the programme is to
promote deployment of biomass and baggase co-generation grid
interactive power projects for MW-scale electricity generation.

(b) Biomass Gasifier Programme

1.12 Biomass gasification is the thermo-chemical conversion of
organic matter into a gaseous fuel known as producer gas. The gas
has low calorific value (1000-1200 kcal/Nm3), but it can be used for
replacing diesel oil in engines for mechanical and electrical applications
or for replacing other forms of conventional energy in heating
applications. The gasifications route of conversion of biomass to useful
energy has the advantage of higher process efficiency in small capacity
range. The Ministry has been supporting development of biomass
gasification technology for almost two decades and as a result of these
efforts, biomass gasification systems from 5 kW to 1000 kW unit
capacity suitable for using a variety of biomass have been developed
indigenously.

4


Objectives of the Programme

1.13 The main objective of the biomass gasification programme is

to promote deployment of biomass gasification systems for different
end uses.

The Committee have examined in detail the issue of exploitation
of Biomass power and implementation of Biomass Energy and
Co-generation Programme. These issues have been discussed in the
subsequent chapters.


CHAPTER II

BIOMASS POTENTIAL AND PRESENT STATUS
OF UTILIZATION

Various studies have indicated that at least 150-200 million tonnes
of Biomass materials, comprising agricultural and agro-industrial
residues produced every year, do not find much productive use and
can be made available for alternative uses. This quantity of Biomass
has the potential to generate 15000-25,000 MW Power. In addition,
biomass grown on wastelands, road and rail track site plantation etc.
can also be used to generate electricity of the order of more than
70,000 MW. Thus, the total electricity potential from Biomass has been
estimated at more than 1,00,000 MW.

2.2 When asked about the comparative picture of Biomass potential
availability and Power being produced in some important countries,
the Ministry referred the Encyclopedia of Energy, Elsevier Academic
Publication 2004 and submitted the following details:

Country Share of Biomass Biomass Biomass Power
in energy mix (%) Consumption (TWh/ Year)
(EJ/Year)
Brazil 23.4 1.861 8.519
China 18.7 9.271 1.963
Thiland 19.4 0.621 Negligible.
Pakistan 37.6 1.053 -do-
Mexico 52: 0.347 -do-
Australia 49 0.234 -do-
Cuba 21.4 0.121 -do-

State wise Bagasse Cogeneration Potential is mentioned in the table
given below:

State Potential, MW
1 Zz
Maharashtra 1,000
Uttar Pradesh 900



४1 2

Uttaranchal 100
Tamil Nadu 350
Karnataka 300
Andhra Pradesh 200
Bihar 200
Gujarat 200
Punjab 150
Haryana & Others 100
Total 3500

The following table shows Bagasse Cogeneration Distribution of
Sugar Mills in the Country—Total Mills 551:

Sector <2500 TCD. 2500-4999 TCD >5000 TCD

Private 43 90 35
Cooperative 113 169 23
Public Sector 48 15 1

2.3 When asked about the potential developed for Biomass
co-generation by the different countries of world like Brazil, China,
Thailand, Pakistan, Mexico, Australia, Cuba having good biomass
potential, the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources submitted
the following details:—

“The total bagasse cogeneration potential in different countries of
the world is estimated to be about 1,35,000 GWh/yr. This includes
38600 GWh/yr for Brazil, 2900 GWh/yr for India, 9400 GWh/yr
for China, 7400 GWh/yr for Thailand, 5200 GWh/yr for Pakistan,
4500 GWh/yr for Mexico, 3600 GWh/yr for Australia and
3400 GWh/yr for Cuba. About 25% of this represents the captive
power needs of the sugar mills and is already exploited but the
remaining 75% representing surplus power generation remains
largely unexplicited. For example, in Brazil 40 sugar mills use
1.2-1.5 GW of capacity for captive use and only 158MW for sale
to grid. Although Australia has 37 sugar mills, no significant
cogeneration activity was taken up until recently. However, a sugar

7


mill has recently setup the first bagasse cogeneration project, which
generates 180 GWh/year of electricity corresponding to about
40 MW at 50% PLE”

2.4 The following table shows State-wise Biomass Power Projects
Co-generation projects Capacity (as on 31.03.2005):

S.No. State Capacity Capacity under
Commissioned Implementation
(MW) (MW)

No, of Biomass Co-generation No of Biomass Co-generation
Project Power Progcts«—Proects «Power Projects

Project Projects

1, Andhra Pradesh 49 194.2 73.05 18 70.25 55.71
2... Chhattisgarh 2. 11.00 - 5. 51.00 -
3. Gujarat - 05,00 - - - -
4. Haryana 2 400... 2.00 - - -
Ue Karnataka 1S 36.00 1598 20 61.00 94.66
6. Madhya Pradesh कक 100 = - - =
7. Maharashtra 9 350 32.50 8 6.00 -
8. Punjab 3 10.00 12.00 1 6.00 69.80
9. Rajasthan 1 780 — 4... 29.10 =
10. Tamil Nadu 19 34.50 13850 9 48.50 28.50
11... Uttar Pradesh 1 - 73,00 8 = 64.30

101 3025 44703 733. 27185 आ29

2.5 As informed by the Ministry, the cost of electricity generation
from Bagasse based cogeneration projects varies between Rs. 2.50 and
3.00 per kwh depending upon site conditions. In case of biomass power
projects, the cost of generation is between Rs. 2.50 and Rs. 3.50 per
kwh.

2.6 In the same context the Committee observed that the schemes
for Biomass cogeneration are concentrated in.a few States namely
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh and wanted to know
that why the other sugar producing states like Punjab and Maharashtra

8


have not taken up the programme in a big way, the Ministry stated
the following reason:—

“In Maharashtra, a majority of the cooperative sugar mills have
limited potential to raise loans because of poor financial and
liquidity positions. Further, the viability of bagasse cogeneration
projects depends upon various factors including length of crushing
season which must be a minimum of around 180 days, crushing
capacity of sugar mills, which should not be less than 2500 tpd
etc. These factors are also not very favourable in Punjab as the
crushing season is not long enough to sustain economic bagasse
cogeneration of power.”

Targets and achievements under Biomass Power and cogeneration
Programme

2.7 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has been
implementing Biomass Power and Co-generation Programme for the
last 10 years. Over these years, more than one hundred biomass power
and cogeneration projects aggregating to 750 MW have been installed
in the country for feeding power to the grid. In addition around 70
biomass power and cogeneration projects aggregating to 585 MW of
electricity are under various stages of implementation. Bagasse
cogeneration projects in sugar mills includes 58 projects with installed
capacity aggregating to 450 MW and 34 projects under implementation
aggregating to 312 MW. The States which have taken a leadership
position in implementation of cogeneration projects include Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, while for biomass
power projects, the leading States are Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu. The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has
an aim of achieving renewable grid power of 10,000 MW, including
3000 MW bio energy based grid power, during the 10th and 11th plan
periods corresponding to 10% of the additional grid-interactive power
generation installed capacity expected during the said period.

2.8 The overall objective of the programme is to catalyze
commercialization of Biomass based grid interactive power.

Biomass power and Cogeneration future strategy of the Ministry
is as under:

* Mapping the potential for energy plantation.


Linking energy plantations with power generation in order
to ensure sustained supply as also to fully harness the
potential of waste-lands.

2.9 When the Committee specifically asked about the efforts made
by the Ministry to achieve the objective of programme, MNES stated
in a written reply as under:—

Resource Assessment was carried out at taluka and district
levels to estimate surplus biomass material. The work on
preparation of a Biomass Resource Atals for India is under
progress.

Guidelines were formulated and issued to States for
announcing a policy for buy-back, wheeling, banking and
third party sale of renewable power, including biomass/
cogeneration power. As a result, twelve of the major
potential States announced conducive policies for biomass
power/cogeneration projects.

Simultaneous dialogue was initiated with financial
institutions for providing loans to biomass power/
cogeneration projects.

Central Financial Assistance (CFA) in the form of capital
subsidy was provided for setting up projects utilizing high
pressure boilers in sugar mills under the cogeneration
programme.

CFA was provided for promotional activities such as
business/interaction meets, training for sugar mill engineers,
professional/technical services by consultancy firms and state
nodal agencies for involvement in promoting biomass
power/cogeneration projects.

Many private sector sugar mills have taken up bagasse
cogeneration projects. Most sugar mills in the cooperative
sector are unable to make bankable proposals on account of
their adverse financial and liquidity positions.

As a result, biomass power/cogeneration projects of 750 MW
installed capacity have been achieved as on 31.3.2005
comprising 303 MW biomass power and 447 MW bagasse
cogeneration projects. Projects aggregating 585 MW are
under implementation.


2.10 The following table show the physical and financial targets
and achievements during the 9th and 10th Plan periods:

A. Physical (in MW)

Ninth Plan Tenth Plan

2002-03 2003-04 2004-05

Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach, Target Ach.

314 295,30 100 102.63 15 129.50 125 ae ee eee
B. Financial (Rupees in crore)
Ninth Plan Tenth Plan
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
BE Ach. BE/RE Ach. BE/RE Ach, BE/RE Ach.

82.30 74.50 19.28/ 16.78 18.00/ 11.95 14.54/ 6.22
16.78 16.50 12.54

2.11 During the course of evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources admitted that the potential of Energy
from Biomass cogeneration was very vast but the targets fixed were
low. Secretary further stated:—

“One of the major problems, of course, is that as far as biomass
conversion outside the Bagasse domain is concerned, the real
breakthrough came in 2002. By the end of 2002, 100 per cent
producer gas run engines became a reality. Till 2002, it was all
dual fuel system, Today, the dual fuel system is not viable because
the price of diesel is so high that nobody is going to go for it.”

2.12 When asked about State-wise physical achievements, Ministry
of Non-Conventional ‘Energy Sources submitted the following
information:

State/UT Achivement (MW)
9th Plan 10th Plan (2002-05)
1 2 3
Andhra Pradesh 100.20 166.05
Chhattisgarh 11.00 तर

1


1 2 3

Gujarat 0.50 =
Haryana ता 29
Karnataka 74.60 76.38
Madhya Pradesh = 19
Maharashtra 15.50 11.5
Punjab 2.00 10.9
Rajasthan = 78
Tamil Nadu 51.50 67.9
Uttar Pradesh 40.00 26.5
Total 295.30 368.23

2.13 When the Committee enquired about the state-wise physical
and financial targets and achievements.

The Ministry have stated:—

“State-wise targets are not fixed under the biomass power
programme as this activity is driven by private investment, which
depends on a host of factors including entrepreneurial activity in
the state, surplus biomass potential and the price of electricity
fixed by the state regulators.”

2.14 While going into the details of future strategy of the
Government regarding Biomass Power and Cogenerating, when the
Committee wanted to know about the latest position of development
of Biomass Resource Atlas based on Biomass resource assessment in
different regions of the country, the Ministry submitted the following

reply:—

“The first phase of development of the Atlas for entire country
has been completed using satellite based Remote Sensing Data
(RSD) obtained from the Regional Remote Sensing Service Centre,
Bangalore (Indian Space Research Organization) and data from the
biomass assessment studies conducted at the taluka level with
support from the ministry. The model results are undergoing
validation. Efforts are being made to ensure distribution of a stand-
alone computer application package to a few selected State Nodal
Agencies/potential entrepreneurs during the last quarter of the
current financial year.

12


The second phase relating to web based application is under
development in which a higher resolution RSD and survey data at
the district level from biomass resource assessment studies are being
used. The web-based package would be hosted by the National
Informatics Centre (NIC), Government of India.”

2.15 During the course of evidence when the Committee enquired
about the time when the map will be available to the potential users,
the head of the programme replied as under:—

“Stand alone computer application package will be available by
the end of this financial year, Presently the model results need
validation. The second phase where the higher resolution data will
be matched that would be the next two years exercise, Thereafter,
it will be available on web for the entrepreneurs and others through
NIC, So, the project would complete by the end of March, 2007.
The first package based on the low resolution data should be
available by the end of this financial year and it would be made
available through state nodal agency and some of the entrepreneurs
for testing and trial purposes.”

2.16 Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have informed
that as per the advice of Sub-Committee III of the Standing Committee
on Energy during the course of evidence held on 18.07.2005 efforts are
being made to make the package already prepared for 8 States viz
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh available on a web server during the next
three months. The work relating to web based application involving
higher resolution data and survey data at district level is expected to
be completed by 31.03.2007.

2.17 The Committee observe that Biomass is renewable organic
material drived from trees, plants, crops or from human, animal,
municipal and industrial wastes. Woody Biomass is derived from
forests, plantations forestry residues while other sources provide non-
woody Biomass. Fortunately, India is blessed with a huge potential
of Biomass. Moreover, Biomass resources are available locally within
or around the villages and energy production, distribution and
provision of energy can be managed by the village communities.
The Committee also note that the total estimated Biomass power
potential in India is above 1 lakh MW. This includes 16,000 MW
grid interactive power from surplus agro residues and wastes from
forestry an plantations 3500 MW through bagasse co-generation and
1 lakh MW from plantation of 60 million hectares of wasteland, The

13


Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has been implementing
Biomass Power and Cogeneration Programme since 1994. The
Committee note that over these ten years, only 101 Biomass Power
and Cogeneration projects aggregating to 750 MW have been installed
in the country and 73 projects aggregating to 585 MW are under
various stages of implementation. This includes 58 Bagasse
Cogeneration Projects aggregating to 450 MW and 34 Projects under
implementation aggregating to 312 MW. The Committee are not at
all satisfied with the present slow approach of the Government in
tapping the huge Biomass potential available in the country. The
Government have fixed a target that 10% of the additional grid
interactive power generation capacity should come from renewable
sources during the 10th and 11th Plan periods, which is 5.5% at
present. Bio-energy can make significant contribution in achieving
this target. More efficient modern Biomass technologies have the
potential to alleviate poverty, improve health, reduce drudgery of
women and children, increase productivity, create employment and
generate incomes in rural areas, thereby reducing rural to urban
migration. The Committee at this stage feel a need that renewable
energy including Bio-energy should now be brought into mainstream
for meeting/supplementing the energy demands in urban and rural
areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Government should now evolve an effective implementation strategy
for Biomass Power Cogeneration Programme for maximum
exploitation of Biomass resources of the country with an objective
to make Biomass energy available at an affordable price to the
common man.

2.18 The Committee note that the private developers face a
number of problems in setting up biomass projects like firm
assessment on availability of Biomass and ensuring its supply to
the project, uncertainty on tariff to be fixed by SERCs and evolving
technology of biomass gasification systems etc. The Committee desire
that these problems should be resolved on priority and in a time
bound manner.

2.19 The Committee specifically note that India has very good
Bagasse cogeneration potential which can generate 3500 MW power.
Out of this, only 450 MW projects have been installed and 312 MW
projects are in pipeline. The Committee are surprised to note that in
the State of Maharashtra out of the potential of 1000 MW, Bagasse
Co-generation projects of 32.5 MW only have been commissioned so
far and projects of 6 MW are under implementation. Similarly the
Bagasse potential of other States like U.P, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,

14


Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat and Punjab has also been poorly
utilized. The Committee are concerned to note that the main hurdles
in the programme exist in the fact that in some states particularly in
Maharashtra, the sugar mills are in the cooperative sector and they
face difficulties in limited access to funds and also in raising equity
component of the investment in the programme. Also, there is heavy
management risk in the projects as the cooperative sector is subject
to frequent changes in the management and perception of risk in
the Biomass Cogeneration Projects is high. The Committee feel that
industrial Co-generation has in the past not received adequate
attention, as cheap power and fuel were abundantly available.
However, with increasing tariffs and unreliable supply of grid power,
there is considerable opportunity for the industrial sector needs to
tap the potential for producing electricity and thermal energy in the
Co-generation mode. In this direction the Bagasse Co-generation
programme can play a pivotal role. The Committee welcome the
initiative taken by the Government by requesting the Maharashtra
Energy Development Agency (MEDA) to constitute a high level
Committee for identifying and suggesting measures for rapid
implementation of Co-generation projects in cooperative sugar mills
in the State and desire that they should persuade MEDA to prepare
a Report in the shortest possible time. The Committee also desire
that after examining the Report the Government should prepare a
specific package of incentives containing capital as well as operative
subsidies for cooperative sugar mills in Maharashtra and other States.
The Committee may be apprised of the time-frame fixed in this
regard.

2.20 The Committee also find that the capacity under
implementation in the various Biomass projects in the various States
is relatively lower than the capacity commissioned. Although the
Ministry have sufficient information on the potential available in
the states for Biomass Power and Cogeneration programme, the
capacity under utilization is quite low. The Committee are constrained
to note that State-wise physical and financial targets are not fixed
and therefore, comparative data on the targets and achievements are
not available. The Committee are not convinced with the reasoning
given by the Ministry that Statewise targets are not fixed under the
Biomass Power Programme as this activity is driven by private
investment, which depends on a host of factors including
entrepreneurid activity in that state, surplus Biomass potential and
the price of electricity fixed by the state regulators. The Committee
in their 31st Report on the Electricity Bill, 2001 (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) had recommended that the states should be encouraged

15


to procure at least 5% of their Energy demands from renewable
sources and the limit of the same should be raised to 10% by the
end of 11th Plan in phases. Similar objectives/targets have been fixed
by the Central Government also. The Committee, therefore, desire
that Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should assess
state-wise potential of Biomass and also fix the targets accordingly
for every year for a balanced exploitation of Biomass potential
available in each State. The Committee desire that the Government
should also collect fuli data of power generation through biomass/
co-generation mode by private developers in various states so as to
know the actual progress. For this purpose, there is a need to develop
a better coordination with the State Level Nodal agencies engaged
in the field of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, responsible for
promotion and development of private sector projects. The Committee
feel that fixation of National targets for procurement of energy
demands from renewable sources would help in better exploitation
of our Non-Conventional Resources.

2.21 The Committee note that Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources have a goal to achieve renewable grid power of
10,000 MW including 3000 MW Biomass Grid Power by the year
2012. They have a target of 700 MW for the Tenth Plan i.e. by 2007
and rest 2300 MW will have to be achieved during 11th Plan period.
Out of the target of 700 MW only 370 MW has been achieved during
the first three years of the current plan. The Committee feel that the
target of energy from Biomass is very low under the situation when
the country has such a huge Biomass potential. Now, that 100%
producer gas run engines have become reality; it should be easy to
obtain higher targets/exploitation from Biomass sources. Efforts
should be made to make this engine cost effective and popularize
the same for mass utilization. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Ministry should suitably enhance their targets of Biomass Power
generation and also generate a suitable action plan for the same, for
the remaining two years of the current Plan and 11th Plan to achieve
the goal of 3000 MW Biomass grid power by the year 2012.

2.22 The Committee are happy to note that the Government have
taken initiatives for preparation of ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for
India’—based on Biomass resource assessment studies in different
regions of the country. Ministry have informed that first computer
application package based on low resclution data will be available
by the end of this financial year. It would be made available through
State nodal agencies and some of the entrepreneurs for testing and
trial purposes. The second phase where the higher resolution data

16


and survey data will be matched and project is proposed to be
completed by March, 2007. The Committee feel that such an
important data should be made available on website of the Ministry
after the completion of first phase itself. The Committee however
desire that the Ministry should ensure the total reliability of the
data supplied.

17


CHAPTER वा

INCENTIVES AND FINANCING FOR BIOMASS
POWER PROJECTS

The promotion of Biomass based power generation in the country
is being encouraged through conducive policies at the Central and
State levels. A number of policy initiatives have been introduced for
encouragement to commercial exploitation of Biomass potential since
1993. Incentives include sales tax and excise duty exemption, reduced
customs duty, accelerated depreciation etc. Electricity Regulatory
Commissions set up in the States of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka and Maharashtra have also noted the relevance of these
technologies and hence announced policies for purchase/wheeling/
banking of power generated from Biomass power/co-generation projects.

(A) Incentives to Private Sector Biomass Power Generation Projects

3.2 Biomass Power Programme is mainly driven by private
investment-Private Sector projects based on forestry and crop residues,
energy plantations, and forestry /agro industrial residues for generation
of 1 MW and higher levels of power are provided subsidy. The primary
objective of the subsidy is to motivate potential entrepreneurs to invest
in this sector. The following table shows the details of the existing
subsidy and that proposed from 2005-06:

Central Finance Assistance for Bagasse Cogeneration Project

S.No. Bagasse Co- Pressure Interest
generation Configuration Subsidy
1 2 3 4
1 Projects by Cooperative/Public/ 40 bar & above 3%
Joint Sector Sugar Mills
60 bar & above 4%
80 bar & above 5%
100 bar & above 6%
2. Projects in IPP Mode in 60 bar & above 2%
Cooperative/Public/Joint
Sector Sugar Mills 80 bar & above as
100 bar &s above 4%

18


1 2 3 a

ऊँ Projects by Private Sector Sugar Mills 60 bar & above 1%
80 bar & above 2%
100 bar & above 3%

Central Finance Assistance for Biomass Power Projects

S.No. Biomass power project Pressure Interest
category Configuration Subsidy

1. Direct combustion, cogeneration, 60 bar & above 2%
including captive power projects 80 bar & above 3%

2. Atmospheric gasification, = 2%
including captive power projects

5. Projects with MW-Scale 100% Capital Subsidy of Rs. 1.00 Cr./MW
Producer Gas Engines

4. Advanced biomass gasification Capital Subsidy of Rs. 1.00 Cr./MW
projects

3.3 Several other incentives are available to the entrepreneurs for
setting up biomass/cogeneration projects. These include:

(i) Sales tax and excise duty exemption.
(ii) 80% accelerated depreciation in the first year.
(iii) Customs duty concession.
(iv) Tax holidays on income from the power projects, etc.
(v) Exemption from local sales tax in some States.

(iv) Preferential tariffs in most potential States.

3.4 While giving the details about the subsidy being provided under
Biomass/Cogeneration Programme the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources submitted the following details:

“To begin with under the Biomass Power/Cogeneration programme,
capital subsidy was provided to bagasse cogeneration projects and
biomass power projects. Thereafter, interest subsidy was introduced
till 2004-05, depending upon the boiler configuration. Several
difficulties were experienced in implementing the interest subsidy

19


scheme as it extends upto ten years and the procedure was
becoming more cumbersome and time consuming. Therefore, a one
time subsidy scheme is proposed for 2005-06 as it is simple to
implement and monitor and assures that the subsidy is released
only when the project is made operational as per DPR parameters.
The financial outgo per MW almost remains unchanged.”

3.5 The Ministry have stated the latest position about subsidy as
under:—

“Subsidy is now proposed to be released to the concerned financial
institution which would reduce the loan by an equivalent amount as
pre-payment of loan by the developer. In case the project is set up by
a developer through its own resources, the CFA would be released to
the developer directly. However, the Government sector projects would
continue receiving CFA linked to physical progress of the project. The
scheme is proposed to be operated through IREDA and will replace
existing schemes for support to grid interactive renewable power
generation projects. The quantum of CFA per Megawatt (MW) is
proposed to be reduced with increase in capacity taking in to account
the factor of economies of scale. Higher CFA is proposed to be given
to projects to be set up in special category States. The CASE has
recently approved the following pattern of CFA for biomass power
projects:

Programme Special Category States Other States
(NE Region, Sikkim, J&K, HP
& Uttaranchal)
Biomass power projects Rs, 25 lakh X (C)*0.646 Rs. 20 lakh X (C)A0.646
Bagasse Co-generation Rs. 18 lakh X (C)0.646 Rs. 15 lakh X (C)A0.646
Biomass power using Rs. 1.2 crore X (C)*0.646 Rs. 1.0 crore X (C)*0.6.46

Advanced Technologies

C: project capacity in MW #९ raised to the power.”

3.6 When asked about the status of implementation of the subsidy
schemes, the Ministry stated during oral evidence:

“A formal study has not been made so. far to evaluate the impact
of incentives. However, it is observed that incentives provided
under the programme have acted as a catalyst to encourage
sugar mills and biomass power project developers to take up
projects.”

20


They further clarified in their written replies...

“Although there is no Proposal to make a formal study of the
impact of CFA under the programme, the Ministry makes
assessments from time to time based on feedback received from
various stakeholders, Further, the Ministry has requested the
Maharashtra Energy Development Agency (MEDA) to constitute a
High Level Committee for identifying and suggesting measures
for rapid implementation of cogeneration projects in cooperative
sugar mills in the state. The Committee is expected to recommend,
among other things, a package of incentives for co-operative sugar
mills in Maharashtra, which could serve as a model for the country.

Since the inception of the programme, the Ministry has been
providing various types of incentives such as Central Financial
Assistance (CFA) for projects in sugar mills in different sugar
Producing States as also for biomass combustion based power
Projects in biomass surplus states. It may be mentioned that these
initiatives have helped in introducing high pressure/high
temperature steam generation technology in sugar mills. As a result
750 MW capacity as on 31,3.05 comprising 303 MW biomass power
and 447 MW bagasse based cogeneration has been set up in the
country and projects aggregating 585 MW are under
implementation.”

3.7 The provisions of Biomass power/cogeneration programme are
applicable to promoters in all sectors including the private sector, The
same level of CFA is admissible to government ass well as private/
joint/cooperative sector Projects. No special dispensation is being
provided to the private sector in these Projects. Majority of Biomass
power/Bagasse cogeneration projects are being taken up by private
sector.

3.8 When the Committee specifically inquired whether the
Government have analyzed the factors responsible for undertaking
Biomass Power Project despite giving several fiscal and other incentives
MNES submitted the following reply:

“The fiscal and financial incentives provided to biomass power
projects are limited to CFA depending upon the boiler configuration
of each project which amounts to a fraction of the Project cost.
Fiscal incentives are available such as sales tax and excise duty
exemptions, accelerated depreciation, customs duty concessions, tax
holidays on income from the power projects, etc. and exemption
from local sales tax in some states.

21


3.9 The main factors which are responsible for limiting the response
for undertaking biomass power projects are:

* Collecting and transporting surplus biomass resources in
the command area to the project site.

* Surplus Biomass has not been a traded commodity.
(B) Participation of Banks and Financial Institutions

3.10 The Ministry have stated that at the time of inception of the
programme in 1993-94, guidelines were issued to states to announce
policies for buy-back, wheeling, banking, third party sale of power
from renewable energy sources, including biomass/cogeneration power.
As a result, twelve potential states have conducive policies for taking
up biomass power/ cogeneration projects. Central Financial Assistance
(CRA) in the form of capital subsidy has been provided for setting up
projects utilising high-pressure boilers in sugar mills under the co-
generation programme. Further, CFA was also provided for promotional
activities such as business/interaction meets, training for sugar mill
engineers, professional/ technical services by consultancy firms and state
nodal agencies for their involvement in promoting biomass power and
cogeneration projects. These initiatives have helped in establishing a
sizeable biomass power/cogeneration capacity in the country. Financial
Institutions too agreed to providing loans for biomass power/
cogeneration projects. Initially only IREDA provided loans to such
projects. FIs such as PFC, HUDCO, NCDC, IDBI and scheduled banks
have started providing loans to such projects. The Department of Food
& Public Distribution also agreed to giving funds from the Sugar
Development Fund (SDF) for bagasse based cogeneration projects. The
SDF Act, 1982 has been amended in 2003 to provide loans at an even
lower rate of interest to bagasse cogeneration projects.’

3.11 When asked about the major constraints faced by private
developers, the Ministry stated that the major constraints faced by
private developers are:

(i) Obtaining a firm assessment on availability of biomass as
also ensuring risk free supply to the project.

(ii) Uncertainty regardin; tariff to be fixed by SERCs in some
y reg हि हु
potential states.

(iii) The technology of biomass gasification is still to be fully
established in a commercial mode. However, the combustion
route technology is available.


3.12 Due to this, the Ministry have stated that commercial users
hesitate in investing large resources. However, the Ministry continues
its efforts to improve acceptability of this technology through
technology development, cost reduction, demonstration, training and
awareness creation and package of financial incentives in the form of
subsidies to further motivate users.

3.13 The Committee appreciate to note that with an objective to
reduce interest burden of Biomass based Power projects, MNES has
been providing subsidy for Government as well as private projects
at the same level. The earlier interest subsidy scheme for commercial
projects is proposed to be modified to one time subsidy support to
the commercial projects. The subsidy is for making repayment of
term loan provided to the developers by the Financial Institution.
The subsidy will be released after successful commissioning and
commencement of commercial generation from the project, to the
Financial Institution. The Committee are however, surprised to note
that no formal study has so far been made to evaluate the impact of
earlier incentives given for Biomass Power and Cogeneration
Programme since its inception. The Committee feel that these
incentives have not shown the desired results in attracting private
sector and corporate sector in Biomass Power Projects. There is a
need for an intensive evaluation of incentives being given for these
programmes. The Committee therefore, recommend that the
Government should conduct a formal study to analyze the impact of
various incentives and subsidy schemes with a view to prepare
separate incentive/subsidy proposals and policy measures for Biomass
power projects in Government, private and cooperative sectors. The
Committee desire that SC/ST and other backward classes should be
covered proportionately in the package. The Committee also desire
that this exercise should be completed before the finalisation of
budget proposals for 2006-07.

3.14 The Committee note that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources are encouraging the setting up of grid interactive
Biomass based power projects through non-government investment.
Now most capacity addition is being achieved through private
investment. The State Nodal Agencies are responsible for promotion
and development of private sector projects by way of providing
necessary clearances, allotment of land and facilitating power
purchase agreements etc. SERCs are determining tariffs by taking its
account fee submissions of all stakeholders. The Committee “are
happy to note that leading Financial Institutions like PFC, HUDCO,
NCDC, IDBI and scheduled banks have started providing loans to

23


Biomass Power Cogeneration Projects. The Department of Food and
Public Distribution has also agreed for giving funds from Sugar
Development Fund for Bagasse based cogeneration projects at lower
rates. The Committee, desire that Government should take initiatives
to convince the Financial Institutions and banks about the importance
and viability of Biomass based power projects by showing their
determination in developing the latest technology. R&D efforts for
cost reduction, future planning policy and tariffs etc. The Committee
also urge the Government to take up the matter with Financial
Institutions and banks to evolve simplified procedures for quick
disposal of loan application for Biomass based power projects.

3.15 The Committee also desire that the Ministry should stress
upon the State Govts. to announce entrepreneur friendly schemes
for buy-back, wheeling and third-party sale etc. so that more and
more private investment can be attracted to the Biomass/Cogeneration
Power. The Committee also feel that incentives like Sales Tax &
excise exemptions, accelerated depreciation and Tax holidays etc.
should continue for the present to encourage the private investment.

24


CHAPTER IV

RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT IN THE BIOMASS
POWER/CO-GENERATION

The R&D component of the Biomass Power and Congeneration
Programme as stated by the Ministry aims at upgradation of the
existing biomass conversion technologies, improve capacity utilisation,
and develop more efficient and cost effective new technology routes.
In pursuance of this aim, a Ministry sponsored R&D project on
“Strategic Development of Bio-energy” was taken up by the
Combustion, Gasification and Propulsion Laboratory (CGPL) of the
19९, Bangalore. The main objectives of the first phase of project, which
concluded during the year, were development of biomass gasification
systems for electricity and thermal applications; development of 100%
producer gas engines; introduction of large systems for industrial
captive use; preparation of technical documentation packages for
applications of biomass gasifiers etc.

4.2 Among of salient achievements of the project have been
demonstration and commercialization of 100% producer gas engines of
upto 300 KW capacity; development and commercial installation of
biomass gasifier systems of upto 1 MW capacity for electricity
generation and of upto 5 MW capacity for thermal applications;
development of a process for extraction of silica from rice huck ash;
development of a biomass drying system for use in biomass gasifiers;
etc. The group has also filed nine patents over the years in India and
abroad, The technology has been licensed to four commercial entities.
During the year, the second phase of the project was approved for a
period of 3 years to carry forward the research work of the first phase
and expand the know-how base to actual field requirements. The main
objectives proposed to be achieved during the second phase is to
develop packages for industrially applicable power generation/ thermal
systems using biomass fuels and opening up related technologies for
large-scale dissemination and commercialization.

4.3 The thrust of the activities will be on optimizing developed
systems; design engineering improvements for large-scale use in

industry; and developing practical applications leading to expanded
use of biomass gasification systems.

4.4 The Ministry have stated CGPL will also be performing the
role of an apex and referral institution to train target groups, develop

25


performance and manufacturing standards and guide test centers
proposed to be set up with the support of the Ministry at various
locations in the country.

4.5 As informed by the Ministry a multi-institutional co-ordinated
project on “Advanced Biomass Gasification” (ABG), Bangalore was
successfully completed during the year. Development and testing of
the high pressure gasifier coupled with gas turbine engines for
generation of power has been demonstrated with contributions from
all the four participating institutions, namely Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT), Chennai; Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
(IICT), Hyderabad; Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd. (BHEL), Trichy; and
Indian Institute of Science (150), Bangalore. Various parameters related
to these tests namely the gas composition, pressure, temperatures and
biomass consumption were recorded and analysed. Similarly the gas
quality in terms of Tar and Particulate matter was examined. The
control system for governing for gas turbine operations was build and
successfully tested.

Research & Development (R&D) Activities
4.6 Achievements of R&D

(i) Achievements made under the R&D projects completed during
2002-03 to 2004-05 are given below:

— Application based biomass gasification technology has been
developed and is being tested for Rice Mills, Cold Storages,
Textile Mills, Plywood Industries, Steel Re-rolling Mills, Tea/
Coffee Drying Units, Tube and Tyre Manufacturing
Companies, Brick Kilns, Ceramic Industries, Cremetoria, etc.

— Under the “Advanced Biomass Gasification” (ABG) project,
a high pressure gasifier coupled with gas turbine engine
has been tested for generation of power by Indian Institute
of Technology (IIT), Chennai; Indian Institute of Chemical
Technology (10), Hyderabad; Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
(BHEL), Trichy; and Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
Bangalore.

(ii) Status of on-going R&D projects is given below:

SLNo. Name of the Project Institution Achievements/Status

1 2 3 4

1. Design and Development of Im, Attempt has been made to
Clean-up Systems for Biomass Bombay remove tar. Characterization of
based Producer Gas (Power size and distribution of
Generation Applications—LC. particulate matter is being
Engines and Gas Turbines) made.

26


2

4

Decentralised power generation
through carbonization &
gasification of Cashew Shell

Design and development of a
laboratory scale fluidized bed
gasifier for conducting
paratmetric studies with various
agro-residues

Conversion of SPRERI's
Functional Prototype of 250,000
kel/ht Open Core Groundnut
Shell Gasifier into a Production
Prototype

Development and testing of low
cost membrane filters from
biomass ash for hot gas clean up
of producer gas for gasifier
based. power plants and
treatment of waste matter
Development, field testing and
demonstration of gasifier system
for areca nut processing in
‘Assam

Development of Technology for
drying industrial products
utilizing eco-friendly biomass
gasifier

Development and study of a
CZZ Kiln for ceramic brick
manufacturing

Institute of

Studies,
Chennai

SPRERI,
Vallabh
Vidya
Nagar,
Gujarat
SPRERI,
Vallabh
Vidya
Nagar,
Gujarat

TERI, New

TERI, New

MPUAT,
Udaipur

MKU,
Madurai

Two-stage approach is being
developed. An active batch
type drum charring unit has
been fabricated for carbonizing
cashew shells. ॥ 5 kWe gasifier
coupled with 100% gas engine is
being tried.

All the components of the
fluidized gasifier have been
fabricated/procured and assembled.
Performance of sub-systems is
being evaluated.

The gasifier system has been
installed and commissioned in
November, 2004. Trials are in

progress.

Biomass ash based membrane
filter has been developed and is
being tested under controlled
condition. Experiments for
treatment of waste water are
also in progress.

Designing of gasifier system for
areca nut processing unit has
been completed and trial runs
are in progress.

The system has been designed,
fabricated and installed. Data

obtained from trial runs are
being evaluated.

Two kilns have been constructed
for performance evaluation.

at


(iii) List of identified thrust areas is given below:

Development of fluidized bed gasification systems especially
for low capacities.

Development of a multi-biomass gasification system.

Development of cost effective engines for 100% producer
gas operation in 10-30 KW range by modifying the existing
diesel engine designs or modifying automotive spark ignition
engines, etc.

Development of Safety Controls and Instrumentation
packages for biomass gasifier linked IC engine systems.

Development of load sharing and load control systems in
multi-point use (thermal + electrical) gasification system.

Development of applications such as direct gas fired
absorption chillers for cold storage, industrial drying, grain
dryers, absorption type air conditioners, etc.

Development and standardization of techniques for firing
different biomass materials along with conventional fuels
(Co-firing) in industrial boilers.

Standerdization of operation techniques for biomass power
projects for high plant load factors.

Establishment of best practices for high efficiency of biomass
use in power projects.

Development of techniques for more efficient handling and
feeding of biomass materials in biomass power projects.

Barriers to R&D efforts

4.7 When the Committee specifically enquired about the various
barriers identified by the Government in implementation of the Biomass
Power/Cogeneration Programme, Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources submitted the following details regarding technical barriers:

28

Problem of erosion of boiler tubes when certain types of
biomass are fired.

Adequate availability of biomass for grid interactive power
generation has been a problem in some States.

Inadequate surplus biomass resource data.

Need to develop test and standardize megawatt scale
biomass gasifier systems and effective cooling & cleaning of
producer gas systems.


4.8 For lower capacities, a gasifier is a better option subject to the
following technical constraints:

Development of 100% gas engines for firing producer gas.
Development of gasifier for multi-fuel applicability.

4.9 R&D effort has focused on development of biomass gasification
systems. Milestones achieved by the various R&D projects are given

below:

Development of biomass gasifier systems from 3 kWe to
1000 kWe unit capacity using woody /non-woody/powdery
biomass.

Conversion of upto 300 KW capacity dual fuel engine to
100 KW capacity dual fuel engine to 100% producer gas
engine.

Gasifiers for different end-uses/industries, such as, rice mills,
cold storages, textile mills, tube & tire manufacturing units,
steel re-rolling mills, tea/coffee drying units, brick kilns
industries, ceramics industries, etc. have been developed and
promoted.

4.10 The following efforts are being made to solicit project proposals
which haye been finalized in consultation with user industries,
entrepreneurs and others as stated by the Ministry:

Development of low capacity fluidized bed gasification
systems.

Development of 100% producer gas engines in 10-30 kW
range.

Development of Safety Controls and Instrumentation
packages for biomass gasifier linked IC engine systems.

Development of load sharing and load control systems in
multi-point use (thermal + electrical) gasification system.

Standardization of operation techniques for biomass power
projects for high plant load factors.

Development of techniques for more efficient handling and
feeding of biomass materials in biomass power projects.

Development gas cleaning systems for gasifiers.

29


4.11 Industries are being encouraged to take up R&D projects on

a cost sharing basis. Gasifiers manufactured by Indian companies have
been exported to USA, Europe, Latin America, Australia, Asia and
Africa.

Biomass gasification based power generation

4.12 Regarding the technology of Biomass gasification systems, the

Ministry have informed:

“Based on technology developed with this Ministry's support, a
grid connected Biomass Gasifier Power Generation Project of
1 MW capacity using 100% producer gas engine, has been
commissioned in 2004 at Coimbatore. This project is expected to
demonstrate an option for electricity generation through biomass
on a MW scale. Under the Biomass Gasifier Programme, it is
proposed to provide financial incentives @ about Rs. 95.000 lakh
per MWe for such projects.

R&D activities are continuing at the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, Sardar Patel
Renewable Energy Research Institute, Vallabh Vidya Nagar, Gujarat,
and Anna University, Chennai, for reducing the cost of gasifier
systems as well as improving efficiency and standardization of
various equipment, improving gas cooling and cleaning system,
developing safety and control system, etc. Further cost reduction
could be achieved through production economies of scale.”

4.13 Details of budget provided for R&D in the field of biomass

Co-generation and Combustion and Gasification Technologies during
the last three years are given below:

(Rs. in crore)

Year Actual Expenditure
2002-03 3.74
2003-04 2.60
2004-05 2.46

A Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 4.00 crore has been provided for

the purpose for 2005-06.

30


4.14 Regarding the expenditure on R&D the Ministry have stated:

“The major heads for release of funds are rants-in-aid to State
Nodal Agencies, R&D institutions for R&D activities, preparation
of resource assessment studies, interest/capital subsidy for
commercial biomass power/cogeneration Projects and “Other
Charges” for taking up promotional activities including business/
interaction meets, training programme etc.

The difference in actual expenditure and BE/RE figures during
2003-04 was primarily on account of withholding release of financial
assistance to many mature biomass power/cogeneration projects
at the end of the financial year in Karnataka due to cancellation
of PPAs earlier signed by the State Government. Similarly during
2004-05, the actual expenditure is less than the BE and RE as the
above issue could not be resolved and also due to the unforeseen
cut/restriction of expenditure imposed by the Ministry of Finance.”

Bio-fuels as an Energy Source

4.15 The role of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
regarding biofuels is related to changing characteristics in order to
mimic those of diesel as also development of prime movers that can
be run on such fuels.

4.16 Work relating to other different aspects of bio-fuel development
is being dealt with by different Ministries /Departments / institutions.

4.17 In this context, it is stated that the Planning Commission had
prepared a Report on the Development of Bio-fuels where after it was
decided that the Ministry of Rural Development (MORD) would be
the nodal Ministry for processing recommendations made in the Report.
A major recommendation of this Report is the launching a Mission on
Bio-diesel with a special focus on Jatropha curcas to be planted in
4 lakh hectares of land. In this regard, MORD has got a Detailed
Project Report (DPR) prepared through the Energy & Resources Institute
(TERI). This DPR is reported to be under consideration of the Planning
Commission for their in-principle approval.

4.18 The focus of the Ministry has been on developing technologies
for the conversion of vegetable oils to biofuels and on bio-diesel
engines. Some R&D/demonstration Projects supported by the Ministry
in this regard at IIT Delhi and TIP Dehradun include:

— producing bio-diesel from non-edible oils such as Jatropha
curcas oil and Karanja oil.

31


— determination of physico-chemical properties of bio-diesel
and blended fuel and field trails on diesel cars with bio-
diesel operation.

4.19 Four biofuel pilot demonstration projects have also been
initiated in December 2004 in four selected villages to demonstrate the
use of non-edible vegetable oils for meeting the entire energy needs of
lighting, agricultural operations and other community based stationary
applications and to study various techno-economic paramenters.

The Ministry have’ stated during evidence:

“So, there is going to be a little slow movement in the direction
of utilization of bio diesels. We also do not have bio diesels
available in very large quantities. We have decided very tentatively
in the Ministry that wherever it is power generation, by using
stationary engines, using bio-fuels, we should go into it in a big
way. No, there is a large field, which I wanted to place before
you, and that is the total captive power domain in the country.
The captive generation of power is almost 30,000 MW. Various
industries are using it in that mode. Half of that comes from diesel.
so, here you have 15,000 MW capacity in which diesel is to be
displaced by using biomass. We have very large field in form of
it.”

4.20 The Committee note that modern Biomass conversion
technologies provide us an opportunity to use Biomass feed stocks
for production of all three kinds of fuel i.e. gaseous, liquid and
solid. Established technologies for Biomass combustion, cogeneration
and anaerobic digestion are available. Recent developments in
pyrolysis and gasification have further added advantages for using
Biomass more effectively not only for heat and electricity generation
but also for transport and chemicals production. The Committee,
however, feel that there are various barriers in technology
development. The main barriers include inadequate reliable regional
data and availability of agricultural residues, lack of coordinated
approach in finalizing technology i.e. of combustion/gasification/
cogeneration for a given kind of feed stock, capacity and use, lack
of standard specifications and inadequate testing facilities for Biomass
furnaces, boilers gasifiers and meagre budget support for R&D to
pilot to demonstration to first of a kind of commercial scale plant.
The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy should take time-bound initiatives for standardization of
technology/systems for Biomass production, harvesting handling,
storage and preprocessing, development and finalization of advance

32

a,


combustion/gasification/cogeneration technology for different kinds
of feed stocks and development and demonstration of gas engines
and micro-turbines for using Biogas and producer gas. The Committee
also desire that Ministry should take concrete initiatives for
development of standard specifications and testing protocol for
selected technologies in collaboration with Bureau of Indian
Standards. The Committee also recommend that testing and
certification mechanism should be strengthened and the Government
should establish institutions for testing and certification.

4.21 The Committee note that a lot of work has been done in
developing small capacity Biogas production units and Biomass
gasifiers and industrial scale Biomass furnaces, boilers, dual fuel
engines etc. With the increase in the use of natural gas, now industry
has started manufacturing gas compressors and producer gas engines.
The Committee desire that the R&D efforts should now be
concentrated to develop and implement selected co-coordinated
projects with target to develop demonstrable technology packages
having potential for wider adaptation. The Committee also desire
that Government should prepare a detailed programme for setting
up of pilot and first of a kind commercial scale units to demonstrate
indigenously developed technology packages and develop confidence
of industries concerned. The Committee further desire that in
preparation of such programme/project the participation of users
stakeholders should also be ensured.

4.22 The Committee strongly feel that the budget support being
given for R&D in Biomass sector is very small. The Committee note
that during 2002-03 only an amount of Rs. 3.74 crores was spent
which came down to Rs. 2.60 and Rs. 2.46 crores during 2003-04 and
2004-05 respectively and for the year 2005-06 an amount of
Rs. 4 crore has been allocated. This all shows a very poor attention
of the Government towards the R&D projects in the field of Biomass
Cogeneration, Combustion and Gasification Technologies. The
Committee consider this poor funding for R&D projects responsible
for very slow progress in development of Biogas and Biomass gasifier
technology during last one decade. The Committee are surprised to
note that as against American Budget of US$ 80 million for R&D in
the year 2005, India is spending very small amount of Rs. 4 crore on
R&D projects. The Committee therefore, desire that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should undertake a detailed review of
R&D projects and deployment of programmes by involving industry
stakeholders also for getting better results in future. The Committee
also desire that R&D budget should be enhanced sufficiently so

33


that R&D projects in development of Bio-energy do not suffer due
to non-availability of funds.

4.23 The Committee note that bio-fuels have been considered as
most preferred alternative to petrol and diesel particularly in the
transport sector. The MNES have initiated a programme on bio-fuels
for transportation since 2002-03. The focus of the programme is to
develop the technology for converting vegetable oils, mainly non-
edible oils, to bio-fuel and promote the use of these bio-fuels in
automobile sector after taking care of different aspects of the
conventional diesel/petrol engines. The Committee are happy to note
that Ministry have taken up a scheme on Bio-fuel Demonstration
Projects in rural areas for implementation initially in four villages
to demonstrate the use of non-edible vegetable oils for meeting the
entire energy needs of lighting, agricultural operations and other
community based stationery applications and to study various techno-
economic parameters. The Committee recommend that the ministry
should first of all undertake detailed non-edible seed resource
assessment study to know the potential of such seed production in
each agro-climatic zone. After that, they must prepare a time-bound
programme for extending similar bio-fuel demonstration projects
covering more and more villages in all States of the Country. In
Committee’s view, a large number of activities are to be taken up
under bio-fuel programme, therefore, the Ministry should also
prepare a National Policy on bio-fuelswith the participation of the
concerned stakeholders and institutions working in the field of bio-
fuels. Since this programme involves major R&D efforts at this stage,
the Government should provide separate budget as per requirement
of the projects to be undertaken during the coming years.

4.24 The Committee note that there is a mission to launch a
Mission on Bio-diesel with a special focus on Jatropha Curcas to be
planted on a large scale to produce bio-diesel from non-edible oils.
The Committee desire that special incentives be given to the farmers
to encourage them to take up the plantation of Jatropha Curcas and
maximum area should be covered. Village Panchayats and Gram
Sabhas should be involved in the pragramme and should be
monitored closely to make it a success.

34


CHAPTER V
OTHER SCHEMES UNDER BIOMASS POWER PROGRAMME
(A) Village Energy Security through Biomass

The Ministry has taken up test projects on Village Energy Security
under which mostly bio-energy based systems will be deployed in
conjunction with small hydro or otherwise to meet the total energy
requirements of cooking, lighting and motive power of a village in an
efficient, reliable and cost effective manner. The projects would be
environment-friendly and create avenues for local employment, thus
improving the quality of life and leading to overall sustainable
development.

5.2 Regarding the time schedule for implementation of Village
Energy Security Programme, the Ministry have stated:

“To begin with, a limited number of test projects on village energy
security will be taken up. Depending on the outcome of the test
projects a programme on village energy security might be drawn
up.”

5.3 As stated by the Ministry that detailed Village Energy Plans
(VEPs) will be prepared that will include assessment of the energy
demand and the locally available renewable resources. An optimal
technology package will then be arrived at to meet the total energy
needs in a sustainable manner. The energy production systems could
comprise biogas plants based on dung or leafy biomass, biomass
gasifiers coupled to 100% producer gas engines and/or biofuel run
pumpsets. Based on the availability of local resources, biogas and
biofuel could also be used for meeting the electricity needs.

-Regarding Village Energy Plans, the Ministry have stated:

“The detailed proposals include a Village Energy Plan under the
test projects. The village energy plan is prepared through interaction
with the village community and contain information on available
local resources, demand for various energy services, and the
configuration for the energy production system. While no specific
time schedule has been laid down, a time period of 2-3 months is
required for preparation of a village energy plan.”

35


5.4 The projects involve active community participation. They will
be planned and implemented by Village Energy Committees (VECs)
set up by the Gram Panchayat through a Gram Sabha Resolution.
Forest Departments, Rural Development Departments and NGOs will
be involved as facilitators to assist the Village Energy Committees in
planning and implement the test projects. They will also help to resolve
issues about land required for plantation and sustainable supply of
feedstock in the form of wood, oilseeds and other biomass material.
The energy services are to be owned and maintained by the village
community.

Regarding village Energy Committees, the Ministry informed:

“Village Energy Committees have been set up under the 17 test
projects that are under implementation. Village-level meetings are
organized by implementing agencies are facilitators for generating
awareness and apprising about the benefits from such projects such
as energy production, employment and income generation, removal
of drudgery particularly among women, clean environment and
sustainability. Their active participation is also sought in planning,
implementation and subsequent management of the projects. Audio-
visual aids are used to create awareness. visits of Committee
members to other successful project sites are also planned.”

5.5 The Ministry have informed that 90% of the capital cost of the
test projects will be met through a Central grant subject to a benchmark
of Rs. 20,000/- per beneficiary houschold for meeting the total domestic
and community energy requirements. The balance 10% towards the
capital cost is to be mobilized by the community/implementing
agency /State Nodal Agency.

Regarding the budget provisions, the Ministry further clarified:

“It is proposed to provide Central financial assistance of
Rs. 3.00 crore/MW for promoting biogas power projects. A scheme
for promotion of distributed biogas power generation projects has
also been formulated”

5.6 The test projects will be closely monitored by the concerned
State Nodal Agency (SNA), and the feedback generated will be utilized
in developing a larger operational programme for remote, tribal and
forest fringe villages.

36


5.7 On the same steps already some issues which the Committee
enquired about the initiated/going to be initiated by the Ministry to
meet the requirements of biomass for different biomass power plants
and whether the Ministry was contemplating to take up the matter
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests to promote energy
plantation in the degraded forest land of the country. MNES informed
the Committee as under:

“A Conference on Renewable Energy for Rural Areas was convened
on 26th July, 2004 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. Senior officials
of the District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) and Forest
Departments of various States/UTs, concerned Central Ministries
including MOEF, Planning Commission, State Government
Departments and Nodal Agencies attended this conference. the
conference focused on the accelerated deployment of bio-energy
systems in rural areas to provide the energy needs of cooking,
lighting and motive power. The focus of the discussions included
promotion of energy plantation in the degraded forest land of the
country. 24 Test Projects are being set up in different parts of the
country.”

Remote Village Electrification

5.8 The Remote Village Electrification is a separate programme for
provision of electricity services whereas the village energy security
test projects aim at provision of all energy services. The two
programmes therefore are separate although sone components might
be common. So far biomass gasification systems have been sanctioned
for electrification of 42 villages.

5.9 Regarding the efforts being made by the Ministry to prepare
detailed Village Energy Plans the Ministry have stated:

“210 preliminary proposals for the test projects on Village Energy
Security have been received from 12 States, namely,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttaranchal and West Bengal. Of these, 92 proposals that were
found to be in accordance with the Guidelines were short-listed
for preparing detailed proposals including Village Energy Plans
for setting up the test projects. 55 detailed project proposals
containing Village Energy Plans have been received from 8 States.
So far, 24 test projects have been sanctioned in three States.”

5.10 When asked about the energy plantation being taken under
these projects, the Ministry submitted the following details:

“Energy plantations are an integral part of the Test Projects on
energy security in villages. Under these projects plantations of fast

37


growing fuelwood species and non-edible oilseed bearing trees will
be taken up in degraded/waste land available in and around the
selected villages. 24 test projects have so far been sanctioned for
remote villages in three States, viz., eleven in Madhya Pradesh,
seven in West Bengal and six in Rajasthan. In all these projects
energy plantations will be undertaken so as to ensure a sustainable
supply of biomass for the energy production systems. The projects
have been initiated in Madhya Pradesh and the plantation activity
is being taken up in all the projects. The electricity production
unit has been installed in one of the projects.”

5.11 Regarding the setting up of Village Security Communities the
Ministry gave the following information:

(i) Village Energy Committees have been set up in 17 test
projects under implementation in Madhya Pradesh and
Rajasthan as Sub-Committees or Standing Committees of
the Gram Panchayat as per the relevant provisions of the
State Panchayat Raj Act and Rules in this regard. The
Committees have been set up through a Resolution of the
Gram Sabha and have been notified by the Gram Panchayat.
The Committees are in the process of being set up in the
7 test projects taken up in West Bengal.

(ii) The test projects are being implemented by the Gram
Panchayats through facilitation by the Forest Departments/
Zila Parishads/Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
The Village Energy Plans are prepared with participation of
the local community taking into account the available
resources and their total energy requirements.

(iii) Training and awareness generation are important
components of the test projects. Training of the villagers
who will run the biomass power generating equipment is
being done through the suppliers and the NGOs. Visits of
the Village Energy Committee members to other biomass
gasifier based projects are also being arranged to generate
awareness and impart knowledge on the working of the
systems. A five year warranty and an Annual Maintenance
Contract (AMC) for the energy production systems has also
been incorporated in the terms and conditions of supply of
the equipment.

5.12 Regarding the guidelines issued for selection of the villages
to be covered under the scheme the Ministry have stated:

“Guidelines for planning and implementation of the test projects
have been circulated to the States. Proper selection of villages is

38


critical for the success of the test projects. Therefore, the Guidelines
for identification and selection of villages for the test projects have
also been provided. The basic criterion for the selection of a suitable
village is that it should have a conducive environment for the
implementation of such test projects. The village idéntified should
be remote, preferably tribal and/or forest-fringe. The selected village
should have adequate availability of fallow, common or
uncultivated non-grazing land for raising plantations. A cohesive
and progressive social structure is also an important requirement.
The selected village should have households ranging from 25 to
200, and should be identified in consultation with forest, tribal
and rural development departments/agencies.

5.13 The Ministry have further informed that to begin with, a
limited number of test projects on village energy security are proposed
to be taken up to demonstrate the techno-economic parameters, provide
operational experience, mobilize local communities and firm up the
institutional arrangements. Depending on their success, a larger
operational programme could be formulated by the Ministry. Biomass
gasification systems are also being installed under the Remote Village
Electrification Programme of the Ministry. A time frame of one year is
envisaged for completion of the test projects on village energy security.

5.14 During the course of evidence the Security explained about
the number of villages under the Villages Energy Security Programme:

“What happened was that our Commission for Additional Sources
of Energy had approved that we may take up 200 villages. Within
the Ministry there was a re-thinking on the number and the number
was finally fixed that let us first install 25 and see what happens.
Accordingly, 24 villages were sanctioned in March last year as
against a target of, let us say, 200 with a restricted number of 25.
We could have done more. We could have sanctioned more. But
some proposals had to be returned to the States because they had
not fulfilled all the conditions. Out of these 24 sanctioned, one
village has already gone on stream. There power is being generated
for the first time in 50 years, That village is getting electricity.
They are going to buy fuel wood from the forest depots at the
rate of Rs. 500 per tonne. People are going to pay for that power.
They are having an arrangement where two to three boys have
been trained and the people who have supplied the equipment
have also stationed somebody who will be available there for some
time. We hope that during this financial year, under this
programme, we can take up another 70 to 80 such cases and by

39


the end of this financial year we will have something like 50 to
60 online and functioning. There is a lot of things to learn from
that because you are going to do plantation, you are going to
have biogas plant and you are also going to save on the fuel
wood which is being consumed by some families. It is an internal
supply chain that has to work properly. The village would have to
prove that it can handle this programme. There is a lot to be
learnt from this. But there is a feeling that perhaps this is going
to be the future line of action as we enter the Eleventh Plan. As
far as remote village domain is concerned, the results are
encouraging.”

5.15 The Ministry have also informed about the biomass
gassification systems:

“So far biomass gasification systems are reported to have been
commissioned in around 28 villages and are reported to be in
operation as per the information received from the State Nodal
Agencies of various States. However, no specific evaluation survey
has so far been carried out.

Many of the Ministry’s programmes for the promotion of renewable
energy are implemented in the States by State Nodal Agencies
which in turn coordinate with various State Government Agencies
and Departments, including the State Electricity Boards/Power
Departments.”

5.16 The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources have evolved a concept of providing
energy security in villages mainly through biomass. The objective of
the Village Energy Security Projects is to go beyond mere
electrification per se by meeting the total energy requirements of
villages including cooking, lighting and motive power with full
participation of the local communities including women. It will also
create avenues for employment generation, full participation of local
communities and environmental improvements leading to overall
sustainable development. The programme has the potential to
generate 15 million jobs in rural areas. The Committee note that
Test Projects are being taken up in remote villages and hamlets that
are not likely to be electrified through conventional means with
emphasis on forest fringe and tribal villages. the energy production
systems would comprise biogas plants based on dung and leafy
biomass, biomass gasifiers coupled to 100% producer gas engines
and bio-fuel run pump sets. The Committee feel thai projects based
on poultry droppings, like the one working at Nammakal,

40


Tamil Nadu, should also be encouraged in other States. The
Committee note that 210 preliminary proposals for Test Projects on
Village Energy Security have been received from 12 States. Out of
this 92 proposals were short-listed for preparing detailed proposals.
Ministry have received 55 detailed village energy plans from 8 States.
Out of this 24 projects have been sanctioned in three States i.e.
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee feel
that these Test Projects should have been spread in all parts of the
country for getting better experience and results. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Government should sanction the projects in
different States. They should also persuade the other States to submit
such proposals so that Test Projects may be distributed evenly in all
agro-climatic regions and results may come out in the proposed
period of one year.

5.17 The Committee observe that Test Projects would be
undertaken by a Village Energy Committee formed by the Gram
Sabha and notified by the Panchayat and facilitated by implementing
agencies such as District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs),
forestry departments and NGOs with technical inputs overall
coordination and monitoring by the State Nodal Agencies. A high
level Steering Group has been constituted to provide overall guidance
for the implementation of Test Projects. It is proposed to take up
about two lakh villages, consisting of 1.73 lakh forest fringe villages
and about 25,000 remote unelectrified villages, total investment would
be 40,000 crore. The Committee therefore, want that role of NGOs
in such projects should be well defined & monitored closely to
check the misuse of the huge funds released under this programme
for the benefits of poor villagers. The Government should issue
strict guidelines in this regard. The Committee also desire that Forest
departments should certainly be associated in selection of forest
fringe villages and plantation of fast growing oil seed bearing trees
for getting better results.

5.18 The Committee also feel that if the projects of Biomass
Co-generation are to be taken up on a large scale at the village/
district level, proper training of the people, who will handle the
equipment of Biomass Co-generation, is required. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Diploma level courses should be started in the
polytechnics in the various States covered under the programme with
the help of Ministry of HRD & State Governments.

5.19 The Committee note that Village Energy Security through
Biomass Programme relates to villagers. There is a lack of awareness

a4


about such an important scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire
that Government should take up extensive awareness generation and
training programmes in prospect villages for local communities who
will run the biomass power generating equipment. They also desire
that similar programmes should be arranged for Government
functionaries, local NGOs, entrepreneurs etc. to prepare a good team
of facilitators.

(B) Accelerated Programmes for development of projects for energy
recovery from urban wastes.

5.20 According to a recent estimate about 42 million tonnes of
solid waste (1.15 lakh tonnes per day) and 6000 million cubic metres
of liquid waste are generated every year by our urban population.
This translates to a potential for generation of over 1700 MW of Power
from urban wastes in the country. The Ministry of NCS has estimated
potential of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) for conversion energy for
next fifteen years as under:

Period Projected MSW Corresponding Power
Generation (in TPD) Generation (in MW)

2007 148000 2550

2012 215000 3650

2017 304000 5200

MNES is implementing a programme on Energy Recovery from
Urban Wastes with the following objectives:

(i) To harness the available potential of MSW to energy.

(ii) To promote the setting up of projects for recovery of energy
from urban wastes, and

(iii) To create conducive environment for the development and
implementation of waste to energy projects.

5.21 The most widely used waste-to-energy technologies are based
on biological on thermal processes. Biological process involves
biomethanation of biodegradable fraction of waste for producing
methane-rich biogas, which can be used as fuel for generating electricity.
Thermal process involves combustion of organic waste as fuel with
evolution of heat energy for generation of power. Advances in thermal
conversion involve destructive heating of organic materials with a
limited supply of oxygen (gasification) or without any oxygen
42


(pyrolysis) to produce a combustible gaseous product consisting of
simple hydro-carbons and hydrogen.

5.22 Three projects for energy recovery from Municipal Solid Wastes
with an aggregate capacity of 17.6 MW have been set up at Hyderabad,
Vijayawada and Lucknow. Other urban waste projects include a 1 MW
project based on cattle manure at Ludhiana, a 0.5 MW project for
generation of power form biogas at sewage treatment plant at Surat,
and a 150 KW plant for vegetable market and slaughter-house wastes
at Vijayawada. Another 300 KW project based on vegetable market
waste is under commissioning at Chennai.

5.23 Some of the aforesaid demonstration projects for energy
recovery from a variety of urban wastes, namely vegetable market
waste, slaughterhouse waste and cattle/cow-dung have been set up
under a UNDP/GEF assisted project on Development of High Rate
biomethanation Processes. Under the Accelerated Programme for Energy
Recovery from Urban Wastes, it is proposed to encourage development
of small-scale projects in towns/cities based on the successful
implementation of demonstration projects.

5.24 A scheme for the Accelerated Programme has been prepared.
Modalities proposed for this Programme were discussed with various
stakeholders, including State Governments, Nodal Agencies, Financial
Institutions Manufacturers, Consultants, Developers, etc. during a
Brainstorming Session organized by the Ministry on 17th June 2005.
Project Reports will be formulated as per the provisions of the scheme.
The main features of this scheme are as under:

(i) Promotion of projects for power generation from MSW

(ii) Development in a fast track mode of projects through public
private partnership for specific cities.

(iii) Provision of Project Development assistance of a maximum
of Rs. 10 Lakh per project for fast track projects.

(iv) Project development will include: *
(a) Assessment of quality and quantity of wastes,
(b) Identification of project site,
(c) Preparation of waste collection and transportation plan,
(d) Finalization of power purchase agreement,

(e) Development of bankable project with Feasibility Report
and detailed Project Report,

43


(0 Preparation of bid document for inviting bids,
(g) Firming up of means of project finance,
(h) Obtaining all statutory clearances for the project, and

(i) Providing assistance and supervision during execution
and commissioning.

(v) Provision of attractive incentives in the form of Capital
subsidy through Fls/banks for making MSW based project
financially viable and remunerative. Capital subsidy upto
Rs. 1.5 crore per MW for fast track project based on
combustion of RDF and upto Rs. 2 crore per MW of projects
based on biomethanation is proposed.

(vi) The scheme shall be implemented by Municipal
Corporations, other Urban Local Bodies, Government
Institutions and private developers having technical and
managerial capabilities for implementing such projects.

5.25 The States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Haryana,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and
Uttar Pradesh have announced policies for promotion of waste-to-
energy project in their States.

Regarding the difficulty faced in financing the projects based on
urban wastes, the Ministry have stated:

“The difficulties faced in financing projects for energy recovery
from urban wastes include high capital cost of projects, higher
risks and lack of awareness, etc. It is now proposed to provide
50% of the subsidy as contribution towards equity for improving
the financial viability of such projects, after disbursement of the
first installment of loan. An Information Package for energy
recovery from urban wastes is also being prepared for raising
awareness levels on various technological options, technology
providers, consultants apart from case studies on different project
types. A scheme has also been prepared for generation of electricity
from cow dung.”

5.26 During evidence the representative of the Ministry informed
that at present there was a problem regarding urban waste conversion
into Energy. The representative stated:

“As far as urban waste conversion to energy is concerned, we are
just now facing one problem when the matter is before the Supreme

44


Court. The Supreme Court has ordered that the Government of
India should not sanction any subsidy at all for waste to energy
projects. They have said about all kinds of wastes to energy
projects. We are trying to argue in the Supreme Court that at least
those projects which are based on the direct combustion of Biomass,
at least that part should not be held back. That is being worked
out. We have two projects, one is at Vijayawada and one is at
Hyderabad. One which is involved with biomethanation is at
Lucknow. this unfortunately has come to a standstill. We have
said that their orders are fine but we are struggling. We have had
an ambitious programme this year onwards. But there is going to
be delay in waste to energy as far as urban centers are concerned.”

5.27 The representative further informed the Committee that the
project at Lucknow was facing problems regarding new foreign
technology. The basic problem being the segregation of Municipal
Waste. The Municipal Waste were not according to the standards as
required by the plant. Regarding the Waste-to-Energy project at
Lucknow, the Ministry further informed:

“The 5 MW project based on biomethanation technology installed
at Lucknow is presently shut down due to some cperational
problems arising from quality of waste being supplied by the
Lucknow Nagar Nigam (LNN) and possible inadequacies of the
segregation system installed at the project for separating
biodegradable organic matter from the garbage supplied to the
plant by LNN.

Feeding of MSW to the plant commenced in August 2003, and
was gradually increased by October 2003. About one MW of power
was generated in October 2003, against the rated capacity of
5.9 MW. Some modifications were carried out in the waste
segregation system of the plant and measures were taken to
improve the quality of waste delivered at the project site. This
resulted in achieving a power generation level of 1.50 MW for a
few months. Thereafter, the power generation kept on decreasing
and was in the range of 0.4-0.7 MW only. As the operational issued
could not be resolved between the promoter and LNN, the
promoter closed down the plant in December 2004. These issues
are yet to be resolved despite high level interventions by the
Ministry. It is understood that IDFC, who have provided loan for
the project, have initiated action to identify other promoters for
taking over the plant.”

45


5.28 The Committee note that at present there is a potential for
generation of over 1700 MW of power from urban wastes in the
country. Out of this, only three projects with an aggregate capacity
of 17.6 MW have been set up at Hyderabad, Vijaywada and Lucknow.
The Committee note that the project at Lucknow has come to a
standstill due to its inability to get waste material and management
related problems. The Committee desire that such issues should be
resolved at the earliest to start the functioning of Lucknow Project.
The Ministry should also try to resolve the objections of Hon‘ble
Supreme Court regarding other Waste to Energy projects so that the
ambitious programme to establish many more such projects does
not suffer.

5.29 The Committee are happy to note that as per the need of
the hour and as desired by them in their 5th report on Demands for
Grants 2005-06, the Ministry have prepared an Accelerated Programme
for promotion of projects for energy recovery from urban wastes
and promotion is proposed to be done in fast track mode. The
Committee are also satisfied with the proposed incentives in the
form of capital subsidy upto Rs. 2 crore through Fis/banks for making
MSW, financially viable and remunerative. The Committee find that
the most important step is firming up of potential for urban,
industrial and commercial wastes for specific urban centers and
industrial units. For this purpose, the Ministry should prepare a
time-bound programme in consultation with State Governments,
major municipal bodies, government institutions and private
developers to know the quantity and quality of urban wastes in all
the major cities. The Committee also desire that States should be
persuaded to implement MSW (Management and Handling) Rules
2000 at the earliest as this will facilitate setting up of projects based
on MSW. The Committee also note that only the States of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have announced
policies for promotion of waste-to-energy projects in their states.
The Committee, therefore, desire that other States should be asked
to formulate and announce similar policies for supply of waste of
desired quality and quantity at project site and facilities for
evacuation and purchase of power generated from such projects in
their States.

5.30 The Committee observe that all the Waste-to-Energy projects
are to be developed through public private partnership. The
Committee find that lack of awareness may be one of the main
hurdles in attracting private sector participation in the projects. The

46


Committee, therefore, desire that Government should undertake
extensive awareness creation and wide publicity programme to attract
private investment for this sector and to harness the potential in a
time-bound manner. The Government should also take initiatives to
convince Fls/Banks for getting projects developed and making easy
financing available for Waste-to-Energy projects.

(C) Promotion of Bio-Energy in the Islands

5.31 The Ministry has prepared a detailed feasibility report in
association with Anna University, Chennai for taking up biomass power
projects in Lakshadweep Islands utilizing residues of coconut trees
abundantly available in Islands. The feasibility report is under
consideration of Islands Administration/CEA for taking up power
projects of appropriate capacities in different potential Islands.

5.32 A team of MNES officers visited A&N Islands in May, 2005
to finalize an action plan for various renewable energy systems,
including biomass based power systems to meet power needs of the
A&N Islands. The team identified the following action point with
respect to biomass power:

(i) DPRs submitted by HSC Bangalore for biomass power
systems at South Andaman, Little Andaman and Great
Andaman to be considered for approval.

(ii) Further study to be taken up for assessment of biomass
i P
power potential at little Andaman, Car Nicobar and Katchal.

(iii) Setting up of biomass based copra driers to be considered
at all Islands.

(iv) The vast quantity of biomass waste generated due to
tsunami in Car Nicobar and posing disposal problem may
be gainfully utilized for power generation through either
direct combustion or gasification systems; systems of about
500 kW capacity to be considered for immediate installation
in the first phase.

5.33 Technical Guidance and assistance for translating the above
action points to prepared detailed project proposals for implementation
by the A&N Administration is being arranged by the Ministry.

Regarding the present status of Biomass programme in the Islands,
the Ministry have stated...

“At the instance of this Ministry a project report has been prepared
by Anna University for utilizing biomass from coconut residues

47


for power generation in different Islands of Lakshadweep. In the
six islands surveyed, no biomass fired copra driers are used. Only
initial drying of copra in the open sun is carried out. Subsequent
drying is done on the mainland. A similar study was conducted
for the A&N islands. However, the A&N administration has been
advised to conduct a fresh study in the light of the changed post
Tsunami situation.”

5.34 The Ministry have further clarified in a reply:

“Project proposals are expected to be prepared by State/UT
administration who have a full complement of staff for the same
and submitted to this Ministry for approval. Ministry would
continue to provide necessary technical guidance and assistance to
the A&N Administration as and when required.”

5.35 The Committee note that there is a huge potential of
Bio Energy in the Islands where coconut tree residues are available
abundantly. The DPRs submitted by IISC Bangalore for Biomass
power systems at South Andaman, Little Andaman and Great
Andaman are to be approved. The Committee further note that at
the initiative of the Ministry a project report has been prepared by
the Anna University for utilizing Biomass from coconut residues for
power generation in different Islands of Lakshadweep. The Andaman
& Nicobar administration has been advised to conduct a fresh study
in the light of the post Tsunami changed situation. The Committee
hope that such studies would be completed in a short span of time
so that the projects of Biomass could be taken up expeditiously in
these Islands. The Committee desire that there should be an
integrated approach to Power generation in the Islands exploring
Biomass, tidal, solar and other forms of renewable energy. The
Committee desire that a time-bound programme to implement these
projects should be drawn up and sufficient funds should be
earmarked in advance by Union/State Governments to avoid:time &
costs over-runs.

New Devut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
23 August, 2005 Chairman,
1 Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

48


PART II

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
CONTAINED IN THE REPORT

SLNo. Reference Para Conclusions /Recommendations
No. of the
Report
1 2 3
1. 2.17 The Committee observe that Biomass is

renewable organic material drived from
trees, plants, crops or from human, animal,
municipal and industrial wastes. Woody
Biomass is derived from forests, plantations
forestry residues while other sources
provide non-woody Biomass. Fortunately,
India is blessed with a huge potential of
Biomass. Moreover, Biomass resources are
available locally within or around the
villages and energy production, distribution
and provision of energy can be managed
by the village communities. The Committee
also note that the total estimated Biomass
power potential in India is above 1 lakh
MW. This includes 16,000 MW grid
interactive power from surplus agro
residues and wastes from forestry an
plantations 3500 MW through bagasse
co-generation and 1 lakh MW from plantation
of 60 million hectares of wasteland. The
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources has been implementing Biomass
Power and Cogeneration Programme since
1994. The Committee note that over these
ten years, only 101 Biomass Power and
Cogeneration projects aggregating to 750
MW have been installed in the country and
73 projects aggregating to 585 MW are
under various stages of implementation.
This includes 58 Bagasse Cogeneration

49


2.18

Projects aggregating to 450 MW and 34
Projects under implementation aggregating
to 312 MW. The Committee are not at all
satisfied with the present slow approach of
the Government in tapping the huge
Biomass potential available in the country.
The Government have fixed a target that
10% of the additional grid interactive power
generation capacity should come from
renewable sources during the 10th and 11th
Plan periods, which is 5.5% at present.
Bio-energy can make _ significant
contribution in achieving this target. More
efficient modern Biomass technologies have
the potential to alleviate poverty, improve
health, reduce drudgery of women and
children, increase productivity, create
employment and generate incomes in rural
areas, thereby reducing rural to urban
migration. The Committee at this stage feel
a need that renewable energy including Bio-
energy should now be brought into
mainstream for meeting/supplementing the
energy demands in urban and rural areas.
The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Government should
now evolve an effective implementation
strategy for Biomass Power Cogeneration
Programme for maximum exploitation of
Biomass resources of the country with an
objective to make Biomass energy available
at an affordable price to the common man.

The Committee note that the private
developers face a number of problems in
setting up biomass projects like firm
assessment on availability of Biomass and
ensuring its supply to the project,
uncertainty on tariff to be fixed by SERCs
and evolving technology of biomass

50


n

3

2.19

gasification systems etc. The Committee
desire that these problems should be
resolved on priority and in a time bound
manner.

The Committee specifically note that India
has very good Bagasse cogeneration
potential which can generate 3500 MW
power. Out of this, only 450 MW projects
have been installed and 312 MW projects
are in pipeline. The Committee are
surprised to note that in the State of
Maharashtra our of the potential of
1000 MW, Bagasse Cogeneration projects of
32.5 MW only have been commissioned so
far and projects of 6 MW are under
implementation. Similarly the Bagasse
potential of other States like U.P, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat and Punjab has also been poorly
utilized. The Committee are concerned to
note that the main hurdles in the
programme exist in the fact that in some
states particularly in Maharashtra, the sugar
mills are in the cooperative sector and they
face difficulties in limited access to funds
and also in raising equity component of
the investment in the programme. Also,
there is heavy management risk in the
projects as the cooperative sector is subject
to frequent changes in the management and
perception of risk in the Biomass
Cogeneration Projects is high. The
Committee feel that industrial
Co-generation has in the past not received
adequate attention, as cheap power and fuel
were abundantly available. However, with
increasing tariffs and unreliable supply of
grid power, there is considerable
opportunity for the industrial sector needs
to tap the potential for producing electricity

54


3

2.20

and thermal energy in the Co-generation
mode. In this direction the Bagasse Co-
generation programme can play a pivotal
role. The Committee welcome the initiative
taken by the Government by requesting the
Maharashtra Energy Development Agency
(MEDA) to constitute a high level
Committee for identifying and suggesting
measures for rapid implementation of Co-
generation projects in cooperative sugar
mills in the State and desire that they
should persuade MEDA to prepare a
Report in the shortest possible time. The
Committee also desire that after examining
the Report the Government should prepare
a specific package of incentives containing
capital as well as operative subsidies for
cooperative sugar mills in Maharashtra and
other States. The Committee may be
apprised of the time-frame fixed in this
regard.

The Committee also find that the capacity
under implementation in the various
Biomass projects in the various States is
relatively lower than the capacity
conunissioned. Although the Ministry have
sufficient information on the potential
available in the States for Biomass Power
and Cogeneration programme, the capacity
under utilization is quite low. The
Committee are constrained to note that
State-wise physical and financial targets are
not fixed and therefore, comparative data
on the targets and achievements are not
available. The Committee are not convinced
with the reasoning given by the Ministry
that Statewise targets are not fixed under
the Biomass Power Programme as this
activity is driven by private investment,
which depends on a host of factors

52


3

2.21

including entrepreneurid activity in that
State, surplus Biomass potential and the
price of electricity fixed by the State
regulators. The Committee in their
31st Report on the Electricity Bill, 2001
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) had recommended
that the States should be encouraged to
procure at least 5% of their Energy
demands from renewable sources and the
limit of the same should be raised to 10%
by the end of 11th Plan in phases. Similar
objectives/targets have been fixed by the
Central Government also. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should assess
State-wise potential of Biomass and also fix
the targets accordingly for every year for a
balanced exploitation of Biomass potential
available in each State. The Committee
desire that the Government should also
collect full data of power generation
through biomass/cogeneration mode by
private developers in various States. For
this purpose, there is a need to develop a
better coordination with the State level
Nodal agencies engaged in the field of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources,
responsible for promotion and development
of private sector projects. The Committee
feel that fixation of National targets for
procurement of energy demands from
renewable sources would help in better
exploitation of our Non-Conventional
resources.

The Committee note that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources have a goal
to achieve renewable grid power of 10,000
MW including 3000 MW Biomass Grid
Power by the year 2012. They have a target
of 700 MW for the Tenth Plan i.e. by 2007
and rest 2300 MW will have to be achieved

53


2.22

during lith Plan period. Out of the target
of 700 MW only 370 MW has been
achieved during the first three years of the
current plan. The Committee feel that the
target of energy from Biomass is very low
under the situation when the country has
such a huge Biomass potential. Now, that
100% producer gas run engines have
become reality, it should be easy to obtain
higher targets/exploitation from Biomass
sources. Efforts should be made to make
this engine cost effective and popularize the
same for mass utilization. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should
suitably enhance their targets of Biomass
Power generation and also generate a
suitable action plan for the same, for the
remaining two years of the current Plan
and 11th Plan to achieve the goal of 3000
MW Biomass grid power by the year 2012.

The Committee are happy to note that the
Government have taken initiatives for
preparation of ‘Biomass Resource Atlas for
India’-based on Biomass resource
assessment studies in different regions of
the country. Ministry have informed that
first computer application package based on
low resolution data will be available by the
end of this financial year. It would be made
available through State nodal agencies and
some of the entrepreneurs for testing and
trial purposes. The second phase where the
higher resolution data and survey data will
be matched and project is proposed to be
completed by March, 2007. The Committee
feel that such an important data should be
made available on website of the Ministry
after the completion of first phase itself. The
Committee however desire that the Ministry

54


3.13

should ensure the total reliability of the
data supplied.

The Committee appreciate to note that with
an objective to reduce interest burden of
Biomass based Power projects, MNES has
been providing subsidy for Government as
well as private projects at the same level.
The earlier interest subsidy scheme for
commercial projects is proposed to be
modified to one time subsidy support to
the commercial projects. The subsidy is for
making repayment of term loan provided
to the developers by the Financial
Institution. The subsidy will be released
after successful commissioning and
commencement of commercial generation
from the project, to the Financial Institution.
The Committee are however, surprised to
note that no formal study has so far been
made to evaluate the impact of earlier
incentives given for Biomass Power and
Cogeneration Programme since its
inception. The Committee feel that these
incentives have not shown the desired
results in attracting private sector .and
corporate sector in Biomass Power Projects.
There is a need for an intensive evaluation
of incentives being given for these
programmes. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the Government should
conduct a formal study to analyze the
impact of various incentives and subsidy
schemes with a view to prepare separate
incentive/subsidy proposals and policy
measures for Biomass power projects in
Government, private and cooperative
sectors. The Committee desire that SC/ST
and other backward classes should be
covered proportionately in the package. The

55


3.14

Committee also desire that this exercise
should be completed before the finalisation
of budget proposals for 2006-07.

The Committee note that the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources are
encouraging the setting up of grid
interactive Biomass based power projects
through non-Government investment. Now
most capacity addition is being achieved
through private investment. The State
Nodal Agencies are responsible for
promotion and development of private
sector projects by way of providing
necessary clearances, allotment of land and
facilitating power purchase agreements etc.
SERCs are determining tariffs by taking its
account fee submissions of all stakeholders.
The Committee are happy to note that
leading Financial Institutions like PFC,
HUDCO, NCDC, IDBI and scheduled banks
have started providing loans to Biomass
Power Cogeneration Projects. The
Department of Food and Public Distribution
has also agreed for giving funds from Sugar
Development Fund for Bagasse based
cogeneration projects at lower rates. The
Committee, desire that Government should
take initiatives to convince the Financial
Institutions and banks about the importance
and viability of Biomass based power
projects by showing their determination in
developing the latest technology. R&D
efforts for cost reduction, future planning
policy and tariffs etc. The Committee also
urge the Government to take up the matter
with Financial Institutions and banks to
evolve simplified procedures for quick
disposal of loan application for Biomass
based power projects.



10.

3.15

4,20

The Committee also desire that the Ministry
should stress upon the State Govts. to
announce entrepreneur friendly schemes for
buy-back, wheeling and third-party sale etc.
so that more and more private investment
can be attracted to the Biomass/
Cogeneration Power. The Committee also
feel that incentives like Sales Tax & excise
exemptions, accelerated depreciation and
Tax holidays etc. should continue for the
present to encourage the private investment.

The Committee note that modern Biomass
conversion technologies provide us an
opportunity to use Biomass feed stocks for
production of all three kinds of fuel i.e.
gaseous, liquid and solid. Established
technologies for Biomass combustion,
cogeneration and anaerobic digestion are
available. Recent developments in pyrolysis
and gasification have further added
advantages for using Biomass more
effectively not only for heat and electricity
generation but also for transport and
chemicals production. The Committee,
however, feel that there are various barriers
in technology development. The main
barriers include inadequate reliable regional
data and availability of agricultural
residues, lack of coordinated approach in
finalizing technology i.e. of combustion/
gasification/cogeneration for a given kind
of feed stock, capacity and use, lack of
standard specifications and inadequate
testing facilities for Biomass furnaces,
boilers gasifiers and meagre budget support
for R&D to pilot to demonstration to first
of a kind of commercial scale plant. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy should take

57


11.

4.21

time-bound initiatives for standardization of
technology/systems for Biomass production,
harvesting handling, storage and
preprocessing, development and finalization
of advance combustion/gasification/
cogeneration technology for different kinds
of feed stocks and development and
demonstration of gas engines and micro-
turbines for using Biogas and producer gas.
The Committee also desire that Ministry
should take concrete initiatives for
development of standard specifications and
testing protocol for selected technologies in
collaboration with Bureau of Indian
Standards, The Committee also recommend
that testing and certification mechanism
should be strengthened and _ the
Government should establish institutions fot
testing and certification.

The Committee note that a lot of work has
been done in developing small capacity
Biogas production units and Biomass
gasifiers and industrial scale Biomass
furnaces, boilers, dual fuel engines etc. With
the increase in the use of natural gas, now
industry has started manufacturing gas
compressors and producer gas engines. The
Committee desire that the R&D efforts
should now be concentrated to develop and
implement selected co-coordinated projects
with target to develop demonstrable
technology packages having potential for
wider adaptation. The Committee also
desire that Government should prepare a
detailed programme for setting up of pilot
and first of a kind commercial scale units
to demonstrate indigenously developed
technology packages and develop
confidence of industries concerned. The

58


12.

4,22

4,23

Committee further desire that in
preparation of such programme/ project the
participation of users stakeholders should
also be ensured.

The Committee strongly feel that the budget
support being given for R&D in Biomass
sector is very small. The Committee note
that during 2002-03 only an amount of
Rs, 3.74 crores was spent which came down
to Rs. 2.60 and Rs. 2.46 crores during
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively and for the
year 2005-06 an amount of Rs. 4 crore has
been allocated. This all shows a very poor
attention of the Government towards the
R&D projects in the field of Biomass
Cogeneration, Combustion and Gasification
Technologies. The Committee consider this
poor funding for R&D projects responsible
for very slow progress in development of
Biogas and Biomass gasifier technology
during last one decade. The Committee are
surprised to note that as against American
Budget of US$ 80 million for R&D in the
year 2005, India is spending very small
amount of Rs. 4 crore on R&D projects. The
Committee therefore, desire that Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should
undertake a detailed review of R&D
projects and deployment of programmes by
involving industry stakeholders also for
getting better results in future. The
Committee also desire that R&D budget
should be enhanced sufficiently so that
R&D projects in development of Bio-energy
do not suffer due to non-availability of
funds.

The Committee note that bio-fuels have
been considered as most preferred
alternative to petrol and diesel particularly

59


3

in the transport sector. The MNES have
initiated a programme on bio-fuels for
transportation since 2002-03. The focus of
the programme is to develop the technology
for converting vegetable oils, mainly non-
edible oils, to bio-fuel and promote the use
of these bio-fuels in automobile sector after
taking care of different aspects of the
conventional diesel/petrol engines. The
Committee are happy to note that Ministry
have taken up a scheme on Bio-fuel
Demonstration Projects in rural areas for
implementation initially in four villages to
demonstrate the use of non-edible vegetable
oils for meeting the entire energy needs of
lighting, agricultural operations and other
community based stationery applications
and to study various techno-economic
parameters. The Committee recommend
that the ministry should first of all
undertake detailed non-edible seed resource
assessment study to know the potential of
such seed production in each agro-climatic
zone. After that, they must prepare a time-
bound ‘programme for extending similar
bio-fuel demonstration projects covering
more and more villages in all States of the
Country. In Committee’s view, a large
number of activities are to be taken up
under bio-fuel programme, therefore, the
Ministry should also prepare a National
Policy on bio-fuels with the participation
of the concerned stakeholders and
institutions working in the field of bio-fuels.
Since this programme involves major R&D
efforts at this stage, the Government should
provide separate budget as per requirement
of the projects to be undertaken during the
coming years.

60


14.

15.

4,24

5.16

The Committee note that there is a mission
to launch a Mission on Bio-diesel with a
special focus on Jatropha Curcas to be
planted on a large scale to produce bio-
diesel from non-edible oils. The Committee
desire that special incentives be given to.
the farmers to encourage them to take up
the plantation of Jatropha Curcas and
maximum area should be covered. Village
Panchayats and Gram Sabhas should be
involved in the programme and should be
monitored closely to make it a success.

The Committee are happy to note that
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have evolved a concept of
providing energy security in villages mainly
through biomass. The objective of the
Village Energy Security Projects is to go
beyond mere electrification per se by
meeting the total energy requirements of
villages including cooking, lighting and
motive power with full participation of the
local communities including women. It will
also create avenues for employment
generation, full participation of local
communities and environmental
improvements leading to overall sustainable
development. The programme has the
potential to generate 15 million jobs in rural
areas. The Committee note that Test Projects
are being taken up in remote villages and
hamlets that are not likely to be electrified
through conventional means with emphasis
on forest fringe and tribal villages. The
energy production systems would comprise
biogas plants based on dung and leafy
biomass, biomass gasifiers coupled to 100%
producer gas engines and bio-fuel run
pump sets. The Committee feel that projects

61


16.

5.17

based on poultry droppings, like the one
working at Nammakal, Tamil Nadu, should
also be encouraged in other States. The
Committee note that 210 preliminary
proposals for Test Projects on Village
Energy Security have been received from
12 States. Out of this 92 proposals were
short-listed for preparing detailed proposals.
Ministry have received 55 detailed village
energy plans from 8 States. Out of this 24
projects have been sanctioned in three
States ie. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. The Committee feel that
these Test Projects should have been spread
in all parts of the country for getting better
experience and results. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Government should
sanction the projects in different states. They
should also persuade the other States to
submit such proposals so that Test Projects
may be distributed evenly in all agro-
climatic regions and results may come out
in the proposed period of one year.

The Committee observe that Test Projects
would be undertaken by a Village Energy
Committee formed by the Gram Sabha and
notified by the Panchayat and facilitated by
implementing agencies such as District
Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs),
forestry departments and NGOs with
technical inputs overall coordination and
monitoring by the State Nodal Agencies. A
high level Steering Group has been
constituted to provide overall guidance for
the implementation of Test Projects. It is
proposed to take up about two lakh
villages, consisting of 1.73 lakh forest fringe
villages and about 25,000 remote
unelectrified villages, total investment

62


17.

18.

5.18

would be 40,000 crore. The Committee
therefore, want that role of NGOs in such
projects should be well defined &
monitored closely to check the misuse of
the huge funds released under this
programme for the benefits of poor
villagers. The Government should issue
strict guidelines in this regard. The
Committee also desire that Forest
departments should certainly be associated
in selection of forest fringe villages and
plantation of fast growing oil seed bearing
trees for getting better results.

The Committee also feel that if the projects
of Biomass Co-generation are to be taken
up on a large scale at the village/district
level, proper training of the people, who
will handle the equipment of Biomass Co-
generation, is required. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Diploma level courses
should be started in the polytechnics in the
various States covered under the
programme with the help of Ministry of
HRD & State Governments.

The Committee note that Village Energy
Security through Biomass Programme
relates to villagers. There is a lack of
awareness about such an important scheme.
The Committee, therefore, desire that
Government should take up extensive
awareness generation and _ training
programmes in prospect villages for local
communities who will run the Biomass
Power generating equipment. They also
desire that similar programmes should be
arranged for Government functionaries,
local NGOs, entrepreneurs etc. to prepare
a good team of facilitators.



19.

20.

5.28

5.29

The Committee note that at present there
is a potential for generation of over 1700
MW of power from urban wastes in the
country. Out of this, only three projects with
an aggregate capacity of 17.6 MW have
been set up at Hyderabad, Vijaywada and
Lucknow. The Committee note that the
project at Lucknow has come to a standstill
due to its inability to get waste material
and management related problems. The
Committee desire that such issues should
be resolved at the earliest to start the
functioning of Lucknow Project. The
Ministry should also try to resolve the
objections of Hon’ble Supreme Court
regarding other Waste to Energy projects
so that the ambitious programme to
establish many more such projects does not
suffer.

The Committee are happy to note that as
per the need of the hour and as desired by
them in their 5th report on Demands for
Grants 2005-06, the Ministry have prepared
an Accelerated Programme for promotion
of projects for energy recovery from urban
wastes and promotion is proposed to be
done in fast track mode. The Committee
are also satisfied with the proposed
incentives in the form of capital subsidy
upto Rs. 2 crore through Fls/banks for
making MSW, financially viable and
remunerative. The Committee find that the
most important step is firming up of
potential for urban, industrial and
commercial wastes for specific urban centers
and industrial units. For this purpose, the
Ministry should prepare a time-bound
programme in consultation with State
Governments, major municipal bodies,

64


21,

22.

5.30

5.35

government institutions and private
developers to know the quantity and
quality of urban wastes in ail the major
cities. The Committee also desire that States
should be persuaded to implement MSW
(Management and Handling) Rules 2000 at
the earliest as this will facilitate setting up
of projects based on MSW. The Committee
also note that only the States of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Haryana,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh
have announced policies for promotion of
waste-to-energy projects in their states. The
Committee, therefore, desire that other
States should be asked to formulate and
announce similar policies for supply of
waste of desired quality and quantity at
project site and facilities for evacuation and
purchase of power generated from such
projects in their States.

The Committee observe that all the Waste-
to-Energy projects are to be developed
through public private partnership. The
Committee find that lack of awareness may
be one of the main hurdles in attracting
private sector participation in the projects.
The Committee, therefore, desire that
Government should undertake extensive
awareness creation and wide publicity
programme to attract private investment for
this sector and to harness the potential in
a time-bound manner. The Government
should also take initiatives to convince FIs/
Banks for getting projects developed and
making easy financing available for Waste-
to-Energy projects.

The Committee note that there is a huge
potential of Bio Energy in the Islands where

65


coconut tree residues are available
abundantly. The DPRs submitted by IISC
Bangalore for Biomass power systems at
South Andaman, Little Andaman and Great
Andaman are to be approved. The
Committee further note that at the initiative
of the Ministry a project report has been
prepared by the Anna University for
utilizing Biomass from coconut residues for
power generation in different Islands of
Lakshadweep. The Andaman & Nicobar
administration has been advised to conduct
a fresh study in the light of the post
Tsunami changed situation. The Committee
hope that such studies would be completed
in a short span of time so that the projects
of Biomass could be taken up expeditiously
in these Islands. The Committee desire that
there should be an integrated approach to
power generation in the Islands exploring
Biomass, tidal, solar and other forms of
renewable energy. The Committee desire
that a time-bound programme to implement
these projects should be drawn up and
sufficient funds should be earmarked in
advance by Union/State Governments to
avoid time & costs over-runs.

66


MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III
ON NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD
ON 30TH DECEMBER, 2004 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,

NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. K. Kasturirangan—Convenor
Memsers

2. Shri M. Shivanna

3. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar

5. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri John Joseph — _ Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari - Director

Representatives of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources

1. Dr. S.K. Chopra, Sr. Adviser

2. Shri A.K. Rath, Addl. Secy. & FA
3. Shri Sunil Khatri, Joint Secretary

4, Shri Sudhir Mohan, Sci. 65.

5. Shri K.P. Sukumaran, Sci. 6.

6. Dr. B. Bandhopadhaya, Sci. G.

7. Shri B.M.L. Garg, Sci."

8. Shri S.K. Mishra, Director

9

Shri D. Majumdar, M.D. (IREDA)

2. At the outset, the Convenor of the Sub-Committee-III on Non-
Conventional Energy Sources of the Standing Committee on Energy

67


(2004-05) welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources to the sitting of the Sub-Committee and
apprised them of the provisions of ‘Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker’.

3. After the introductory remarks of Convenor and formal
introduction of the officials of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources, a detailed presentation was made on the subject, “Biomass
Power/Co-generation Programme—An Evaluation” by the Ministry. The
main points, which came under detailed discussion during the course
of presentation included:—

(i) Potential and achievements for biomass power/
co-generation;

(ii) The role of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
and Financial Institutions like IREDA, PFC, REC and
Nationalised Banks;

(iii) Evaluation of the social benefits like employment generation,
afforestation, etc., accrued out of the biomass power/co-
generation programme;

(iv) The need to upgrade the technology of producing grid
quality power beyond the demonstration phase;

(v) Need for using cow-dung in a major way to set up larger
plants on the line of 1 MW plant in Punjab and also to
incorporate dairies and other agro-based industries for the
same;

(vi) Capital and interest subsidized available and required for
the development of the Biomass Power and Co-generation
Programme;

(vii) The need to motivate the cooperative sugar mills in the
field of bagasse co-generation and to remove the hurdles in
their way of getting loan from the banks;

(viii) The information about the project on “Biomass Resources
Atlas for India” to assess the surplus biomass resources
available for generation of power; and

(ix) Introduction of ‘Village Energy Security Programme’ to meet
the total energy requirement of un-electrified villages with
full community participation.

4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Sub-
Committee has been kept on record.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

68


MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD
ON 18TH JULY, 2005 IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM G-074,
BLOCK-K, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.

PRESENT
Dr. K. Kasturirangan—Convenor

MEMBERS

. Shri Subodh Mohite

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Shri. V.P. Goel

ae ON

2

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri PK. Bhandari >> teleirecior,
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary

List OF WItNEssES
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources

1, Shri A.M. Gokhale, Secretary

2. Dr. S.K. Chopra, Sr. Adviser

3. Shri Debshish Majumdar, M.D. (IREDA)
4, Shri Sunil Khatri, Jt. Secretary

5. Dr. K.C. Khandelwal, Scientist “G”
6. Shri Ajit K. Gupta, Scientist “G”

7. Dr. T.C. Tripathi, Scientist “G”

8. Shri N.P. Singh, Scientist “G”

9. Shri Sudhir Mohan, Scientist “G”
10. Shri K.P. Sukumaran, Scientist “G”
11. Dr. 8. Bandopadhyay, Scientist “G”

69


At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee III of Standing
Committee on Energy welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources to the sitting of the Sub Committee
and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions
by the Speaker.

2. The discussion started with a detailed presentation by the
Ministry on the various aspects pertaining to the subject ‘Biomass Co-
generation Programme—An evaluation.’ The Members of the Sub
Committee discussed the following important points during the sitting:

(6) The estimated Biomass potential of the country and
exploitation thereof.

(ii) The additional power generation through Bagasse
Cogeneration.

(iii) The details of the Ministry’s programme on Bio Energy and
the major constraints in the execution of the Biomass
Cogeneration Programme.

(iv) The major issues regarding Research and Development and
the milestones achieved.

(v) The role of the Ministry in the Bio-diesel project.

(vi) The difficulties faced by the sugar mills in the cooperative
sector for engaging in Bagasse Cogeneration Projects.

(vii) The subsidy schemes for the Biomass Cogeneration Projects.

(viii) The Village Electrification Schemes and the role of the people
in the villages in execution of the Biomass Programmes.

3. The Ministry were requested to send written replies to the list
of points for oral evidence on the subject to the Secretariat at the
earliest.

4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

70


MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-06) HELD ON
23RD AUGUST, 2005 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘F’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1600 hours to 1710 hours.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

30585

. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri Nandkumar Sai

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

1, Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav
. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

. Shri Jesu Das Seelam

NQQPwn

ee ee
के ONE S Oo &

ae
aa

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
2. Shri PK. Bhandari — Director

3. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
4. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
(2005-06) welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.

71


3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:

(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Biomass Power/Co-generation
Programme—An Evaluation of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources.

(ii) Draft Report on the Implementation of APDRP of the
Ministry of Power.

4, The Committee adopted draft Reports with minor additions/
deletions/amendments suggested by the Members of the Committee.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports after incorporating the amendments suggested
by the Members of the Cornmittee and making consequential changes
arising out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and to
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

72