STANDING COMMITTEE

30 ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF POWER

[ROLE OF CENTRAL ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSION
AND STATE ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSIONS IN
PROTECTION OF INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS]

THIRTIETH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


THIRTIETH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2008-2009)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[ROLE OF CENTRAL ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSION

AND STATE ELECTRICITY REGULATORY COMMISSIONS IN
PROTECTION OF INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.2.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.2.2009

rea जयत

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)


Price : Rs. 132.00

© 2008 By Lox SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in. Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

Composition oF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION ..

REPORT

Introductory

Cuaprer I A. CERC, SERCs and their Role in Protection
of the Interests of Consumers.....

8. National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy
for Protection of Interests of Consumers

C. Capacity Building of Consumer Groups and
Consumer Grievance Redressal Mechanism..

D. Standards of Performance and Reliability
Indices

Forum of Regulators ...
F Indian Electricity Grid Code...

G. Open Access in Transmission and Distribution
of Electricity

H. Setting up of Power Exchanges

I. Power Purchase Obligation from Renewable
Sources of Energy ee

Cuarter II Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee......

APPENDIX Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19.12.2007, 23.4.2008 and 27.1.2009 ...

Pace

116

tO)


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2008-09)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Rashid J.M. Aaron

Smt. Susmita Bauri*

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Smt. Anuradha Choudhary

Shri Mohan Jena

Prof. Chander Kumar

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nand Kumar Sai

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

ce NS oe कुछ LP

ee ee Bw ee
a fF SPE S

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

e
a

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar**

An
०

Shri G. Venkatswamy

Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav
21. Vacant

8S

* Re-Nominated as Member of the Committee we,f. 9.1.2009.
++ Nominated as Member of the Committee wef. 18.12.2008.

(iii)


Rajya Sabha

22. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
23. Dr. Bimal Jalan

24. Shri Prakash Javadekar
25. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

26. Shri Anil H. Lad***

27. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

30. Shri Shivpratap Singh

31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Juneja — Committee Officer

+४+ Nominated wef. 15th January, 2009.

(५)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 30th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Role
of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions in protection of interests of consumers’.

2. The Committee held two sittings i.e. on 19th December, 2007
and 23rd April, 2008 for examination of the subject. The Committee
heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Power and
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, as also the representatives
of the State Governments of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal on the subject. The Committee also
undertook a study visit to Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Mumbai
and held detailed discussions in connection with examination of the
aforesaid subject with Departments of Power of the respective State
Governments and the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs).
The Committee wish to express thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Power and ail others who appeared before the Committee
and placed their considered views and also furnished written
information on the subject.

3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 27th January, 2009.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Det; GURUDAS KAMAT,
January 27, 2009 Chairman,
Magha 7, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

)


INTRODUCTORY
Background

Electricity is a concurrent subject. The Preamble of the Electricity
Act, 2003, states that protecting the interests of the consumers and
Promoting competition in the Electricity industry are among the main
objectives of the Act.

2. The establishment of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) goes
back to the year 1998, when the Electricity Regulatory Commission
Act, 1998 (now repealed) was enacted inter alia to provide for
establishment of a CERC and SERCs. Certain States had also enacted
their State Electricity Reforms Act earlier to the legislation of the
Electricity Act, 2003. The Electricity Act, 2003, which has repealed the
Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 provides (sections 76 and
82) that the CERC established under the Electricity Regulatory
Commissions Act, 1998 and the SERCs established by the
State Governments under the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act,
1998 or various State Electricity Reforms Acts shall be deemed to be
the CERC and SERCs for the purpose of Electricity Act, 2003.

3. Sections 79 (3) and 86 (3) of the Act provide that the Electricity
Regulatory Commissions shall ensure transparency while exercising
their power and discharging their functions. Further, section 86 (1) 6)
of the Act provides that the CERC shall inter alia discharge the function
of specifying and enforcing standards with respect to quality, continuity
and reliability of services by licensee. Section 57 of the Act provides
that the Electricity Regulatory Commission may after consultation with
the licensees and persons likely to be affected, specify standards of
performance of a licensee or a class of licensees. The Act further
provides that if a licensee fails to meet the standards so specified, he
shall be liable to pay such compensation to the person affected as
may be determined by the Commission, without Prejudice to any
penalty which may be imposed on prosecution. The compensation so
determined shall be paid by the licensee within ninety days.

4. The Act gives overriding effects to the Provision of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Accordingly, the consumers can seek
redressal of their grievances under the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Mechanism established under the Consumer Protection Act.


5. In addition to the above, the Electricity Act provides in
section 42 (5) that every distribution licensee shall, within six months
from the appointed date or date of grant of licence, whichever is
earlier, establish a forum for redressal of grievances of the consumers
in accordance with the guidelines as may be specified by the
State Commission.

6. The Act further provides in sub-sections (6) & (7) of section 42
that any consumer, who is aggrieved by non-redressal of his grievances
under sub-section (5), may make a representation for the redressal of
his grievance to an authority to be known as Ombudsman to be
appointed or designated by the State Commission. The Ombudsman
shall settle the grievance of the consumer within such time and in
such manner as may be specified by the State Commission.

7. The Central Government has also notified the Electricity Rules,
2005. Rule 7 of these Rules inter alia provides that “The Ombudsman
shall consider the representations of the consumers consistent with the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and Regulations made hereunder or
general orders or directions given by the Appropriate Government or
the Appropriate Commission in this regard before settling their
grievances. The Ombudsman shall prepare a report on a six monthly
basis giving details of the nature of the grievances of the consumer
dealt by the Ombudsman, the response of the Licensees in the redressal
of the grievances and the opinion of the Ombudsman on the Licensee’s
compliance of the standards of performance as specified by the
Commission under section 57 of the Act during the preceding
six months. The report of the Ombudsman shall be forwarded to the
State Commission and the State Government within 45 days after the
end of the relevant period of six months.”

8. The Act has provisions to ensure compliance with the directions
of the Regulatory Commissions and the provisions of the Act and
rules and regulations made thereunder. Section 142 of the Act provides
that the Appropriate Regulatory Commission may, after hearing the
person concern, impose penalty on any person for contravention of
any of the provisions of the Act or rules or regulations may thereunder
or any directions issued by the Commission. Section 146 provides for
prosecution and punishment for non-compliance with the order or
direction given under the Act, for contravention or attempting or
abetting any of the provisions of the Act or any rules or regulations
made thereunder.

2


9. The Central Government has made adequate provisions for
the protection of interests of consumers in the Electricity Act, 2003.
However, while having discussions with the Ministry of Power and
representatives of CERCs and various SERCs who were called to appear
before the Committee and also those with whom discussions were
held by the Committee during the study visit to Jaipur, Ahmedabad,
Bangalore and Mumbai during January and February, 2008, a host of
practical difficulties faced by the SERCs vis-a-vis the State Governments
and also in getting their orders implemented through the Distribution
Companies as also under the existing Consumer Grievance Redressal
Mechanism came up before the Committee.

10. Details of the factual information and relevant discussions held
during the course of examination of the subject are contained in
Chapter-I of the Report. Chapter-II of the Report contains Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee.


CHAPTER I

A. CERC, SERCs and their Role in Protection of the Interests of
Consumers

(i) Role of CERC & SERCs

1.1 The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), an
independent statutory body with quasi judicial powers, was constituted
on 25th July, 1998, under the Electricity Regulatory Commission’s Act,
1998, and has been continued under the Electricity Act, 2003. The
Commission consists of a Chairperson and four other Members
including the Chairperson, CEA as the Ex-officio Member.

1.2 To a specific query as regards the role of CERC in regulation
of tariff and various other benefits to consumers, the Ministry of Power
have replied:

“The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission was created by
the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 (since repealed)
and is now governed by the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003,
which has since repealed inter-alia the ERC Act, 1998.

The role of the CERC as envisaged in the Electricity Act is as
under:

(a) to regulate the tariff of generating companies owned or
controlled by the Central Government;

(b) to regulate the tariff of generating companies other than
those owned or controlled by the Central Government
specified in clause (a), if such generating companies enter
into or otherwise have a composite scheme for generation
and sale of electricity in more than one State;

(c) to regulate the inter-State transmission of electricity;
(d) to determine tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity;

(e) to issue licenses to persons to function as transmission
licensee and electricity trader with respect to their inter-
State operations;

(f) to adjudicate upon disputes involving generating companies
or transmission licensee in regard to matters connected with
clauses (a) to (d) above and to refer any dispute for
arbitration;


(8)
69

6)

to specify Grid Code having regard to Grid Standards;

to specify and enforce the standards with respect to quality,
continuity and reliability of service by licensees; and

to fix the trading margin in the inter-State trading of
electricity, if considered, necessary.” हि

1.3 The State Electricity Commission shall discharge the following
functions as specified in section 86 (1) of the Electricity Act, 2003:

a)

(b)

(०

(व)

(०)

(g)
(h)

6)

Determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and
wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case
may be, within the State.

Providing that where open access has been permitted to a
category of consumers under section 42, the State
Commission shall determine only the wheeling charges and
surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of consumers;

Regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of
distribution licensees including the price at which electricity
shall be procured from the generating companies or licensees
or from other sources through agreements for purchase of
power for distribution and supply within the State;

Facilitate intra-state transmission and wheeling of electricity;

Issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission
licensees, distribution licensees and electricity traders with
respect to their operations within the State;

Promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from
renewable sources of energy by providing suitable measures
for connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any
person, and also specify, for purchase of electricity from
Such sources, a percentage of the total consumption of
electricity in the area of a distribution licence;

Adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees, and
generating companies and to refer any dispute for
arbitration;

Levy fee for the purposes of this Act;

Specify State Grid Code consistent with the Grid Code
specified under clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 79;

Specify or enforce standards with respect to quality,
continuity and reliability of service by licensees;


(j) Fix the trading margin in the intra-State trading of electricity,
if considered, necessary; and

(k) Discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it
under this Act.

(2) The State Commission shall advise the State Government
on all or any of the following matter, namely:

(i) Promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in
activities of the electricity industry;

(ii) Promotion of investment in electricity industry;

(iii) Reorganisation and restructuring of electricity industry
in the State;

(iv) Matters concerning generation, transmission, distribution
and trading of electricity or any other matter referred
to the State Commission by that Government.

(3) The State Commission shall ensure transparency while
exercising its powers and discharging its functions.

(4) In discharge of its functions the State Commission shall be
guided by the National Electricity Policy, National Electricity
Plan and tariff policy published under section 3.”

14 The Ministry have further specified that the tariff for retail
supply of electricity is not determined by the CERC as the same is the
function of State Regulatory Commission. However, the cost of bulk
power supptied by inter-State generating stations on long term basis,
which is a significant part of power purchased by the distribution
licensees is regulated by the CERC. Moreover, CERC regulates interstate
transmission and interstate trading, which are important from the view
point of reliability, efficiency and economy of power supply. Section
61 of Electricity Act provides that the SERCs shall be guided by the
principles and methodologies specified by CERC for determination of
the tariff applicable to generating companies and transmission licensees.

1.5 Moreover, the Committee were informed that section 101 of
the Electricity Act requires the CERC to prepare an Annual Report.
The form of Annual Report of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission is described as per the points given below:

(i) The Commission in brief

(ii) The mandate of the Commission


(iii) Mission statement
(iv) The year in Retrospect

(v) Annual Accounts of the Commission showing Receipts and
Expenditure

(vi) Outcome of Regulatory process in terms of benefits to
consumers and development of sectors

(vii) Work plan for the year ahead

1.6 The Report of the CERC for year 2006-07, as required under
the rules notified by the Central Government, contains a chapter on
‘Outcome of regulatory process in terms of benefits to consumers and
development of sector’. The Annual Report of the CERC 2006-07 gives
details about the benefits to consumers by reduction in bulk electricity
Process of Central Generating Station under the new terms and
conditions for the period 2004-09 on account of the following:

(i) Reduction in Return On Equity (ROE) from 16% to 14% for
the tariff period 2004-09 shall directly reduce the cost of
bulk power;

(ii) Adoption of Department Equity Ratio of 70:30 for new
investment;

(iii) Rationalisation of Depreciation;

(iv) Higher Benchmarks of performance;
(v) Norms for loss of coal in transit;
(vi) Norms for O&M expenses; and

(vii) Target Availability norms for thermal generating station was
adopted as 80% and for lignite based stations it has been
raised from 72% to 75% and for hydrostations from 85% to
90%.

1.7 Taking note of the fact that under Section 107 of the Electricity
Act, 2003, the Central Government has powers to give directions to
the CERC in matters of policy involving public interest, the Committee
quite categorically desired to know as to whether there had been any
instances, where directions were given to the CERC. In this regard,
the Committee were informed that no such direction had been given
so far by the Government to CERC under the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003.


1.8 As regards, transparency in the functioning of CERC, the
Ministry informed the Committee in a written reply as under:—

“Under Section 178 of the Act, the Commission is required to
frame regulations to give effect to the provision of the Act. All
regulations made by the Commission are subject to the condition
of previous publication, The CERC has informed that it floats
discussion paper, calls for comments, and then holds public hearing
before preparing the draft regulation. The draft regulation is also
put on the website of the Commission for eliciting the comments /
response of the stakeholders and public at large. Thereafter, the
Commission notifies the regulations. The Commission follows the
principle of natural justice in the proceedings before it. Moreover,
the proceedings of the Commission are open to the public and the
Orders are passed after public hearing where the Petitioner as
well as the Respondent gets an opportunity to argue their case/
stand. The Orders issued by the Commission are speaking orders.”

(ii) Appointments and Selection Process

1.9 As per the provision of section 78 of Electricity Act, 2003,
Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee for selection
to the post of Chairman and Members of CERC. Section 78(5) of the
Act further states that the Central Government shall, within one month
from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death,
resignation or removal of a Member of the Appellate Tribunal or the
Chairperson or a Member of the Central Commission and six months
before the superannuation or end of tenure of the Member of the
Appellate Tribunal or Member of the Central Commission, make a
reference to the Selection Committee for filling up of the vacancy.

1.10 The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson and Members referred to in sub-section (5) within three
months from the date on which the reference is made to it.

1.11 Asked about the reasons for the post of Chairman, CERC
lying vacant since 24th March, 2007, the Ministry of Power have
informed the Committee that in accordance with the provisions of the
Act, the process for selection of Chairperson of the CERCs was initiated
in August, 2006. Applications/nominations were invited vide letter dated
5.10.2006. The vacancy was also posted on the website of the Ministry
of Power. Statutory reference to Selection Committee was made on
9.10.2006. 1st meeting of the Selection Committee was held on
19th January, 2007. The Selection Committee made its recommendation

8


available on 14th August, 2007. With the approval of Minister of Power,
the recommendations of the Selection Committee were forwarded to
Department of Personnel and Training on 20th September, 2007 for
getting the approval of the Competent Authority. The final appointment
to the post was however, made on 15th April, 2008.

1.12 As regards the number of vacancies of Chairman and Members
of various SERCs that are lying vacant, the Ministry of Power have
supplied the following information:

Post lying vacant in SERCs
(As on 15.07.2008)

S.No. Name of SERCs Chairperson Members
1 2 3 4
1, Assam. Nil Nil
2. Chhattisgarh Nil Nil
3. Central Electricity Nil One. Since 09.5.2006
Regulatory Commission
4. Delhi Nil One. Since 10.05.2007
5. Gujarat One. Since Nil
06.01.2008
6, Haryana Nil Nil
% Himachal Pradesh Nil ‘Two. Since 08.03.2006
8. Jammu Kashmir Nil Nil
9. Jharkhand Nil One. Since 24.2.2008
10. Karnataka Nil Two. Since 12.3.2008,
14.07.2008
i. Kerala Nil Nil
12. Maharashtra One. Since Nil
09.06.2008
13. Punjab Nil Nil
14. Rajasthan One. Since One. Since 14.01.2007
15.01.2007
15. Tamil Nadu Nil Nil



1 = 3 4
16. Uttar Pradesh Nil Nil
1... West Bengal One. Since Nil
03.2.2008
18. Andhra Pradesh Nil One. Appointed on
11.07.2008. Yet to join.
19... Bihar Nil One. Since 10.04.2008,
20. Madhya Pradesh Nil Nil
21... Orissa Nil Nil
22. Tripura One. Since -
27.05.2008
23. Uttarakhand Nil Nil

1.13 When enquired about the other vacancies and posts lying

vacant in Regulatory Commission, the Ministry have informed the
Committee:

the
and

10

“So far as information relating to Technical persons and Finance
experts lying vacant in the SERCs with date of vacancy is concerned
it is stated that under section 91 (2) of the Electricity Act, 2003,
Appropriate Commission may, with the approval of the appropriate
Government, specify the number of, nature and categories of other
officers and employees. In terms of the provisions of the said Act,
the matter is, therefore, to be determined between the State
Commission and the State Government.”

1.14 The Committee note that the Electricity Act 2003, specifies
following position in regard to appointment of Secretary, officers
others of Regulations Commission:

91(1) The Appropriate Commission may appoint a Secretary to
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
specified.

(2) The Appropriate Commission may, with the approval of the
Appropriate Government, specify the numbers, nature and
categories of other officers and employees.

(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms
and conditions of service of, the Secretary, officers and others


employees shall be such as may be specified with the
approval of the Appropriate Government.

(4) The Appropriate Commission may appoint consultants
tequired to assist that Commission in the discharge of its
functions on the terms and conditions as may be specified.

1.15 However, the Committee have been informed that the
Government had awarded a study to the Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) on the ‘Impact of Reorganisation of SEBs”. On
the staffing requirements of the Commissions the IPA in its report
has recommended as follows:

“The Commissions should have full autonomy in matters relating
to staffing pattern, organizational structure and adequate powers
to recruit staff, as require. An overall ceiling on expenditure could,
however, be fixed.

As no staffing pattern has been specified in the Act regarding
officers and other employees of the SERCs, and keeping in mind
the recommendations of IPA study, the Ministry have requested
the Forum of Regulators (FoR) to evolve a model of the staffing
pattern, after taking into account the size of the State.”

B, National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy for Protection of
Interests of Consumers

1.16 According to the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions shall be guided, inter alia, by the
National Electricity Policy and the Tariff Policy. As informed by the
Ministry, these policies were required to be notified by the Central
Government under the provisions of the Act after consulting, inter alia,
the State Governments. These Policies have already been notified.

1.17 The National Electricity Policy was notified by the Central
Government on 12.02.2005. Giving details of the same, the Ministry
have specified that protection of consumer interest is one of the
objectives of the Policy. The Policy in its para 5.7.1 lays down emphasis
on promoting power markets to promote market development, a part
of new generating capacities, say 15% may be sold outside long-term
PPAs. As power markets develop, it would be feasible to finance
Projects with competitive generation costs outside the long-term power
purchase agreement framework. In the coming years, a significant
portion of the installed capacity of new generating stations could
participate in competitive power markets. This will increase the depth

ab


of the power markets and provide alternatives for both generators
and licensees/consumers and in the long run would lead to reduction
in tariff. Further, Para 5.13 of the National Electricity Policy deals with
protection of consumer interests and quality standards. The Policy
requires the Electricity Regulatory Commissions to regulate utilities
based on predetermined indices on quality of power supply. The policy
also requires that the grievance redressal forums should be set up
expeditiously and the Ombudsmen should be appointed within six
months.

1.18 As regards, the Tariff Policy notified by the Central
Government on 6.1.2006. the Committee have been informed by the
Ministry of Power that the Policy aims at, inter-alia, ensuring availability
of electricity to consumers at reasonable and competitive rates. One of
the key features of the Policy is to enhance competition which will
lead to significant benefits to the consumers through reduction in capital
costs and also efficiency in operations. The Policy requires (para 5.1 of
the policy) that all future requirement of power should be procured
competitively by distribution licensees except in cases of expansion of
existing projects or where there is a State controlled/owned company
as an identified developer and where regulators will need to resort to
tariff determination based on norms provided that expansion of
generating capacity by private developers for this purpose would be
restricted to one time addition of not more than 50% of the existing
capacity. Even for the Public Sector projects, tariff of all new generation
and transmission projects should be decided on the basis of competitive
bidding after a period of five years or when the Regulatory
Commission is satisfied that the situation is ripe to introduce such
competition.

1.19 The Committee find that Section 61(a) of the Electricity Act
provides that the State Commissions shall be guided by the principles
and methodology specified by the Central Commission for
determination of tariff applicable to the generating companies and
transmission licensees. The principles and methodology for
determination of tariff applicable to the generating companies and
transmission licensees in the Central sector have been specified in CERC
(Terms & Conditions of Tariff) Regulations 2004. This serves as
guidelines for State Commission to specify the regulation for terms
and conditions for determination of tariff in respect of the generating
companies and transmission licensees under their control.

1.20 As regards AT&C loss reduction, the Ministry have specified
that Tariff Policy stipulates [para 8.2.1 (2) of the policy] that AT&C

12


reduction needs to be incentivised by linking returns to the power
utilities in a multi year tariff framework to an achievable trajectory.
The Ministry have further informed the Committee that the Tariff Policy
requires [para 8.1(2) of the policy] the State Commissions to introduce
mechanism for sharing of excess profits and losses with the consumers
as part of the overall multi-year tariff framework.

1.21 On enquiring about the mechanism for sharing excess profits
and losses with the consumers that has been introduced by the SERCs
as per the requirement of the Policy, the Ministry have furnished the
following information to the Committee:

SLNo. Name of State Comments
1 2 3
1 Assam . * No power purchase cost in excess of

approved AT&C loss granted to licensees;

. For excess loss, no amount is granted
after prudent check;

* For excess profit, benefits shall be passed
to the consumers after meeting the related
expenditure and provisions.

2. Bihar * MYT framework is yet to be put in place.
However, Directions given to BSEB for
reduction of AT&C losses in a specified
time frame.

3. Chhattishgarh * MYT has not been enforced in the absence
of requisite base data. Would be
introduced from 1/04/2009;

* Mechanism for sharing of excess profits/
Losses on the basis of the efficiency
parameters is being provided in draft
MYT regulations;

* — CSEB has entrusted the work of study of
AT&C losses and cost of supply to a
consultant;

* Provision for profit sharing and refund
of excess amount provided in tariff
regulations, 2006;

13


3

4,

6.

Delhi

Gujarat

Haryana

Incentive (50% retained by the licensee
and 50% kept for reducing ARR in future
years) is to be provided to the licensee in
case income is more than ARR;

Tariff is being determined after prudent
checking of ARR;

Commission has so far issued three tariff
orders FY 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08.
Reduction of ARR after Commission's
scrutiny led to the reduction of tariff
(from 3.45 Rs./Kwh to 3.20 Rs./Kwh and
finally to 2.98 Rs./Kwh ).

Discoms were given a target of 17%
reduction over the last 5 years 2002-07;

All three Discoms have been able to
achieve the targets. NDPL has been able
to over achieve;

In the MYT regulations, 2007, Discoms
have been given a target (NDPL 17%,
BRPL 17%, BYPL 22%) to bring down the
AT&C losses by the end of the control
period;

Incentive/disincentive linked to
performance on loss reduction.

The tariff and fuel surcharge are
determined on the basis of the T&D losses
fixed by the SERC and in case of higher
T&D losses, utilities are not allowed to
pass on this burden to consumers;

The MYT Regulations notified by the
SERC in Dec, 2007 provide for detailed
methodology related to sharing of
excessive profits/losses with consumers.

AT&C losses of licensee have declined
and T&D losses benchmark has been set
by SERC;

14


8.

10.

3

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

Karnataka

Kerala

Collection efficiency of the Utility has
improved.

T&D and AT&C losses in the utility are
extremely high;

Attempts are being made. However, due
to prevailing conditions much progress
could not be achieved to reduce losses.

SEB never attempted to reduce the AT&C
loss. However, some action is being taken
after being threatened of reducing the
tariff;

MYT will be implemented from April ‘08
wherein profit sharing mechanism in case
of earning profit due to over efficiency
by the licensee has been laid down.

T&D loss reduction target for licensees;

Penalty /Incentive for under-achievement/
over-achievement of loss targets by
allowing power purchase cost with
reference to loss targets;

Incentive/disincentive for performance on
loss reduction, in MYT;

To take care of surplus profits, truing up
exercise for past years undertaken and
only permissible ROE and surplus/deficit
being carried forward to next year. This
obviates need for sharing of surplus
profits.

MYT Principles, not applicable to the
KSEB;

Incentive regulations are followed for
approving the ARR (2003-04 & 2084-05)
of the Licensee;

Loss on account of under achievement of
AT&C loss reduction target to be borne
by the licensee;

15


3

ll.

12.

13.

14.

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

Meghalaya

Orissa

Excess profit (If any) earned over the
approved level, shall be adjusted to
allowable level during the truing up
process.

Profit Sharing Mechanism (excess
profit) for a period of three years from
FY 2007-08;

50% of the excess profit will be retained
by the utility and 50% will be passed on
to the consumer through tariff
commencing from the next tariff period;

Targets for distribution losses (technical
and non-technical) for 3 distribution
companies for 5 years (2006-07 to 2010-
11) period are set by State government;

Commission to disallow at the time of
truing up the amount on account of
excess purchase due to not adhering to
annual loss reduction target.

Mechanism for sharing of gains or losses
on account of controllable factors are
specified in the Regulations (Terms &
Conditions of Tariff);

SERC monitors distribution losses and
collections efficiency separately instead of
ATE&C loss.

MSERC operationalised in 2006. Not
possible to comment on this issue.

Licensee, allowed an approved return.
Profit over and above approved return is
shared in the following manner:

1/3rd amount to be declared by the
licensee as dividends to the shareholder;

1/3rd amount to be returned to
consumers by way of reduction in the
consumer bills as rebate; and

16


3

15.

16.

7.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

1/3rd amount to be kept as tariff
balancing reserve to be used to reduce
sharp rise in ARR in future;

Target set for the reduction of AT&C loss
has not been achieved. Thus, No incentive
sharing with the consumer. However,
regarding under-achievement of the target,
losses are entirely borne by the licensee.

Utility shall retain the entire gain/bear
the loss for any variation in respective
norms including T&D losses trajectory;

Penalty imposed for not achieving
specified loss trajectory.

The Commission may revise the tariff if
the current tariff results in excessive
Profits to licensees so as to allow only
reasonable return;

While truing up of the ARR of the
licensees the Commission has allowed
only target losses as specified by the
Commission and accordingly their
cumulative deficit up to the year 2004-05
as allowed by the Commission has been
reduced by disallowing amount toward
not achieving the desired targets of loss
reduction.

The trajectory for reduction of loss under
the multi-year tariff framework is yet to
be stipulated;

AT&C loss reduction targets during the
control period shall be determined with
reference to the loss level for base year
and such level shall have the flexibility
to accommodate changes due to
completion of metering arrangements for
accurate measurement of losses.;

az


3

20.

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

West Bengal

Losses due to under achievements of the
target shall be borne by the licensee and
gain shall be shared with the beneficiaries
at the rate of 50:50.

Licensee has taken an action plan under
APDRP Scheme to reduce AT&C loss to
25% which at present is 40%.

Excess profit (i. Profit over and above
the approved returns by way of reduction
of distribution losses collection efficiency
etc.) is as follows:

50% of the additional profit to the
licensee;

25% credited to the licensees contingency;

25% passed on to the consumer by
reducing ARR provided to the Licensee;

Does not allow losses to be passed on to
the consumer.

In its first order in Sept., 2003, SERC fixed
a trajectory for loss reduction of 4% every
year for the next five years for the
licensees;

Over the years, SERC has not allowed
loss to the licensee in excess of the
trajectory approved by it.

The targets for reduction in AT&C losses
are fixed in individual tariff orders;

The licensee can retain the difference if
the target of reducing losses has been
over achieved. However, in the case of
under achievement licensee shal! bear the
losses.

1.22 On enquiring about the need of indepth scrutiny of the

financial and technical data submitted by the licensees, which form
the basis of tariff determination, the Committee have been informed

18


that the SERCs have been tequired by the policy [para 8.2.1(2) of the
Tariff Policy] to institute a system of independent scrutiny of financial
and technical data submitted by the licensees.

1.23 The Committee have desired to know how far reduction in
capital cost and increase in efficiency in operations have been achieved
through different regulations of the State Regulatory Commissions and
how the SERCs fixes the tariff for various classes of consumers, i.e.,
the domestic, commercial and agricultural consumers. In this regard,
the following information was furnished to the Committee by SERCs
during the study tour of the Committee during January-February, 2008:

Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission (RERC)

“About the reduction in T&D losses, the Committee were informed
that the State had reduced distribution losses by 5.47% in 2006-07,
and plan to bring down the same to less than 20% level. In this
direction, measures such as Feeder Separation schemes, adoption
of Theft Preventive Techniques, replacement of old over-head lines/
cables and installation of push-fit meters are being undertaken.
RERC’s order regarding ‘Tariff for supply of Electricity-2004’ came
into force ७९.६. 1st January, 2005. Tariffs determined for all the
categories of consumers were within the limit of + 20% of cost of
supply as per tariff policy of the Gol except agriculture sector
where it was less than the specified limit. However, for non-
domestic supply it was more than the specified limit. Since, all the
three distribution companies are State-owned and are not claiming
any return on equity in their petition of revenue requirement,
probably under the directions of the State Government, the tariff
determined on 31 August 2007 is still continuing.”

Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission

Regarding energy audits, the Committee have been informed that
at present, these are being done in-house by the licensees and the
Commission is engaging experts/ independent consultants like TERI,
PWC, ASCI for scrutiny and analysis of the data submitted by the
licensee for tariff determination. The tariff and fuel surcharge are
determined on the basis of the T & D losses fixed by the
Commission and in case of higher T & D losses, Utilities are not
allowed to pass on this burden to consumers. GERC’s tariff orders
resulted in no significant increase in electricity tariff in the State
during the last seven years. Cross-subsidy surcharge has been
reduced from Rs. 1.80 per unit in 2005-06 to Rs. 1.37 per unit in

19


2006-07 and to Rs. 1.00 in the year 2007-08. According to the
Commission, they are in the process of further reducing the cross-
subsidy surcharge, although no directives have been issued to the
Commission from Government for Tariff Regulations or Tariff
Fixations. However, the State Government is providing fixed
subsidy of Rs. 1100 crore for Agriculture sector. Over and above,
the Government was also providing cash subsidy for the difference
between rates fixed by the Commission and rates recovered from
the agricultural consumers.

Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission

Regarding AT&C losses, the Committee were informed that loss
reduction of 5.61% was achieved by November, 2007. The
Committee were further informed that reforms measures such as
increasing of collection efficiency, network upgrading, photo-billing
of consumer bills, metering of feeders by photo meter reading and
HT consumers reading through MRI were under progress.

1.24 Regarding role of MERC in tariff fixation, the Committee have
been informed that MERC hold Public Hearings across the State, before
determining the Aggregate Revenue Requirement (ARR) and tariff in
case of the Distribution Licensees in the State, which distributes and
supplies electricity across the State. There has been tremendous
participation by individual consumers, organisations, industries, etc.,
over the years, which increased to around 13000 representations made
during the Multi-Year tariff process for Maharashtra State Electricity
Distribution Company Ltd. undertaken in February and March 2007.
The Commission’s Tariff Orders are very detailed and clearly enunciate
the philosophy and principles adopted by the Commission. According
to the Commission, it has ensured complete transparency at all stages
of the tariff determination process. However, it was pointed out that
almost all the tariff orders passed by MERC were challenged.

1.25 When asked about bringing efficiency in distribution system
and tariff rationalisation, the Secretary, Ministry of Power stated during
evidence on 23.04.2008:

“Tariff rationalisation has not been achieved in full, but the progress
that has been made is good. I would not say that it is entirely
satisfactory, it is good. There have been some innovative
methodologies to encourage efficiency. This institution of regulators
is a very senior and responsible body. We only hope that with our
support and whatever guidance we can give from outside, they

20


can achieve the desired results because if the consumer complaints
are not removed in time and if the efficiency of the distribution
system is not improved soon, the desired effects of re-organisation
of the earlier electricity boards into these various entities will not
be sustaining or not giving desired objectives because these
distribution companies could also sink into the red.”

1.26 Regarding fixation of tariff and its rationalisation, the
following information was provided by the representatives of SERCs
before the Committee during evidence on 23rd April, 2008:

Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission

“From 2004 there has been five paisa increase in one year to
another and six per cent increase which came to 20 paisa over one
unit, So, Rs. 2.20 went to Rs. 2.40 and that is what the Government
decided to roll back at that stage.

It is not correct to say that out of three companies one did not
ask. All the three companies and Delhi Transco., all of them put
together projected a gap of Rs. 3055 crore. So, Rs. 3055 crore was
the gap projected by all the companies. But on the scrutiny and
examination, if the whole thing was allowed, Rs. 3055 crore would
have translated into 60 per cent tariff hike. Ultimately what the
Commission ordered was 6.67 per cent. We have gone through the
whole process and every item of expenditure, cost of power
purchase, all were looked into and finally we arrived at a number
of Rs. 320 crore or so which resulted in a tariff hike of 6.67 per
cent. If I can claim that it would be a kind of advantage or help
which was rendered to the citizens of Delhi.

Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission

With regard to tariff, since 2001 there is no increase in the tariff,
Rather in this year there is fall in tariff. So far as agro industries
are concerned, there is a fall. For the first time we have seen a
fall. “ With regard to regulation, Orissa is the first State which has
privatized this sector after the reforms in 1995. Orissa is the first
State which has revoked licences in the post-reform era. We have
revoked licences of CESCO. Now, it is under control under a
scheme under Electricity Act 2003. We are running the utility under
that scheme. In the case of another three utilities Wesco, Nasco
and Southco, we have issued notice for revocation of licences
because they have not complied with our orders and business

21


22

plan. Business plan is a comprehensive plan where there is an
arrangement for the utility and the regulator as to how they will
achieve the results and as to how the sector will go, etc. After a
thorough discussion we have drawn the business plan. As they
have not complied with the orders of the Commission, we have
issued notice to revoke the licences. Then, they have gone to the
Appellate Tribunal. Now, we have gone to the Supreme Court.
Now, it is pending.

Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission

In UP, we have 110 lakh of consumers as on date. The villages
that have been electrified, get power only 4-6 hours a day. People
are not questioning our authority to fix tariff. They say if you are
supplying electricity for 12 hours, then the tariff is worth. It is fair
enough.

Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission

For the last three years, there has been no increase in tariff of this
segment. Similarly, for the agriculturists also, we have tried to
keep the tariff minimum and we have tried to give them a lot of
relief, particularly those farmers who consume energy up to
300 Hp. Now, the position is that in MP, if a farmer who consume
monthly to the extent of 500 units, he will have to make a
contribution of only 75 paise per unit.

For industry also we have given incentives; load factor and power
factor incentives. We have introduced time of day tariff. We want
to bring energy efficiency, clean development mechanism and hence
we have made a very conscious effort to promote new and
renewable energy in our power generation.

Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission

A new category of agricultural load has been introduced to
encourage use of electric power by the farmers by carving out
from irrigation category. Earlier, unmetered category was there and
we have abolished that. Then we have introduced ToD tariff for
4 (four) HT category time. We have kept the peak hours rate
moderately high so that the people are discouraged to use energy
during that period. Last year, we noticed that in Gauhati itself, the
demand in the peak hours was reduced by 30 to 40 MW.

As regards cross subsidy, in 2005-06, we had reduced it from
Rs. 80 crore to Rs. 60 crore. During 2006-07, we have asked the
Government whether it would give any subsidy. But the
Government has not responded. What we have done is that we
have got the trading income which means we have deducted the


purchase from the sale and whatever profit they make that is to
be adjusted with the cross subsidy.

We have established consumer grievance redressal forum. We are
encouraging electricity utilities to install electronic meters in all
cases. There was lot of resistance by the consumers. However, it
is in progress,

Bihar Electricity Regulatory Commission

The Bihar Electricity Regulatory Commission came into force in
August 2005. Within this short period, we have notified a number
of regulations and passed tariff order in November 2006. A question
was raised why there is an increase in tariff by the Regulatory
Commission. I have got a comparative chart of tariff, This example
is from Kutir Jyoti Yojana. It was unmetered and the rate was
Rs. 30 per month. The proposal which we had received from the
utility is for Rs. 107 per month which is 256 per cent increase.
Ultimately, we have fixed it at Rs. 35 per month, Similarly, in
domestic rural, the proposal was 245 per cent hike but we have
ultimately made it hardly 15 to 20 per cent hike. So, these are the
basic problems. Actually our utilities want to recover the entire
loss through tariff order passed by the Regulatory Commission
but it is just not practicable.

Another thing is that the average cost of supply before this first
tariff order was Rs. 5.55 per unit and we have reduced it to
Rs. 5 and we hope that it will be reduced further in future. As
regards T&D losses actually they suppress some information also.
We have asked for all this information two-three times. They have
given some affidavit but still I find that there is some variation.
We calculated ourselves and ultimately found that it is 41 per cent
and we have asked them to reduced by 3 per cent per annum. We
are little bit confused because they say that the T&D losses are
41 per cent but according to the Ministry of Power figure, the
AT&C losses are more than 70 per cent.”

C. Capacity Building of Consumer Groups and Consumer
Grievance Redressal Mechanism

1.27 As regards the Consumer Redressal Mechanism, the Ministry
of Power have informed the Committee that section 173 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 provides that nothing contained in the Act or any
rule or regulation made thereunder shall have effect in so far as it is
inconsistent with any other provisions, inter-alia, of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986. The Committee find that the National Electricity

23


Policy (Para 5.13.4) requires the Central Government, the State
Governments and the Electricity Regulatory Commissions to facilitate
capacity building of consumer groups and their effective representation
before the Regulatory Commissions.

1.28 Asked about the steps that have been taken by the Electricity
Regulatory Commissions to facilitate capacity building of consumer
groups, the following information was furnished to the Committee:

“Section 94(3) of the Act, 2003, provides that the Appropriate
Commission may authorize any person as it deems fit to represent
the interests of the consumers in the proceedings before it. The
Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission constituted the Office
of the Consumer Advocacy in year 2001 under the similar provision
of Karnataka Electricity Reforms Act, 1999.

Ministry of Power vide its letter dated 14.1.2008 has drawn the
attention of the Forum of Regulators towards section 94(3) of the
Act and para 5.13.4 of the National Electricity Policy and the Forum
has been requested to ensure the effective representation of the
consumers in the regulatory process.

Regulations 18 & 19 of the CERC (Conduct of Business) Regulation,
1999 provide for effective representation to the consumers before
the Central Commission in its proceedings.”

1.29 On enquiring about the violation of the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003, that have gone before different consumer forums,
the Committee have been informed that the National Consumer Dispute
Redressal Commission (NCDRC) established at national level under
the Consumers Protection Act is adjudicating the consumers complaints
filed, inter-alia, against the Electricity Boards or Companies providing
the electricity related services filed by aggrieved consumers whenever
there is an allegation of any defect in the goods or deficiencies in the
services rendered which include any unfair/restrictive trade practices
adopted. Beginning from the year 1988 and upto November 2007, 1358
such cases (relating to consumers of electricity) have been filed before
NCDRC in the form of Original Petitions, First Appeal (against the
order of the State Commissions) and Revision Petitions, out of which
1077 cases have been disposed off.

1.30 The Committee have been informed that the Electricity Act,
2003, Section 42 (5) provides that every distribution licensee shall,
within six months from the appointed date or date of grant of license,

24


which ever is earlier establish a forum for redressal of grievances of
the consumers in accordance with the guidelines as may be specified
by the State Commission.

1.31 To a query on the State-wise position in regard to the capacity
building of consumer groups, the Ministry in a written teply has
informed the Committee:

Sl. No. Name of State Comments
1 2 3
4, Assam * A Consumer Advocacy Cell, consisting

of 12 consumer groups, has been
constituted to educate consumers;

* Periodic consumer awareness meets are
organized by SERC through such
groups;

* A periodic newsletter viz. ‘The
Electricity Consumer Grid’ published
wherein different developments related
to consumer interest are highlighted.

2 Bihar * Comments/suggestions are invited from
the consumers’ groups/associations and
general public before finalizing any
Regulation or before taking any
decision on policy issues;

* A number of consumer groups/
associations and general public
participated in tariff determination
process for 2006-07.

3 Chhattisgarh * Services of a reputed NGO have been
enlisted by SERC to create awareness
amongst the consumers about their
rights and obligations under the Act;

* The NGO has conducted meetings/
seminars at Punchayat level,
expenditure for which has been borne
by SERC;

25


3

Gujarat

Consumer Advocacy Cell has been set
up in SERC for support of consumers.
The Cell visits different places to create
awareness amongst consumers;

Wide publicity regarding functioning of
CGRFs and Ombudsman by
distributing pamphlets and also through
monthly energy bills;

Representation to various categories of
consumers given in the Advisory
Committee, constituted u/s 87 of the
Act;

System of Registration of NGOs and
necessary support by the Commission.

Pursuant to DERC proposal, Deptt. of
Power, GNCT of Delhi has notified
constitution of Electricity Consumers
Advocate Committee (ECAC) with the
objective, inter-alia, of capacity building
amongst the consumer groups,
particularly in comprehending and
verifying the data submitted in various
petitions filed by the Discoms before
the SERC.

During initial period, SERC appointed
‘consumer advocate’ for representing
the small consumers;

A number of associations/groups such
as—Chambers of Commerce &
Industries, Consumer Education &
Research Society, Distt. Industrial
Associations—participated in various
matters before SERC including tariff
petitions as well as direct petitions on
matters of consumer interest;

SERC also funded Consumer Education
& Research Society for creating
awareness among consumers;

26


3

Haryana

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

Karnataka

SERC put responsibilities to some of its
official to put the facts & consumers
interest before the Commission;

SERC specified State Advisory
Committee, where in representation to
all types of consumers have been given
and broader issues are discussed in its
meetings.

SERC is considering appointing
consumers advocate to present cases on
behalf of the consumers during the
public proceedings.

Three eminent engineers were
appointed to apprehend the interests of
consumers during public hearings.

SERC organized public awareness
programmes and thereafter invited
register of consumers groups;

These groups are also invited to
participate in workshops, organized by
the SERC.

Pioneering steps by SERC to promote
consumers participation, by giving legal
status for consumer advocacy;

Office of the Consumers Advocacy
(OCA) appoirlied within SERC in 2001;

In last six years, OCA has undertaken
several activities to empower, inform
and educate public in general and
several societies/organizations in
particular about developments in the
electricity sector;

OCA has been conducting various
activities and events seeking to
disseminate information to the public;

27


3

10.

il.

Kerala

Madhya Pradesh

OCA publishes newsletters, bringing
out leaflets, pamphlets, alerts and fact-
sheets to educate consumers on several
issues;

OCA has published a training module
covering all aspects of electricity
regulations, which can be used by
consumers groups in their training
seminars;

QCA holds Public Outreach Meeting
(POM), capacity building programme,
public hearings etc;

OCA also appears before the
Commission in public hearings
wherever consumer interest is involved.
It has been a party in various petitions
before SERC, High Court and Appellate
Tribunal for Electricity.

SERC has conducted a training
programme for consumer groups for
verifying objections on ARR, petitions
of licensees, training programme for
electricity safety was also conducted;

SERC is in the process of creating
Consumer Advocacy Cell for effective
representation before the Commission.

120 NGOs have been registered with
the SERC;

Details of supply code, containing
salient provisions were distributed
through the NGOs about information/
rights/obligations of licensees and
consumers;

NGOs were also invited in the hearings
before SERC for represent interest of
consumers;

28


3

12.

13.

14.

Maharashtra

Meghalaya

Orissa

NGOs workshops held in August, 2007
to apprise them about Standards of
Perforraance, details of compensation
payable in various cases etc. They have
also been requested to present in
consumer interest in individual cases as
well as during hearing related to
consumers interest like tariff
determination;

Consumer Advocacy Cell constituted by
SERC to look after the consumers’
interest and educate consumers.

SERC has authorized four Consumers
Representatives of different fields for
attending hearings/technical validation
session held in the Commission’s office.
They are provided with the data/
petition/applications/records required
for their analysis and comments/
suggestions / objections;

A separate fund is reserved by the
SERC for reimbursement of the actual
expenditure, incurred by these
Consumers Representatives for
attending hearings/technical validation
sessions.

Steps like-public contact through media
and empanelled NGOs have been
initiated in the first tariff determination
exercise. There were as many as 10
representations.

Guidelines for empanelment of
consumer groups by SERC for
consumer advocacy;

Appointment of NGOs as Consumer
Council in tariff proceedings, Consumer
inter-phased programmes by SERC in
collaboration with consumer groups,
State-wise workshops for training
orientation by consumer groups;

29


3

15.

16.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Translation of Regulations into local
language;

Publication of Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQs);

A State level workshop organized in
August, 2007 wherein several consumer
related issues were discussed and
subsequently SERC undertook a multi-
media consumer awareness campaign in
collaboration with consumers groups;

State-wise consumer survey is being
conducted by SERC to attend consumer
satisfaction with the performance of
distribution utilities in the State.

Participation of NGOs of consumer
groups is encouraged by SERC;

Their representatives have been
nominated as members of State
Advisory Committee, District
Coordination Committees have been
constituted by State Government under
the Act;

A general guide educating the
consumers in respect of complaints
handling procedures and facilities
available in redressal of grievances has
been prepared and made available to
these groups and Distt. Coordination
Committee Members.

Audio-visual presentation of petitions of
licenses on ARR;

Amicus-curie appointed by SERC in
some cases;
Representatives from industrial sector

and from NGOs nominated in the State
Advisory Committee.

30


3

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

West Bengal

Consumer Advocacy Officer appointed
to educate consumers and to impart
knowledge on power sector reform
Process and their rights and
responsibilities;

SERC is publishing a quarterly issue on
newsletter and also prepared a
consumer guide in questions &
answers;

A web enabled interactive software
application ‘Consumer Query Platform’
has been hosted in the Commission's
website facilitating the consumers to get
clarifications on proper interpretation on
the orders, codes and regulations;

SERC has proposed to conduct one-day
seminar/workshop for consumers’
associations/groups/NGOs in all the
nine distribution regions of licensees to
provide knowledge to consumers on
power sector reforms.

Public awareness campaign, open house
discussions are held periodically in
district headquarters and sub-division
headquarters.

A cell for consumer education and
advocacy has been created by SERC on
public-private partnership basis, to
create consumers awareness by
Education and Advocacy as well as for
directing the consumers rights.

UERC has organized “Jan Ghoshtis” to
impart knowledge and education
consumers’ groups about their rights
and responsibilities.

A State Advisory Committee is already
in position and consumer groups are
effectively represented in that advisory
Committee;

31


1 2 3

*  SERC has decided to launch a program
for increasing consumer awareness at
the district level with the help of
district Administration, the Zilla
Parishads and other public bodies;

* The Ombudsman gives open hearing to
the concerned consumers/consumer
groups.

1.32 The Committee have been further informed that the Central
Government notified the Electricity Rules, 2005. Rule 7 of these Rules,
inter-alia, provides that ‘The Ombudsman shall consider the
representations of the consumers consistent with the provisions of the
Act, the Rules and Regulations made thereon or general orders or
Directions given by the appropriate Government or the appropriate
commission in this regard before settling their grievances. The Rule
also requires the Ombudsman to prepare a report on six monthly
basis giving details of the nature of the grievances of the consumer
dealt by the Ombudsman, the response of the licensees in the redressal
of the grievances and the opinion of the Ombudsman on the licensee’s
compliance of the standards of performance as specified by the
Commission under section 57 of the Act during the preceding six
months. These reports of the Ombudsman are required to be forwarded
to the State Commissions and the State Governments within 45 days
after the end of the relevant period of six months.’ In this context, the
Committee desired to know the break-up of the nature of the grievances
of the consumers dealt with by the Ombudsman in different States,
the response of the licensees thereto as also opinion of the Ombudsman
in relation thereto.

1.33 In this regard, the Government in its reply furnished to the
Committee has provided the following details of Consumer Grievances
Redressal Forum and Ombudsman in various States as received from
SERCs:—

Sl. No. Name of State Comments
1 2 3
1, Assam ¢ Regulations stipulating guidelines on

Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum
and Electricity Ombudsman, issued;

32


3

Bihar

Chhattisgarh

Most of the complaints received are of
irregular billing due to installation of
digital energy meters.

CGRF established by BSEB and is
functional from Sept. 2006;

213 cases have been filed by consumers
and 86 cases have been disposed of by
CGRF upto 30.11.2007;

Ombudsman yet to be appointed as the
post of Ombudsman not yet sanctioned
by State Government.

Regulations on CGRF and Ombudsman
notified;

CGRFs set up by CSEB in Raipur,
Bilaspur, Jagdalpur;

Other Discoms viz. Bhilai Steel Plant

(BSP) and JSPL have set up single
Forum in their area;

234 cases received by CSEB Forums, out
of which 225 cases have been settled;

Both Ombudsman and SERC monitor
progress of complaints filed with
CGRFs;

Regular meeting held by SERC with
CGRF on complaint redressal;

Non-compliance of orders of CGRF and
Ombudsman, treated as violation of
SERC regulations and as liable for
action under section 142 of the Act;

Ombudsman appointed. 30 cases
received so far, out of which 26 cases
have been disposed of till Nov., 2007;

Quarterly report by Ombudsman to
SERC on disposal of cases;

33


3

Delhi

Also a six monthly report by
Ombudsman about the nature of
§rievances, response of licensees, and
Ombudsman’s opinion about licensee's
compliance of standards of
performance;

Most of the complaints are related to
billing dispute. Some cases are relating
to delay in giving connections;

Issues regarding effectiveness of CGRF
because of CGRF consisting primarily
of licensees’ employees.

CGRFs formed by each of the three
Discoms in 2004;
4677 complaints received by CGRFs so

far, out of which 4541 have been
disposed of till Nov. 2007;

75% of the cases decided have gone in
favour of consumers;

Ombudsman appointed;

Ombudsman sends bi-annual reports.
SERC maintains break-up of complaints.
Over 80% of complaints are related to
metering and billing problems;

Out of 4677 complaints received by
CGRFs, only 226 complaints ie. 4.8%
of the total number of complaints have
gone on appeal;

Ombudsman bi-annual reports have
been discussed with licenses and
suggestions made by Ombudsman
about strengthening of grievances
handling mechanism at Discom level
have been generally accepted by
Discoms.



3

8.

Gujarat

Haryana

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

SERC is regularly holding meetings of
Consumer Grievances Redressal Forums
(CGRFs) for reviewing grievances
redressal mechanism;

SERC is also getting quarterly progress
teports regarding complaints handled
by the CGRFs;

The nature of complaints received
include non-release of deposits, transfer
charges, development charges, slowness
of meters etc;

In order to review and monitor

performance of CGRFs, meeting
convened by Ombudsman;

Information regarding Ombudsman was
published in newspapers;

All CGRFs were requested to fix
information regarding Ombudsman on
their notice boards and to upload this
information on their websites.

CGRFs established by Discoms;

Discoms file a quaterly report to the
SERC;

Ombudsman has been appointed;

Ombudsman has to submit report to
the SERC every six month containing
details of the nature of grievances;

15 complaints filed during July, 07 to
Dec. 07.

J&K State Electricity Act does not have
provision for CGRF and Ombudsman.

CGRFs established by Discoms;

SERC exercises checks through
quarterly reports and giving directions
in case of delay in disposal of cases;

35


3

10.

Karnataka

Kerala

Ombudsman appointed;

14 cases filed before Ombudsman, out
of which 12 relate to billing dispute and
2 relate to connection/reconnections.

CGRFs established by Discoms;

During 2006-07, 109 cases have been
disposed of by CGRFs and 21 cases are
pending;

Ombudsman appointed;

Ombudsman submits bi-annual report
to SERC indicating nature of grievances,
his opinion about implementation of
orders;

32 cases disposed of by Ombudsman
so far-8 cases are pending;

Complaints relate mainly to new
connection, delay in refund of security
deposit, relief from payment of arrears,
violation of electricity supply and
distribution code standards, wrong
billing /excessive billing, etc;

Licensees have implemented all orders
of Ombudsman.

CGRFs set up;

391 cases received till March 2007, out
of which 336 cases disposed of and 45
are pending;

Ombudsman appointed;

33 cases received till December, 2007,

out of which 31 cases have been
disposed of and 2 are pending;

11 cases disposed of have gone in
favour of licensees and 20 in favour of
consumers.



1

2

3

i.

12.

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

CGRFs established;

SERC monitors performance of CGRFs
through Ombudsman;

During 2006-07, 1875 cases settled, out
of the total of 2007 cases (including 521
pending cases of the previous year);

During 2007-08 (upto September, 2007)
673 cases settled, out of the total of 790
cases (including 132 pending cases of
the previous year);

Ombudsman appointed;

Ombudsman conducts proper hearing
to decide cases and also monitors
whether decision of CGRF/
Ombudsman being properly
implemented. On non-compliance SERC
issues notices to Discoms;

Scrutiny of 6 cases settled by each
CGRF undertaken by Ombudsman
every month;

Ombudsman submits six monthly
report to SERC;

Response of licensees towards disposal
of complaints has been satisfactory.

SERC has framed a comprehensive
“Electricity Consumer's Rights
Statement” with the objective of
enabling consumers to protect
themselves by creating awareness about
their rights available and the service as
well as the level of quality that may
reasonably expect from the electricity
distribution companies in their
respective areas etc;

Utilities are also directed to spread over
awareness about the consumers
grievances redressal mechanism;

37


13.

14.

3

Meghalaya

Orissa

As per information available, leaflets on
consumers’ awareness were circulated
along with electricity bills and
information hoardings have been
displayed of their respect billing centre/
customer care centre about consumer
grievances redressal mechanism.

Regulations on Redressal of Grievances
have been notified in 2007;

Ombudsman appointed;

No cases filed before Ombudsman so
far.

CGRFs are operational all over the State
since October, 2004 and Ombudsmen
are functioning since Jan, 2005;

Procedure for redressal laid down in
Regulations on CGRF and Ombudsman;

SERC conducts periodic inspection of
the operation of the CGRFs;

Requirement for CGRFs to submit
quarterly, biennial and annual reports;

Monitoring of complaints of
Ombudsman relates to billing disputes,
low voltage, allegedly illegal
disconnection, delay in new connection,
defective meter, dispute over contract
demand, delay in replacement of burnt
transformer and non-implementation of
orders of CGRFs;

Bi-annual report by Ombudsmen to
SERC;

Observations of Ombudsmen so far
include: rising trend of registration of
cases before Ombudsman, greater
awareness about role of Ombudsman
required, mutual conciliation should be
predominant means of addressing
disputes, non-implementation of orders
of Ombudsmen in some cases.



3

19.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

Triprua

Uttar Pradesh

CGRF established. SERC monitoring
performance regularly;

Ombudsman appointed. Half report to
SERC.

CGRF established. SERC monitoring
performance regularly;

Ombudsman appointed;

Half Yearly report by Ombudsman to
SERC, giving details about nature of
grievances of consumers, response of
licensees, opinion of Ombudsman on
licensees compliance of Performance
Standards;

Out of 68 cases received, 50 cases have
been settled and 18 are pending.

The Commission issued Regulations for
CGRFs & Ombudsman which came into
force in Feb., 2004;

Licensees have established CGRFs in all
the 38 distribution circles. The Forums
have disposed of 382 petitions from
July 2006 to June 2007;

Ombudsman has been functioning from
7.6.2005. 17 petitions have been
admitted and all have been disposed
of during 1-1-2007 to 31-12-2007.

SERC notified Grievance Redressal
Management System and Ombudsman
appointed;

On receiving a complaint, SERC
advised the consumer to follow the
§rievance redressal procedure.

CGRFs established in all Discoms;

SERC holds meetings with CGREs to
hear their problems and assess
procedures followed in disposal of
grievances of consumers;

39


ड़

20. Uttarakhand

21. West Bengal

Regulations on Ombudsman notified
and Ombudsman is required to submit
reports to SERC.

CGRFs appointed for redressal of
complaints;

Licensees are required to submit a
quarterly report on the number of
complaints received, redressed and
pending along with reasons for their
pendency;

Ombudsman has also been appointed
by SERC.

CGRF has been established at the level
of the licensees as per the Regulation
of Commission;

Ombudsman operating for more than
3 years has kept a close watch to
ensure that the grievances of the
consumers submitted to the Forum and
the cases of non redressal of the
grievances referred to the Ombudsman
are settled expeditiously;

Out of 1970 cases received, 1726 cases
have been settled and 244 are pending.

1.34 When asked about the nature and status of complaints
received by the SERCs, the following information has been furnished

by the Ministry:

Sl. No. Name of State Comments
1 2 3
Hf Assam Complaints received in SERC referred

to CGRFs for redressal;

However, general complaints are
deliberated in the State Advisory
Committee (SAC) meeting.

40


3

5

Bihar

Chhattisgarh

Delhi

Gujarat

Consumers grievances are redressed by
Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum
(CGRF), established u/s 42(5) of the
Act;

So far 213 complaints have been filed
and 86 complaints have been redressed
by CGRF upto September, 2007.

Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum
(CGRF), set up u/s 42(5) of the Act to
redress consumers grievances;

After analyzing of complaints received
by CGRE, it is observed that most of
the complaints relate to billing disputes
and delay in new connections.

Fast running meters was a general
complaint received in SERC;

SERC took cognizance and conducted
third party testing of meters along with
CPRI & BIS;

SERC has also got survey conducted
for consumers satisfaction;

SERC has been receiving petitions filed
by consumers u/s 142 of the Act for
imposing of penalty on licensees for
violation of certain provisions of the
Act, Regulations of the SERC;

Out of 100 petitions filed upto
December, 2007, 86 have been disposed
off and penalty ranging from Rs. 500
to Rs. One lakh imposed in 23 cases
and compensation ranging from
Rs. 1000/- to Rs. 10,000/- allowed in
8 cases.

Consumer complaints handled through
in-house mechanism of the licensees,
Consumer Grievances Redressal Forums
(CGRFs) and Ombudsman;

41


3

6. Haryana

2 Jammu & Kashmir
8. Jharkhand

9. Karnataka

10. Kerala

iL. Madhya Pradesh

In case of receipt of a complaint by
SERC, same is forwarded to licensees/
CGRFs for redressal.

Consumer's complaints are addressed
by CGRF and Ombudsman;

Few complaints involving power factor
rebate, Advance consumption deposit
and interest on security have been
addressed by the SERC.

No complaints received so far.

Complaints received are of the nature
of:- non providing of electricity
connections, vigilance case/complaints
cases of non-providing connections;

Out of 980 complaints, nearly 700 cases
have been decided in favour of the
complainants and connections have
been provided.

Office of the Consumer Advocacy
{OCA) in the Commission has received
1043 complaints, out of which 891
complaints have been solved to the
satisfaction of the consumers; action is
being taken to dispose of the remaining
152 complaints.

Complaints are mainly on tariff
classification;

SERC has received 20 complaints filed
as per Regulations so far.

Consumer complaints are required to
be sent to Consumer Grievances
Redressal Forum (CGRF) and
Ombudsman;

Every complaint received by the SERC
is also being taken care of through
Ombudsman;

42


12.

13.
14.

15.

3

Maharashtra

Meghalaya

Orissa

Punjab

After scrutiny, these complaints are
forwarded to CGRF or to respective
licensee;

218 complaints were received and sent
to Discoms for redressal, out of these
redressal reports of 137 complaints have
been received and 33 complaints were
sent to CGRE, out of which redressal
reports of 18 complaints have been
received;

No serious complaint of low voltage,
interruption in supply and delay in
new service connection were received;

General complaints were of billing
raised on account of enhancement of
load and cases u/s 126 & 135 of the
Act.

Complaints received in SERC referred
to concerned utility and CGRFs for
tedressal.

There are no reported cases in the State.

Most of the complaints received by
SERC relate to:- voltage complaint,
interruption/failure of power supply,
problems in metering, billing disputes,
dis-connections and re-connections of
power supply, delay in providing new
connections, non-implementation of the
orders of CGRF/Ombudsman;

Most of these complaints have been
settled in favour of the consumers.

General complaints regarding billing/
metering being received by SERC, are
got settled from the licenses through
intervention of the Commission.



16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

als

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

West Bengal

3

Appellate Tribunal for Electricity as well
as Hon'ble Supreme Court have held
that redressal of consumers grievances
is the specific responsibility of the
CGRFs u/s 42 (5) of the Act.

No instance as yet.
Complaints are settled by the licensee;

In case of complaint received, SERC
issued directions to licensee for disposal
and no re-appeal/re-consideration so
far.

Normally when complaints are received
from the consumers, licenses are
informed about these complaints;

SERC of its own does not decide on
these complaints but facilitates
stakeholders by issuing suitable
directions in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and Regulations
framed by it.

General complaints such as non-
implementation/wrong implementation
of orders, wrong billing, defective
meters, supply problems etc. are
received by SERC;

Orders are given by the Commission
to rectify the same, which have been
duly complied and implemented by the
licensees.

Of the total number of 629 cases
disposed of by the Comimission, the
verdicts in favour of the complainants
have gone in 336 cases (including
orders for payment of compensation in
38 cases).



1.35 Regarding establishment of forums for redressal of consumer
grievances, the Committee were informed by Rajasthan Electricity
Regulatory Commission (RERC) during a study tour to Jaipur that all
the three distribution companies have already set up forums for
redressal of consumers grievances and the Commission has appointed
one Ombudsman for each Distribution Companies for settlement of
complaint of the consumer aggrieved with the decision of the Forum.
The process of specifying the mechanism of compensation by the
utilities to the aggrieved person, in case of non-adherence of Standards
of Performance by the former within a specified time period, was
reported to be under process in the Commission.

1.36 During their study visit to Ahmedabad in January, 2008, the
Committee also observed that the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory
Commission is regularly holding meetings with consumer Grievance
Redressal Forums (CGRFs) for reviewing Grievance Redressal
mechanism. The Commission is also getting quarterly Progress reports
regarding complaints handled by the CGRFs. With the designation of
the Secretary, Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission as
Ombudsman, the office of Ombudsman has become functional since
5th August, 2005. The information regarding Ombudsman was
published in newspapers for the purpose of public awareness. All
forums were also requested to affix the information regarding
Ombudsman on their notice boards and to upload this information on
their web-site.

1.37 When enquired about the grievance redressal mechanism, the
Committee were informed that the MERC had formulated its Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forums and Electricity Ombudsman Regulations,
2006, which provides guidelines to the Licensees in the matter. As per
the above said guidelines separate machinery have been set up for
redressal of grievances. All five (5) Distribution Licensees have
established Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums in each Distribution
Zone falling within their area of supply. Maharashtra State Electricity
Distribution Company Ltd. (MSEDCL) has established twelve CGR
Forums at each Zone, i.e., Amravati, Nagpur (Urban), Nagpur (Rural),
Aurangabad, Nashik, Pune, Beed, Latur, Kolhapur, Kalyan, Kinkan and
Bhandup. Tata Power Co. Ltd., Reliance Energy Ltd., Brihan-Mumbai
Electricity Supply & Transport Undertaking (BEST) and Mula Pravara
Electric Co-operative Society Ltd. have also established one Forum
each for their respective supply areas.

1.38 Regarding Consumer Advocacy in the State it was brought
out to the notice of the Committee that during initial period, the

45


Commission appointed ‘Consumers Advocate’ for representing the small
consumers. The Commission also funded ‘Consumer Educaction and
Research Society’ (a prominent consumer association) inter-alia for
creating awareness among Electricity Consumers. In the State Advisory
Committee (SAC), representation to all the types of consumers is given
and broader issues are discussed.

~ 41.39 The Committee have also been informed that in accordance
with the requirements of the Karnataka Electricity Reforms Act 1999
and in the interests of the consumers, the Karnataka Electricity
Regulatory Commission (KERC) has established the Office of Consumer
Advocacy (OCA) within the Commission. The OCA has been
functioning independently since its establishment in 2001. A senior
consumer activist has been nominated as Consultant (Consumer
Advocacy) to head the OCA. Besides, the KERC has recognized the
Consultant (CA) as the representative of consumers in all matters
relating to electricity. The OCA has been put in charge of all activities
relating to consumers.

1.40 In the last six years, the OCA had reportedly undertaken
several activities to empower, inform and educate the public in general
and the civil society organizations in particular, about the developments
in the electricity sector. The Committee have been informed that OCA
is acting as a catalyst to make the consumers participate in the power
sector reform process and at the same time act as a countervailing
force both on the Licensees and the Regulatory Commission. The
Committee have been further informed that OCA is obtaining quarterly
reports of Standards of Performance and monitoring its compliance.
Periodically, a consolidated report of the performance of the Licensees
are prepared and made public.

1.41 To a query about the mechanism for handling Consumer
Grievances in the State, the Committee were informed that despite the
fact the Licensees have established their own Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forums as required under the Electricity Act, 2003 and
Regulations made thereunder by the KERC, the OCA has been
facilitating redressal of consumer grievances. Up to 31st March 2007,
the OCA was stated to have received 1043 complaints out of which
891 had been resolved to the satisfaction of the consumers and the
action was being taken to dispose off the remaining 152 complaints.

142 When enquired about the Grievance Redressal Mechanism in
Maharashtra, the Committee have been informed by MERC during the
study visit that they had formulated its Consumer Grievance Redressal

46


Forums and Electricity Ombudsman Regulations, 2006, which provides
guidelines to the Licensees in the matter. As per these guidelines,
separate machinery has been set up for redressal of grievances. All
five (5) Distribution Licensees have established Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forums in each Distribution Zone falling within their area
of supply. Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Ltd.
(MSEDCL) has established twelve CGR Forums at each Zone ie.
Amravati, Nagpur (Urban), Nagpur (Rural), Aurangabad, Nashik, Pune,
Beed, Latur, Kolhapur, Kalyan, Konkan, and Bhandup. Tata Power Co.
Ltd., Reliance Energy Ltd., Brihan-Mumbai Electricity Supply &
‘Transport Undertaking (BEST), and Mula Pravara Electric Co-operative
Society Ltd. have also established one Forum each for their respective
supply areas.

143 The Committee have been further informed that the office of
the Electricity Ombudsman was constituted on December 27, 2004 and
was made functional immediately, to receive representations and settle
grievances of consumers who are aggrieved by non-redressal of
grievances by the Forums in the State, as envisaged in the Electricity
Act, 2003. The MERC [Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums (CGRF)
and Electricity Ombudsman] Regulations, 2006 stipulate that the order
issued by the CGRF has to be implemented within the stipulated
timeframe. In case the consumer is aggrieved by the CGRF order, or
Forum has not passed an order within maximum period of two months
from the date of receipt of the grievance by the Forum, he may
approach the Ombudsman. The above Regulations further stipulate
that the Ombudsman’s order is binding on both parties. The
Regulations also stipulate that in case of non-compliance of the CGRF
order and Ombudsman’s order by the distribution licensee, the penal
proceedings against the distribution licensee under Sections 142 and
149 of EA 2003 are attracted.

1.44 The Committee were further apprised by MERC that the
Commission had framed a comprehensive “Electricity Consumer’s
Rights Statement (ECRS)”. The ECRS spells out in great detail the
rights of electricity consumers available under the Electricity Act 2003
and serves a twin purpose-it enables consumers to protect themselves
by creating an awareness regarding the rights available, and the service
as well as the level of quality that they may reasonably expect from
the electricity distribution companies in their area of supply, details on
security deposit, billing, etc. The ECRS lists the procedure for getting
a new connection, the right to receive notice and due process prior to
disconnection and the procedure for reconnection, the standards of
performance of electricity distribution, the complaint handling and

47


grievance redressal system and their right to the electricity supplier of
their choice.

145 Regarding Consumer Representatives’, the Committee were
informed that MERC authorized four (4) Consumer Representatives
viz.Prayas (Energy Group), Pune, Mumbai Grahak Panchayat, Mumbai,
Thane Belapur Industries Association, Navi Mumbai and Vidarbha
Industries Association, Nagpur. All the 4 authorized Consumer
Representatives are called for every hearing, and technical validation
session held at the Commission’s office and at public hearings held at
different places, for effective representation of all the consumers before
the Commission. They are provided with the Data/Petition/
Applications/Records required for their analysis and comments/
suggestions/ objections. MERC has already taken a decision to reimburse
the actual expenditure incurred by the authorised consumer
representatives to be present at the hearing/public hearing. A separate
fund is reserved by the Commission for the expenditure on consumers.

1.46 Regarding Consumer Redressal Mechanism, during evidence
on 19.12.2007, the Secretary, Ministry of Power informed the Committee:

“The consumer interest being paramount, this legislation, the 2003
Act, does not interfere with the rights of consumers within the
Consumer Protection Act. That Act is supreme and any consumer
is at liberty to approach any of the consumer fora under that Act
for legal redressal of his grievances. However, a more expeditious,
mode of consumer-redressal has been provided under the 2003
Act where it is made obligatory on the distribution company, which
is a licensee, to provide for a forum which shall be redressing
consumer grievances. If a consumer is not satisfied with his petition
in this forum, he can come to the Ombudsman. The effort would
be to address the grievances. It is generally understood and I am
given to believe that it is supported by a judgement of the Supreme
Court also reported in 2007 that individuals are not to appear
before the Commission.”

1.47 The Secretary, Ministry of Power further stated:

ore we have just yesterday decided to conduct a study or rather
commission a study for studying the impact of these consumer
redressal mechanisms which are available in the various States.
We have chosen three or four States in each region and we intend
to invite quotations on the subject from the IIPA and the
Administrative Staff College of India for conducting the study and

48


give a report within a period of probably three months. We hope
that the status of consumer redressal as it exists in the various
States would be appropriately brought up and in case, any further
changes are needed, we shall do so. From our side, we have also
made suitable rules and regulations which make it compulsory for
the report on this redressal mechanism in the States to be placed
before the appropriate Government.”

1.48 Talking of Consumer Redressal Mechanism, the representative
of the State Electricity Commission of Uttar Pradesh during evidence
on 23.04.2008 stated as under:

“First, when the Regulatory Commissions were created, the much-
harassed consumers in almost all the States felt that the God’s
Avatar has come to help them, to rescue them from all problems
and woes of power. We are looked by the consumers in a State as
the solution to all their problems. I get midnight calls from the
consumers. People have great expectations from the Regulatory
Commissions because, after a prolonged torture of the consumers,
the Regulatory Body has been formed.” The Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum is one window which the Act has created. We
have to put in place in the respective States that Body. When in
2003 the Act was passed by Parliament, this Forum had a
constitution where only the licencee-officers were there to adjudicate
the disputes between the licencee and the individual consumer.
Normally, they would be headed by the level of SC. In a certain
case, the General Manager or the Chief Engineer has said like this.
The consumers can go to the Ombudsman. We have appointed
the Ombudsman. The Ombudsman says “no”. He says that as per
the Bill, the limit is only up to rupees one lakh. They do not
implement it. The licencee does not listen. What can the
Ombudsman, do? He has no power to do anything. After
exhausting the channel of Ombudsman, the hapless consumer has
no place to go in the country. He cannot come to the Commission
because the appeal provision does not lie in us. He has to go to
the Tribunal or the Supreme Court or somewhere. How can a
poor consumer go to such places for the rectification of a bill? So,
certain grey areas are there. Certain modifications and
improvements are required to the Act. Maybe, there is a parallel
need to look into ourselves and see how we can better our
performance. At the same time, the basic Premise and the structure
of the Act is not very effective as far as the Forum and various
other things are concerned. Therefore, my personal view is that
the hon. Committee should review this aspect also so that

49


consumers get some relief some justice. So far as the consumer
satisfaction is concerned, we have done a lot. We are very proud
that we have 12 GRFs and two Ombudsmen. We have done a lot
of things so far as consumer satisfaction is concerned.”

1.49 Regarding the Grievance Redressal Mechanisms, the Secretary,
Ministry of Power informed the Committee:

.. Forum of Regulators has engaged the Indian Institute of
Management, Ahmedabad to review the gaps between vision and
achievements of reforms and regulatory framework and to suggest
the way forward in respect of six States where they will do the
study.”

1.50 A representative of MPERC made the following submission
on their role in protecting the interests of the consumers:

“First of all, we have set up three IT-enabled Central Call Stations
at the headquarters of the three Distribution Companies which we
are having: one at Bhopal, the other at Jabalpur and the third at
Indore. We have also given them a facility whereby online
registration of complaints can be done by the citizens. There is
also an additional facility created that there could be online tracking
of status of each complaint made by the complainant. All these
things are being done so that the two offices of Forum and the
Ombudsman become more responsive to the need of the time that
is genuinely resolving the grievances of the consumers. For that
also we have made a departure from the established practice.
Earlier the Forum used to sit only at the headquarters. Now, we
have stated that for two definite days, in the first week and the
third week of each month, the Forum has to sit at another
important part of the Company. For example, for the Central
Discom it is at Gwalior because Gwalior is also as big a city as
Bhopal. Similarly, we have asked that Indore Division Forum must
sit at Ujjain which is another big place within the area of that
Company. Similarly, for the other Discom also we have stated that
apart from sitting at Jabalpur it must reach out to the citizens in
Rewa and Sagar, two other big towns of the Discom.

seeeene there has been an increase in the number of cases registered.
Similarly, there has been an increase in number of disposal of
cases. When we analyse the disposal of cases by the three Forums
we find that 58 per cent of the cases have gone in favour of the
consumers. When we analyse the cases decided by the Ombudsman

50


we find that 57 per cent of the cases have gone in favour of the
consumer, This is, of course, the beginning. We are not fully
satisfied with it. We realise that there are inherent weaknesses in
the composition of the Forum itself. There are two Members from
the licencee’s side and there is only one independent Member
who is picked up by the Commission through a prudent process
of checking and interviewing.

We held a workshop inviting NGOs from all over the State.
Fortunately, we have got 125 NGOs registered with the
Commission. Perhaps, this must be the largest number anywhere
in the country. We got them a lot of material because we want
them to be more and more informed. We told them that since
they are people who are closest to the consumers, they know their
day to day difficulties and problems, the kind of difficulties they
face when they come up against the licensees to get their
connections regularized, etc. We told them to come and help the
consumers by instilling confidence of the licensees in the consumers
and be a facilitator.”

1.51 In a post evidence reply regarding number of complaints,
Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC) has furnished the
following information:

1. Billing complaints ४ 17293
2. Metering complaints : 23051
3. Power failure complaints % 371701
4, Street light complaints : 105054
5. Voltage related complaints : 45650

1.52 On being asked about payment of compensation by the
Distribution Companies in the event of default in observance of
Standards of Performance, the DERC has informed the Committee in
3 post evidence reply that the Delhi Electricity Supply Code and
Performance Standards Regulations, 2007 envisage payment of
compensation by the Distribution Companies to consumer(s) in the
event of default in observance of the notified Standards of Performance
(SoP) on their part. Regulation 65 of the Delhi Electricity Supply Code
and Performance Standards Regulations, 2007 reads as under:

“65. Compensation

(i) The Licensee shall be liable to pay to the affected consumers
compensation specified in Schedule-III for Licensee’s failure

51


to meet the Guaranteed Standards of Performance specified
in Schedule-I. The compensation shall be paid by the
Licensee in the manner specified in Schedule III:

(ii) The Licerisee concerned shall pay the compensation referred
to under sub-clause (i) above by way of adjustment in the
current or future electricity bill{s) as laid out in
Schedule-II.”

1.53 The Commission has directed all the Distribution companies
to pay compensation to the affected consumer without there being a
need for such consumers to apply for the same. The DERC receives
quarterly MIS reports from Distribution companies in respect of
compliance of the guaranteed SoP by them. The information submitted
by all Distribution companies show 133 cases of failure which are
eligible for compensation in terms of Regulations for the first quarter
of financial year 2008-09. In such cases these Distribution companies
have mentioned that the compensation will be reflected on individual
bills of consumers in next billing cycle on receipt of their claims. The
amount so disbursed shall be known after the due credit in the billing
account of all the affected consumers has been given.

1.54 The Committee have been further informed that for putting
in place a permanent monitoring mechanism for compliance of SoP by
the Distribution companies, the DERC has proposed creation of certain
additional posts. The approval of GNCTD is awaited. Once the
dedicated institutional framework is in place, the monitoring of SoP
compliance by Distribution companies shall become more effective.

1.55 Further, in regard to the issue relating to the fast running of
electricity meters, the DERC has stated:

“The Delhi Electricity Supply Code and Performance Standards
Regulations, 2007 require the electricity meters to conform to the
Central Electricity Authority (Installation and Operation of Meters)
Regulations, 2006. The CEA regulations specify that meters shall
comply with the requirements of the relevant Standard notified by
the BIS which inter alia define the error limits of meters. The error
limits for electricity meters are set by BIS in their relevant standards
and the current limits are + 1% and + 2.5% for Class I static
(electronic) type meter under standard and on-site conditions,
respectively.

52


DERC has notified ERTL (North), Okhla, Delhi and CPRI which
are NABL accredited Government laboratories, as independent third
Parties for testing of meters.”

D. Standards of Performance and Reliability Indices

156 As regards the protection of consumers interests and quality
standards, the Committee have been informed that as per Rule 5.13 of
National Electricity Policy, 2005, appropriate Commission should
regulate utilities based on pre-determined indices on quality of power
supply. Parameters should include, amongst others, frequency and
duration of interruption, voltage parameters, harmonics, transformer
failure rates, waiting time for restoration of supply, percentage defective
meters and waiting list of new connections. The Appropriate
Commissions would specify expected standards of performance.

1.57 Enquired about the performance of standards laid down by
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), the Ministry have
informed the Committee as under:

(a) Performance Standards specified by CERC

(1) Performance of Power Stations and Inter-State Transmission
system regulated by the CERC is governed by the
benchmark standards of performance specified by the
Commission as part of the multi-year terms and conditions
of tariff notified by the Commission. In special cases, the
specific norms of performance are laid down by the
Commission through orders giving reasons for the same.

(2) In order to ensure reliability of supply which ultimately
has to reach the end consumer through a distribution utility,
the capability of generating stations to produce electricity
and of a transmission utility/licensee to deliver the same
from the point of generation to the point of drawal is
important. CERC has specified a benchmark Target
Availability /Capacity Index in this regard. The payment of
annual: fixed charges is linked to achieving the specified
benchmark. In case of under achievement there is a pro-
rata reduction in payment. In case of thermal power stations,
the generating company has to take into account, the
availability of its machine as well as the fuel.

(3) In case of all power stations covered by Availability Based
Tariff (ABT), the availability has to be declared on day-

53


(4)

(5)

(6)

”)

ahead basis as per the time-line specified in the Indian
Electricity Grid Code (IEGC), so that beneficiary distribution
utility can plan its drawl in advance.

The general norm of target availability for thermal
generating stations was adopted as 80% and for NLC’s TPS-
II lignite-based station the norm was 72% for the period
2001-04. The target availability norm for thermal generating
station has been retained as 80% for the period 2004-09,
while the norm for lignite-based stations has been raised to
75%.

In case of hydro-stations, capacity index norms for the Run
of the River type hydro stations have been raised to 90%
from 85%. The raising of availability norms has positive
impact on reliability of power supply. The target availability
for Inter-State Transmission System is 98% for AC
Transmission System and 95% for HVDC systems.

In addition to target availability, the CERC has also set
performance standards for efficiency (Heat rate), auxiliary
consumptions and secondary fuel oil consumption in respect
of thermal power stations and performance standard of
auxiliary consumption for surface as well as underground
hydro-electric stations. Energy charges are payable based
on specified parameters. No compensation is given for plants
performing below the specified norms and the consequent
financial loss has to be entirely borne by such generation
stations.

The Commission has also specified performance standards
in respect of allowable Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
expenses for thermal power station as well as for Inter-
State Transmission System. This induces the generating
station to economize and optimize its expenses.

Performance standards for inter State traders:

(i) In order to monitor the performance of the Inter-State
Traders, CERC has specified in its Regulations for Inter-
State Trading, the requirement of submission of quarterly
report on trading.

(ii) The licensees are required to post the information in
their website.


(b) Performance standards specified by SERCs

Sl. No.

Name of State

Comments

1

2

3

Assam

Bihar

Chhattisgarh

Delhi

Distribution Licensees’ Standards of
Performance Regulations, 2004 notified;

Utilities are regulated by predetermined
indices on quality of power supply,
voltage variation limits and neutral
voltage displacement.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public.

Standards of performance in
distribution of electricity, notified in
July, 2006;

These Regulations cover issues like
restoration of power supply, attending
normal fuse of call complaints,
replacement of failed distribution
transformers, complaints regarding
unscheduled load shedding, complaints
regarding voltage variation beyond
permissible limits, replacement of failed
meters, providing new connections
etc;

Quarterly reports on compliance of
performance standards, published by
SERC at least once in a year;

Method to compute distribution system
reliability index also specified.

Delhi Electricity Supply & Performance
Standards Regulations, 2007 issued by
DERC, provide for specific standards to
be followed by Discoms for various
operations.



me

8.

Gujarat

Haryana

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

Karnataka

3

SERC notified the Standards of
Performance Regulations after
comments/suggestions from
stakeholders which include-licensees,
consumer groups, individual consumers
of various categories etc.

SoP regulations notified in July, 2004
which incorporate quality, continuity
and reliability of service that a licensee
shall achieve in discharge of its
obligation;

Guaranteed standards of performance
specify the rate of compensation if
licensee fails to meet them.

Regulations on distribution performance
standards have been notified.

Reguiations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public;

Licensees directed to provide new
connections to the consumers from
whom money has been realized and in
case of nine villages connections have
been provided after intervention of the
Commission;

In some cases penalty has been
imposed on licensees for default.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public;

Office of the Consumers’ Advocacy
(OCA) hears complaints on non-
compliance of standards of
performance;

56


3

10.

pi

Kerala

Madhya Pradesh

Some affected parties have also
approached to the consumers’
Grievances Redressal Forum.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public.

Regulation of distribution performance
standards notified by MPERC on
28.10.2005;

Quarterly and annual report on
performance standards are published in’
newspapers/available in MPERC
website;

NGOs workshop held by MPERC in
August, 2007 to disseminate information
on performance standards among
consumers;

Discoms directed by MPERC to display
performance standards at their offices.
Field visit by MPERC to ensure
compliance of directions;

Ombudsman directed to review
Performance standards bi-annually;

As per directions of MPERC, six lakh
pamphlets containing details of
performance standards, distributed
along with electricity bills in Bhopal,
Indore and Jabalpur;

Pre-identified indices like total number
of 11KV feeders, sum of outage
duration of all feeders, outage duration
per feeder, number of outage per feeder,
total number of tripping, feeder
reliability index of area etc.;

Monthly information on power
reliability indices, published in
newspapers every year;

57


3

2.

13.

Maharashtra

Meghalaya

Orissa

Punjab

Rajasthan

Quality Monitoring Cell constituted in
MPERC.

Regulations have been framed after
vide ranging consultations with
stakeholders including distribution
licensees.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public;

Monthly, quarterly and annual reports
are being submitted by the Discoms on
guaranteed standards of performance
and overall standards of performance.

Regulations on standards of
performance of the licensees have been
issued in consultation with the
licensees;

Electricity Supply Code and related
matters Regulations have also been
issued.

Standards of performance Regulations
specified by SERC;

These Regulations cover, inter-alia, time
limit (prescribed maximum period) for
attending to various complaints;

Quality of power supply etc;

Discoms are required to publish status
of various performance parameters
including status of attending complaints
for new connections; T&D/AT&C
losses; Reliability index etc.

58


3

17.

19.

20.

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

West Bengal

The SERC specified the Regulations on
Standards of Performance (SoP) for the
distribution licensees after following
due pre-publication process;

The Commission has also conducted
special meetings with the licensees for
fixing the SoP for different services,

SERC specified the Regulations on
Standards of Performance (SoP) after
consultation with public/licensee/
stakeholders and through a process of
Regulatory Information Management
System;

Datas are reviewed and directions are
issued.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of distribution licensees issued by SERC
after consultation with licensees,
stakeholders and general public.

UERC (Standard of Performance)
Regulations, 2007 notified for
guaranteed and overall standards with
respect to replacement of burnt/
defective meters, voltage variations/
unbalance, meters complaints, billing
complaints, reliability indices etc. These
Regulations came into effect w.e.f.
01.10.2007.

Regulations on Standards Performance
of licensees were specified in 2004. The
same was repealed and another set was
notified in October 2005.

1.58 The Ministry have further informed that the issues relating

to specifying and enforcing standards with reference to quality,
continuity and reliability of service to the consumers and regulating it
on the pre-determined indices are under the purview of the
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions. Asked about the action taken

59


by various SERCs for enforcing standards, the Ministry of Power has
furnished the following information:

Sl. No. Name of State Comments
1 Py 3
1. Assam * Distribution Licensees Standards of

Performance Regulations, 2004 notified;

* — Utilities are regulated by predetermined
indices on quality of power supply,
voltage variation limits and neutral
voltage displacement.

2. Bihar * Specified standards with respect to
quality, continuity and reliability of
services to be maintained by a
Distribution Licensee in its Standards
of Performance of Distribution Licensee
Regulation, 2006;

* Licensee would be liable for payment
of compensation to the affected

consumers.
3. Chhattisgarh * Standards of performance in
distribution of electricity, notified in

July, 2006;

* These Regulations cover issues like
restoration of power supply, attending
normal fuse of call complaints,
replacement of failed distribution
transformers, complaints regarding
unscheduled load shedding, complaints
regarding voltage variation beyond
permissible limits, replacement of failed
meters, providing new connections etc;

* Quarterly reports on compliance of
performance standards, published by
SERC at least once in a year;

* Method to compete distribution system
reliability index also specified.

60


3

5.

Delhi

Gujarat

Reliability indices viz. system average
interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI),
System Average Interruption Duration
Index (SAIDI), Monitory Average
Interruption Frequency Index (MAIFI),
laid down in Electricity Supply Code
and Performance Standards Regulations,
2007;

These indices indicate reliability of
services being offered by distribution
companies (Discoms);

Other standards specified by DERC
include procedure and time limit for
Discoms to attend to problems of
consumers on metering, billing etc.;

Compensation for non-compliance of
performance standards by Discoms;

Pre-determined indices on quality of
power supply like requirement of
maintaining not less than 99% in case
of fuse-off calls rectification within 3
hours for urban areas/8 hours for rural
areas.

Standard of Performance of Distribution
Licensees Regulations notified in March,
2005 which deals with the matters
relating to quality, continuity and
reliability of services;

Specified formats for submission of
information related parameters like—
interruption, period of schedule outages
to performance;

Regular compliance reports from the
distribution licensees to SERC;

SoP Regulations provide for various
limits/time period for the, voltage
variations, harmonics—related to
quality of power.

61


3

6.

8.

10.

Haryana

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

Karnataka

Kerala

SoP regulations notified in July, 2004
which incorporate quality, continuity
and reliability of service that a licensee
shall achieve in discharge of its
obligation;

Guaranteed standards of performance
specify the rate of compensation if
licensee fails to meet them;

Reliability Indices viz. SAIFI, SAIDI and
MAIFI has been specified in the
regulation.

Distribution Performance Standard
Regulations, 2006, which contain the
indices on the quality power supply,
notified by the J&K SERC.

Standards of performance for
distribution licensee notified by the
Commission in 2005;

SERC ordered in one case, reduction of
energy charge on tariff by 2.5% for
failure to implement the regulations.

Standard of supply, continuity and
quality of power supply, specified in
Grid Code;

Frequency limits being maintained
through implementation of Availability
Based Tariff (ABT). This has helped in
ensuring grid discipline;

The Commission, through monthly
reports, is monitoring the interruptions
and reliability of supply.

Overall standards of performance
specified by KSERC;

Quality of Supply for voltage and
frequency is specified in Kerala
Electricity Supply Code, 2005.

62


az

3

वा.

12.

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

Regulation of distribution performance
standards notified by MPERC on
28.10.2005;

Quarterly and annual report on
performance standards are published in
newspapers/available in MPERC
website;

NGOs workshop held by MPERC in
August, 2007 to disseminate information
on performance standards amongst
consumers;

Discoms directed by MPERC to display
performance standards at their offices.
Field visit by MPERC to ensure
compliance of directions;

Ombudsman directed to review
performance standards bi-annually;

As per directions of MPERC, six lakh
pamphlets containing details of
performance standards, distribution
along with electricity bills in Bhopal,
Indore and Jabalpur;

Pre-identified indices like total number
of 11KV feeders, sum of outage
duration of all feeders, outage duration
per feeder, number of outage per feeder,
total number of tripping, feeder
reliability index of area etc.;

Monthly information on power
reliability indices, published in
newspapers every year;

Quality Monitoring Cell constituted in
MPERC.

Regulations on Standards of
Performance (SoP) viz. Electricity
Supply Code & Other Conditions of
Supply, Terms & Conditions of Tariff
and General Conditions of Distribution
License, have been issued;



13.

14.

Meghalaya

Orissa

3

SERC through different orders also
gives directives to utilities for enforcing
standards with respect to quality,
continuity and reliability of service,
however, due to sever demand-supply
gap in the State, SERC regulated
quantity of supply to ensure that no
category of consumers is discriminated
against;

Reliability in indices have been
specified in the Regulations on SoP;

Reports on various indices are hosted
by licensees in their websites which are
monitored by SERC. SERC has also
engaged an agency to carry out field
inspections on behalf of Commission.

Promulgated the Meghalaya Electricity
Supply Code, 2006 and the MSERC
(Standards of Performance) Regulations,
2006;

These Regulations provide consumers
with the necessary means of securing
their rights in accordance with the
provisions of Act.

Regulation on Licensee's Standard of
Performance notified in May, 2004,
which specifies minimum standard with
respect to quality, continuity and
reliability of services by Licensees;
Guaranteed Standard of Performance
and overall Standard of Performance;

Under Guaranteed Standard of
Performance, performance of licensees
is monitored on parameters like
restoration of power supply, voltage
variation, ‘harmonics, complaints about
meters, applications for new
connection/additional load, complaints
about consumer's bills etc.;



3

15,

16.

17.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

Methods of computing distribution
system reliability indices like SAIFI,
SAIDI, MAIFI, are specified in overall
Standards of Performance;

Under the standards of performance,
licensees are required to attend to the
service within a fixed period of time.
Provision of incentive or disincentive
linked to performance;

Monthly, quarterly and annual reports
are being submitted by the Discoms on
guaranteed standards of performance
and overall standards of performance.

Specified in Electricity Supply Code
and Related Matters Regulations
(wef, 01-01-2008);

Licensee shall be liable to pay
compensation for violation.

Already specified various standards of
performance (SoP) for the licensees to
ensure quality, continuity and reliability
of services, and system availability,
voltage management, voltage unbalance,
current unbalance, system adequacy,
frequency management, service
reliability, harmonic distortion for
transmission licensees.

Standard of Performance Regulations
came into force in Sept., 2004 with
salient features-effective new service
connections, change of tariff, shifting &
transfer of service connection, quality
of supply, interruption and restoration
of supply, handling of complaints,
payment of compensation, level of
overall performance, to be achieved by
the licensee etc.;



3

18.

19,

20.

66

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

Regulations related to payment of
compensation when the licensee fails to
meet the specified performance
standards came into force in Jan, 2007;

SERC has set standards in respect of
effecting new service connection,
duration of interruption, voltage
parameters, transformer failure rates,
waiting time for restoration of supply
etc;

SERC has directed the utility (as per
CEA Regulations on connectivity
standards on harmonics) to measure the
harmonics and its impact on
distribution system.

Regulations on Performance Standards
and Supply Code notified.

Reliability index at the feeder level and
at consumer level determined by
UPERC. Also defined are guaranteed
time limits for various break downs,
voltage variations, rectification of billing
disputes, installation/replacement of
meters;

SAIFI, SAIDI, MAIFI indices of
reliability defined;

Licensees directed to do rostering based
on AT&C losses of a particular division;

Incentive/disincentive schemes linked
with the loss levels at distribution
transformers introduced for the benefit
of consumers and staff of the licensee.

Regulations specifying standards with
respect to quality, continuity and
reliability of services by licensee have
been issued;



3

21.

West Bengal

SERC has also taken steps to streamline
the billing system of the licensee by
issuing time bound action plan to
eliminate billing deficiencies and often
Visited different parts of the State for
effective compliances of the same;

Standards of Performance Regulations
have specified the power supply on
quality, restoration, voltage variations/
unbalance and period of schedule
outages;

Reliability indices viz. System Average
Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI),
System Average Interruption Duration
Index (SAIDI) and Momentary Average
Interruption Frequency Index (MAIFI)
specified by the SERC.

Standards have been laid down by
notifying the allowable periods of
unplanned interruption of supply to
consumers to ensure quality, continuity
and reliability of supply;

Indices on quality of power supply are
yet to be developed which require
collection of data, voltage level of
supply, the terrain, climate condition,
salinity of atmosphere and such other
natural characteristics of different
localities within the area of supply of
distribution licensee, consumer mix, the
character of various loads under
different categories of consumers, the
predominant mode of supply etc.

159 As regards Reliability Index (RI) of supply of power to

consumers, the Committee have been informed that as per para 5.13.2

of the National Electricity Policy,

the SERCs are required to draw a

roadmap for declaration of Reliability under Reliability Index (RI) of
supply of power to consumers for all cities and towns upto the district
headquarters as also rural areas. The Committee have desired to know

67


as to whether the roadmap for RI has been drawn by all SERCs. In
this regard, the following information has been furnished by Ministry

of Power:

Reliability Index

Sl. No. Name of State

Comments

1 2:

L Assam

2 Bihar

5. Chhattisgarh

4. Delhi

5. Gujarat

Voltage variation limits specified by
SERC;

Reliability index has been specified in
the Distribution Licensees’ Standard of
Performance Regulation as Consumers
Average Interruption Frequency Index
(CAIFI) and Consumers Average
Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI);

The utilizes are directed to submit the
index of different area from time to
time;

No benchmark has been fixed till date.

SERC, in the process of drawing
roadmap for declaration of Reliability
Index (RI) of supply of power to
consumers.

The Standards of Performance
Regulation cover inter alia issue
regarding voltage variation beyond
permissible limit, unscheduled load
shedding and load shedding etc.

Reliability Index has been framed by
DERC in the Delhi Electricity Supply
Code and Performance Standards
Regulations, 2007.

SERC directed the licensee to build the
database and provide the information
to it;

68


10.

nh.

12.

13.

14.

3

Haryana

Jammu & Kashmir

Jharkhand

Karnataka

Kerala

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

Meghalaya

Orissa

On getting the required information for
the base year, SERC notifies the target
levels for these indices annually, as part
of the roadmap.

No Reliability Index roadmap has been
specified so far.

Distribution Performance Standard
Regulation issued by SERC provides for
Reliability Index in respect of power
supply to consumers both in cities/
towns and rural areas.

Reliability Index yet to be specified.

Due to data availability constraints, the
roadmap for Reliability Index is yet to
be specified.

‘Target is given in Performance Standard
Regulation. Monthly Reports are
reviewed.

The Reliability Index of the supply of
power to the consumers in line with
the guidelines of CEA for the cities and
towns up to the District HQ towns and
industrial growth centers has been
prescribed in the Regulations notified
by SERC.

The matter related to Reliability Index
is under consideration of SERC and
would take some time.

Reliability Index will take some time.
Reliability Index is specified in Licensee
Standards of Performance Regulation;
Quarterly reports on Reliability Index,

submitted by licensee are published
annually by SERC.

69


3

15.

18.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

SERC is in the process of drawing up
roadmap for declaration Reliability
Index/supply of power to consumers
in all cities and towns upto the District
HQ and also for rural areas.

Feeder Renovation Programme,
introduced by DISCOM is due to
complete in 2009;

SERC to draw roadmap for declaration
of Reliability Index of the supply of
power to consumers after completion
of this programme;

SERC has already identified 54 cities
and towns in the State (18 in each
DISCOM areas) for which the
DISCOMs are required to indicate the
performance relating to supply of
power to the consumers.

Quarterly reports on reliability index
(RI) of feeders for cities and municipal
corporations are furnished by the
licensee and monitored by the
Commission;

Commission is in the process of
finalizing the road map for declaring
the RI.

Due to lack of information by the
Government, study is yet to be
completed;

Roadmap for declaration of RI for cities,
district headquarters and rural areas yet
to be finally notified.

SERC is in the process of drawing a
roadmap for declaration of Reliability
Index of the supply of power to
consumers for all cities and towns upto
the District HQ towns as also for the
rural areas.

70


1 2 3

20. Uttarakhand © _UERC has laid down reliability indices
viz. System Average Interruption
Frequency Index (SAIFI), System
Average Interruption Duration Index
(SAIDI) and Momentary Average
Interruption Frequency Index (MAIFI)
in its standards of performance
Regulations;

* — These indices shall be computed for the
Discoms as a whole by stacking, for
each month all the 1IKV/33KV feeders
in the supply area, excluding those
serving pre-dominantly agricultural
load and then aggregating the number
and duration of all interruption in that
month for each feeder;

* SERC accordingly, notifies these indices
based on licensee's proposal of target
level while submitting ARR.

1.60 The Ministry of Power have further informed the Committee
that National Electricity Policy provides that the data of reliability
index of supply of power to consumer should be compiled and
published by Central Electricity Authority (CEA). According to CEA,
it has been capturing the ‘Outage Duration’ and ‘No. of Outages’ of
11 KV feeders in respect of State capitals, District Headquarters and
towns with population more than 8 lakhs. The Reliability Indexing in
terms of 11 KV feeders, instead of consumer level, was started initially
as consumer indexing, i.e., linking of consumers to the distribution
transformers was not in place. Subsequently, CEA has now covered
the towns with a population of more than 1 lakh. As regards consumer
level, the information has been received wef. April, 2007 onwards in
respect of a few States only that too irregularly as consumer indexing
has not been in place in most of the towns. According to the Ministry
under Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme
(APDRP), thrust was given to the high density population areas, only
towns were covered which may also include rural areas partly in the
first phase. The information is reported to be compiled on monthly
basis and is also put up on CEA’s website and is available up to the
month of October, 2007.

71


1.61 Asked about improving the efficiency of distribution system,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power stated during evidence:

“Now, the basic thing is 100% metering should be done and with
the IT enabled network today we are trying to structure these
activities as a compulsory activity in the new APDRP that is going
to be launched in the 11th Plan. We are putting this component as
a compulsory component. Of course, the proposal has received the
clearance of the EFC of which the Secretary (Expenditure) and
myself are members. It is now going to be placed before the
Cabinet where we are making it very clear that putting this energy
audit system in place, ring fencing of your distribution or supply
side and consumption and IT monitoring with a third party
verification is a pre-requisite. The proposal also envisages
compensating the States in full for the IT component of the project
cost and we would like to encourage this kind of thing to happen.”

1.62 During a study visit to Jaipur in January, 2008, the Committee
were briefed that the Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission
(RERC) has specified various Standards of Performance (SoP) for the
licensees towards performance, minimum standards for the purpose of
penalty and for statistical purposes. The Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory
Commission (Distribution Licensee’s Standards of Performance)
Regulations, 2003, of the Commission enforced with effect from
29th March, 2003, contained detailed procedure for, among other things,
the procedure for release of new electric connection, inspection of
meters and complaint redressal mechanism.

1.63 To a specific query regarding metered consumers in the State,
the Committee were informed that only about 63% of consumers in
Agricultural Sector of the State were metered. The representative of
Government of Rajasthan further clarified that the consumers could
also purchase and install their own meters subject to metering code of
RERC.

1.64 When asked about the notification of reliability index for the
utilities in the State by the State regulator, the Committee were
informed that the Commission specified the method of calculating
reliability of system by way of two indices, namely System Average
Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and System Average Interruption
Frequency Index (SAIFI), the minimum limits thereof for the purpose
of compensation have not been specified because the licensees are in
the process of renovation of their distribution system in a big way
with the emphasis on rural focus, industrial focus and urban focus

72


under Feeder Renovation Programme (FRP) which is targeted to be
completed by March 2009. According to the Commission, this would
lay a platform for determining the benchmarks of the indices. RERC
in its effort to reduce cost of power has also advised the State and
directed the distribution licensees to introduce competitive bidding in
generation and for all future purchases. The Committee were also
informed that the generating company, transmission company and the
distribution companies are State owned companies and are required to
file tariff petitions and Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR) for ensuing
year along with information for the previous year based on accounts
audited by a Chartered Accountant and further reported upon by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The third party verification
to the extent of data contained in the financial statements was not
considered necessary by the State. As regards technical data, the
technical losses in the transmission system are measured through
appropriate meters and the Committee have been informed that there
is no need to get the same verified from the 3rd party.

1.65 Asked about the steps taken by the Gujarat Electricity
Regulatory Commission (GERC) to protect the interest of consumers
during a study visit to Ahmedabed in January 2008, the Committee
have been informed that GERC had notified various Regulations, issued
directives, tariff orders and such other orders keeping in view the
importance of protection of interest of consumers. The GERC already
notified the Regulation “Standard of performance of Distribution
Licensee” (SoP Regulations) vide Regulation No. 10 of 2005 dated
31st March, 2005. The Commission specified formats for submitting
information related to performance and obtains compliance reports from
the Distribution Licensees and same are also uploaded on the
Commission’s website (Website—www.gercin.org). The SoP Regulations
provide for the various limits and time period for the parameters
(Interruption, Period of Schedule Outages, Voltage variations,
Harmonics) related to quality of power.

1.66 Regarding enforcement of Standards of Performance, the
Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission (KERC) and Maharashtra
Electricity Regulatory Commission (MERC) informed the Committee
during study visits to Bangalore and Mumbai in January-February,
2008, as under:

“The Commission in its Grid Code specified the standards of
supply, continuity and quality of power by specifying voltage,
frequency and harmonics limits. To enforce these standards, detailed
procedures have been prescribed in the Grid Code to be complied

73


with by the licensees. Further, the Commission, through monthly
reports, is reported to be monitoring the interruptions and reliability
of supply. The interruptions up to 11 KV feeder level are also
being monitored. The licensees are being directed to set right
abnormalities in interruption.”

“The MERC Standards of Performance (SoP) Regulations has
specified—period for giving power supply, restoration of power
supply, quality of supply and system of supply, metering,
reconnections, consumer Charter/service and Reliability Indices. In
Maharashtra, the utilities, viz. Rural Electrification Corporation, Tata
Power Corporation Ltd. and Brihan-Mumbai Electricity Supply &
Transport Undertaking have developed their respective indices on
quality of power supply. The Commission has, however, not so far
pre-determined any indices on quality of Power Supply, to be
followed by licensees, as the data available from the utilities is
under analysis of the Commission, and systems are yet to be
installed and unified for all utilities. The level of compensation
payable to the consumers for non-adherence to the above specified
standards, have also been indicated in the SoP Regulations, 2005.”

Forum of Regulators

1.67 The Ministry of Power have apprised the Committee that

Forum of Regulators (FOR) was constituted in February, 2005 under
section 166(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003. The Forum consists of
Chairperson of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) and
Chairpersons of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs). The
Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of the Forum.

1.68 On enquiring about the functions of the Forum envisaged in

the Forum of Regulators Rules 2005, the Ministry of Power have
informed the Committee of the following:

74

(i) analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of Central
Commission and State Commissions and compilation of data
arising out of the said orders, highlighting, especially the
efficiency improvements of the utilities;

(ii) harmonization of regulation in power sector;

(iii) laying of standards of performance of licensees as required
under the Act;

(iv) sharing of information among the members of the Forum
on various issues of common interest and also of common
approach;


(v)

(vi)

(vii)

undertaking research work in-house or through outsourcing
on issues relevant to power sector tegulation;

evolving measures for protection of interest of consumers
and promotion of efficiency, economy and competition in
power sector; and

such other functions as the Central Government may assign
to it, from time to time.

1.69 When asked about the number of meetings held by FOR and
the pivotal role played by it in building consensus amongst the
electricity regulators, the Ministry have informed that since its
constitution the FOR has held six meetings to discuss and evolve
consensus on the following important issues facing the electricity sector
in general and regulation in particular:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Strengthening Consumer advocacy system;

Issues relating to empowerment of consumers were
discussed. An action plan was charted by Chairperson, FOR.
SERCs have been taking steps on consumer related issues,

Return on equity for distribution;

Consensus was evolved on 14% ROE for distribution as
against the existing practice of 16% ROE. All SERCs except
two States agreed to adopt ROE of 14% for distribution.
This decision has the potential of reducing consumer tariff.

Operationalisation of open access in distribution;

Issues at stake in the path of operationalisation of open
access in distribution were discussed including legal and
operational constraints. Consensus was evolved on issues
inter alia relating to rationalisation of various charges for
open access.

Harnessing of surplus captive generation;

The issue was discussed at length by FOR and consensus
evolved on creating proper commercial arrangement for
harnessing surplus captive generation in the grid, including
rationalization of various charges levied on CPPs.

Depreciation Rates for distribution;

FOR Group recommended adoption for distribution, of
depreciation principles and rates on lines of CERC

75


regulation. Adoption of this recommendation by SERCs will
have the same benefit for consumers as was sought by
CERC through rationalization of depreciation rates in its
regulations.

1.70 On enquiring about as to whether any study has ever been
conducted by the Ministry in respect of implementation of Electricity
Reforms and Regulations, Secretary, Ministry of Power informed the
Committee during evidence:

“Forum of Regulators has engaged the Indian Institute of
Management, Ahmedabad to review the gaps between vision and
achievements of reforms and regulatory framework and to suggest
the way forward in respect of six States where they will do the
study. We look forward to this Report and we will share it with
you.”

1.71 In this regard, in a post evidence reply furnished to the
Committee, the Ministry of Power have further informed the
Committee:

“The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission has informed that
the Forum of Regulators (FOR) has appointed the Indian Institute
of Management Ahmedabad (Centre for Infrastructure and
Regulation) as Consultant for conducting a study on “Electricity
Reforms and Regulations—a Critical Review of last 10 years
experience with focus on constraints and gaps between the vision
and achievements.

The Main objectives of this study are: (a) To review the role of
various authorities involved in the process of reforms in the
electricity sector in India, more importantly, the role played by the
Government (Central as well as State), government agencies, the
Regulatory Commission, Appellate Authorities and (b) To assess
the roles envisaged for various stakeholders including the
Government (Central as well as State), Government agencies,
Regulatory Commissions, Appellate Authorities and the constraints
and gaps on achievements of the objectives set, and the way
forward etc. The draft report is expected shortly.”

F. Indian Electricity Grid Code

1.72 The Committee observe that Section 79 (I)(n) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 states that Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)
shall specify Grid Code having regard to Grid Standards. in pursuance

76


of the above provision, as per the Annual Report (2006-07) of CERC,
the Commission had notified revised Indian Electricity Grid Code
(IEGC) on 17.03.2006 which became effective from 01.04.2006. Prior to
coming into force of the revised IEGC, the function of preparation of
Regional Energy Accounting (REA) as well as Unscheduled Intercharge
(UI) and VAR accounting was entrusted to Regional Electricity Boards
(REBs). Ministry of Power while notifying Regional Power Committees
(RPCs) for five regions in May, 2005 had not mentioned
Regional Energy Accounting as one of the functions of RPCs. Keeping
this in view, the Commission transferred work of REA and weekly UI
& VAR accounting from RPCs to RLDCs in the revised IEGC.
Subsequently, Ministry of Power vide its letter dated 12.04.2006
informed the Commission that present arrangement of RLDCs being
operated by CTUs was being reviewed by the Central Government
and suggested that Secretariats of RPCs be allowed to discharge the
function of REA for the time being. Representations from Central
Electricity Authority, NTPC and Northern Regional Power Committee
for amending the relevant provisions of IEGC were also received. When
the Commission invited comments from stakeholders, they
overwhelmingly reposed faith in RPC Secretariats for discharge of REA
function. The Commission decided that REA as well as UI and reactive
energy accounts be issued by RPCs from 01.09.2006 and accordingly
two 186८ amendments were issued.

1.73 Asked about the penalty imposed on the utilities for violation
of Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC), the Committee have been
informed that overdrawal from the grid at low frequency is the major
violation that have been brought to the notice of the CERC. The
procedure of day-ahead scheduling and pricing of deviations from the
schedule (i.e. Unscheduled interchange or UI) was part of the IEGC
prepared by Central Transmission Unit (CTU) and approved by the
Commission which was implemented with effect from 1st February
2000. The provision for pricing of UI, however, became effective only
after implementation of Availability Based Tariff (ABT) progressively
in various regions beginning July 2002. The earlier IEGC as well as
the IEGC notified by the Commission under the provisions of the Act
gives flexibility to States to deviate from the schedule with appropriate
frequency linked prices for such Unscheduled Interchanges to be
notified by the Commission. The ceiling rate of UI is at 49.0 Hz and
is related to price of electricity that can be produced using costliest
fuel and thus reflects system marginal cost. Such UI pricing mimics
real time market help in inducing grid discipline. The ceiling UI price
also acts as effective price cap for short-term trading of electricity.

Wy


1.74 The Committee have been further apprised that the IEGC,
however, further provides that States should endeavour to restrict their
net drawl from the grid within their respective drawl schedules
whenever frequency is below 49.5 Hz and States have to carry out
requisite load shedding to curtail over-drawl when frequency falls
below 49.0 Hz. Few instances have been brought to the notice of the
Commission when States have overdrawn from the grid even below
49.0 Hz. The Commission has penalized two utilities for violation of
IEGC in view of their persistent and severe overdrawal from the grid
at low frequencies.

1.75 While disposing petition filed by Western Regional Load
Despatch Centre, the Commission vide order dated 28 January, 2003
had directed that MPSEB shall pay a penalty of Rs. One lakh only
invoking powers conferred on the Commission under Section 45 of
now repealed ERC Act, 1998. Similarly, while disposing a petition filed
by Northern Regional Load Despatch Centre (NRLDC), the Commission
had imposed a penalty of Rs. One lakh only on Uttar Pradesh Power
Corporation Limited (UPPCL) invoking powers under Section 142 of
the Electricity Act, 2003. A penalty of Rs. One lakh on UPPCL was
also imposed by the adjudicating officer appointed by the Commission
under Section 143 of the Act to conduct an inquiry into the instances
of non-compliance by the respondent of the instruction of the NRLDC
during the period 1.4.2006 to 30.4.2006.

1.76 As regards disposal of petitions of non-payment of UI charges
by Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board (MPSEB) and Jharkhand
State Electricity Board (JSEB), the Committee have observed the
following from the Annual Report of CERC (2006-07).

(i) WRLDC had filed petition and sought for imposition of
penalties under Section 146 and 149 of the Electricity Act
2003 on MPSEB for its failure to pay UI charges. WRLDC
also ought direction for regulation of power supply of
MPSEB in case of default in payment of UI charges and to
open LC for future UI payments to ensure timely payment
of UI charges. The Commission directed MPSEB to pay
Rs. 25 crore on or before 25.06.2006 and balance amount of
Rs. 25.7 crore by 27.07.2006. Interest payable by MPSEB on
outstanding UI amount from time to time shall be worked
out by WELDC and shall be cleared by MPSEB within one
month of issuance of relevant statement by WRLDC. MPSEB
was directed to pay current UI charges regularly. MPSEB
had complied the Commission’s directions.

78


(ii) As regards petition filed by ERLDC before CERC seeking
directions to Jharkhand State Electricity Board (JSEB) for
payment of outstanding UI charges within 15 days with
interest thereon and to accord highest priority to payment
of weekly UI charges, while admitting its liability to pay
UI charges claimed by ERLDC, sought to pay the
outstanding dues in 20 equal installments. It was observed
that in the earlier hearing JSEB had given undertaking to
pay the outstanding dues in six monthly installments but it
did not adhere to its undertaking. Therefore, JSEB was
directed to show cause why action should not be taken
under Section 142 of the Electricity Act 2003 read with
Section 144 thereof, for breach of undertaking. Thereafter,
JSEB had made payments towards all pending UI charges
to the Eastern Region (ER) pool. The Commission, while
disposing of the petition warned JSEB that the casual
attitude in complying with the undertaking given before
them, in future, would be viewed strictly.

1.77 When asked about the problem of non-payment of UI charges
by some States during evidence on 23 April, 2008 the Committee have
been apprised that Uttar Pradesh is not paying for the UI charges and
has an outstanding arrears of more than Rs. 770 crore. Asked about
the remedial steps taken to recover the amount, representative of CERC
inter-alia informed the Committee during evidence:

“We have given them an order that they have to liquidate their
arrears in the next six months. They have habitually been not
paying. They may have their own compulsions. But then they are
taking extra power from the grid and not paying for it. States
which are underdrawing, are paying for more energy than they
get because they have to pay to the generating companies and
whatever is the underdrawal they do not get any compensation
unless the UI payment comes. So, we have petitions from Delhi
utilities saying that this must be recovered and paid to them
*ह०«०९«5३९५०३०००६० ७ We had proposed Central appropriation as the
ultimate thing because States like Jammu and Kashmir are not
able to pay it at all. But some how that has not yet found favour.”

1.78 The witness further added:

“But that is also not an easy option because it endangers the
whole grid. We have said in our last order that even if it endangers
the whole grid we will have to take this step because otherwise

79


it is promoting total anarchy in the system—that States can
overdraw from the grid, get the grid into danger and then not
pay for the overdrawl. It is virtually taking power from the grid
without paying for it. So we cannot allow this to continue. We
will have to take up some extreme measures even at the risk of
a grid disturbance because otherwise we will be perpetuating
anarchy in the system.”

1.79 Speaking on the issue of trading of electricity and the UI
rates, Secretary, Ministry of Power inter alia informed the Committee:

“I had also expressed grave concern about States violating the
unscheduled interchange barrier and overdrawing power to the
detriment of some States. This issue had been brought to our notice
by the Chief Ministers also including the Chief Minister of
Maharashtra. I believe that UI charge should be in excess of the
charge for generating power from naphtha. It is only then it will
act as a deterrent and the regulatory commission has given out a
notice to that effect raising that charge to about Rs. 10 per unit.”

1.80 The witness further added:

boas the regulators should evolve a practice that when the ARRs
are being filed, the damages which have been imposed for the UI
charges should be stated separately and very clearly and those
payments which are in the nature of damages should not go to
show purchase of power because that really is the inefficiency or
incompetence of that particular distribution company or entity. That
must be set aside. That must go to the negatives of that
organisation and not be loaded on to the consumer. As the law
develops and as we get on to this regime, we should be solving
most of these problems.”

G. Open Access in Transmission and Distribution of Electricity

1.81 As regards the implementation of open access in transmission
and distribution of electricity, the Ministry have informed the
Committee that the regulations for Open Access in inter-state
transmission were issued by CERC in February 2004. Thereafter, a
major amendment was carried out in these regulations in February
2005 to further harmonize them with requirements of trading. The
Committee have been informed that the Open Access Regulations for
Inter-State transmission, 2008 have been conceived after taking into
account the evolution of the electricity market during the last four
years. It has created a framework, which would not only facilitate
80


traditional bilateral transaction (negotiated directly or through electricity
traders), but also cater to collective transactions discovered in a power
exchange through competitive bidding by sellers and buyers.

1.82 The Committee have been informed that the Commission had
issued draft regulations on open access in December 2007 inviting
commertts, suggestions and objections from the stakeholders. The
Commission received an overwhelming and prompt response from as
many as forty stakeholders. While finalising the new regulations, the
Commission has taken into consideration the concerns raised, and it
incorporates most of the suggestions received.

1,83 Enquired about the salient features of the new regulations,
the Committee have been apprised of the following:

“(@i) Facilitates traditional bilateral transactions as well as
collective transactions discovered in a Power Exchange.

(ii) Emphasis is on scheduling rather than reservation because
from the perspective of an Open access customer, what
matters ultimately is that his request is included in the
dispatch schedules released by the Regional Load Despatch
Centre (RLDC).

(iii) Following type of transmission services shall be available
to open access customers:

Bilateral transactions
Scheduling and open access up to three months in advance.

Scheduling and open access for the current month up to
four days in advance.

Scheduling and open access for the day-ahead and up to
three days in advance.

Scheduling and open access for the same day in the event
of a contingency.

Collective transactions

Scheduling and open access for collective transactions
discovered in a power exchange through anonymous
simultaneous competitive bidding by buyers and sellers,
Presently on day-ahead basis.

81


(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

Greater role assigned to State Load Despatch Centre (SLDC)
to bring them at par with the Regional Load Despatch
Centre (RLDC).

Provision of standing clearance by the State Load Despatch
Centre (SLDC) introduced with the aim of harnessing of
intra-state sources of generation.

Nominal transmission charges for open access customers to
be levied in Rupees per MWh instead of Rupees per MW
per day, earlier.

In case of bilateral transaction, the transmission charges for
the use of inter-state transmission system shall be as follows:

Type of Transaction Transmission charges
(Total) (Rs./MWh)
(a) Bilateral, intra-regional 30
(b) Bilateral, between adjacent 60
regions
(c) Bilateral, wheeling through 90
one or more Intervening
regions

In case of the collective transactions charges at the rate of
Rs. 30/MWh for energy approved for transmission for each
point of injection and for each point of drawal shall be
payable for use of the inter-State transmission system.

The intra-State entities shall additionally pay transmission
charges for use of the State network as determined by the
respective State Commission. In case the State Commission
has not determined the transmission charges, the charges
for use of respective State network shall be payable
for the energy approved at the rate of Rs. 30/- MWh.
Non-determination of the charges by the State Commission
shall not be ground for denial of open access.

The operating charges for the bilateral transactions and
collective transactions shall be as follows:

Type of Transaction Operating Charges
(a) Bilateral Transaction (a) Rs. 2000/- per day for each
RLDC.

(b) Rs. 2000/- per day for each
SLDC.


(xi)

(xii)

(xiii)

(xiii)

vy)

(b) Collective Transaction (a) Rs. 5,000/- per day for
NLDC for buyers and
sellers, after clubbing them
separately, for each State.

(b) Rs. 2,000/- per day for
SLDC for each point of
transaction.

Real time deviations from the net schedules for a State to
be settled by the Regional Load Despatch Centre (RLDC)
as per the established UI mechanism at the regional level.

The State utility designated for the Purpose of collection/
disbursement of UI charges from/to intra-State entities shall
be responsible for timely payment of the composite dues of
the State to the regional UI pool account.

Any mismatch between the scheduled and the actual drawal
at drawal points and scheduled and the actual injection at
injection points for intra-State entities shall be determined
by the concerned State Load Despatch Centre (SLDC) and
covered in the intra-State UI accounting scheme.

It has been stipulated that unless specified otherwise by the
concerned State Commission, the UI rate for intra-State entity
shall be 105% (for over-drawals/under generation) and 95%
(for under-drawals/over generation) of the UI rate at the
periphery of regional entity. This has been done to facilitate
dispute free energy accounting and settlement of deviations
for intra-state entities located in the State where intra-state
ABT has not yet been implemented. In an inter-connected
grid, deviations from schedule of an entity are met from
the entire grid and the local utility is no longer solely
responsible for absorbing these. Since unscheduled
interchange (UI) mechanism has been provided to distribute
the burden and charges of support for countering deviations,
it is specified that neither any restrictions regarding
magnitude of deviations (except on account of over stressing
of concerned transmission or distribution system), nor any
standby charges, grid support charges, parallel operation
charges etc. shall be imposed.

Exit option for open access customers by giving five days
advance notice and payment of charges up to five days.

83


(xvi) In case of curtailment of approved schedule by the Regional
Load Despatch Centre, transmission charges to be payable
pro-rata in accordance with the curtailed schedule.

(xvii) The transmission charges recovered from open access
customers to be utilized for reduction in monthly
transmission charges payable by long-term customers of the
region after allowing 25% to be retained by the Central
Transmission Utility. The transmission charges for the use
of State network to be disbursed to the State Transmission
Utility concerned.

(xvii) In case a State utility open access customer, the operating
charges and the transmission charges to be collected by the
nodal agency shall include the charges for the State network
and operating charges for the State Load Despatch Centre.

(xix) Separate guidelines to be issued for those seeking long or
medium term lien over the inter-State transmission system
requiring creation of new transmission facilities or otherwise.
The provisions relating to long-term customers as contained
in the Open Access Inter-State Transmission Regulations,
2004 shall continue to apply till the Commission notifies
separate regulation.”

1.84 To a query on the present position of the open access and
inter-State trading, the Ministry informed that the Open Access
Regulations and Inter-State Trading Regulations of the Central
Commission have facilitated power trading in an organized manner.
Today, it is possible to trade electricity between any two points in
India through inter-State Open Access on advance reservation basis,
on current reservation basis, on day-ahead basis and even on real
time basis. Open Access charges are transaction specific depending on
the regions/transmission systems involved between point of injection
and point of drawal. At present, power is mostly being traded between
power surplus distribution utilities in Eastern Region (ER) and North-
Eastern Region (NER) on one-hand and deficit utilities in Northern
Region (NR) and Western Region (WR) on the other, Annual volume
of electricity traded through open access route is of the order of two
percent of the total energy availability. In terms of power, the
magnitude of all India short-term bilateral trade is in the range of
1000 to 1500 MW compared to installed capacity of about 1,40,000
MW. The availability of power for trading peaks during monsoon and
bottoms out during winter. Table below depicts growth in number of
inter-State open access transactions and volume of electricity approved
for such transactions during the period of 2004-05 to 2006-07.

84


S.No. Year Total Number of Energy approved

inter-State Open for inter-State

Access transactions Open Access

transactions

(Million kWh)
A. 2004-05 778 16440
va 2005-06 3398 22526
3. 2006-07 5933 23598

1.85 The Ministry have further informed that most of the open
access transactions taking place presently are between SEBs or their
successor entities with or without involvement of trading licensees.
Full potential of open access in overall optimization by way of
facilitating trading will be realized only when open access at intra-
State level also becomes effective.

1.86 Enquired about the steps taken by the various SERCs to
implement the various provisions of the Act regarding Open Access at
distribution level, the Ministry of Power have furnished the following
information to the Committee:

91. No. Name of State Comments
1 ४ 3
1 Assam * Regulation for open access upto IMW

amended in April, 2006;

* No case of open access consumer has
yet come up.

2. Bihar * Open Access Regulation notified in
May, 2006 which covers phased
introduction of open access;

* No application has been received so far
for open access.

3. Chhattisgarh * Open Access Regulation notified in July,
2005 covers phased introduction of
open access;

* 35 consumers have availed open access
in the State;

85


3

4. Delhi

5. Gujarat

6. Haryana

UE Jammu & Kashmir
8. Jharkhand

9. Karnataka

10. Kerala

Open access charges are being reduced
in every tariff order.

Open Access Regulation notified in 2007
which covers phased introduction of
open access.

Open Access Regulations notified in
Sept, 2005. At present 8 consumers are
using open access;

Regulations on Power Procurement/
Obligation for Distribution Licensees
notified in Oct, 2005.

Open Access Regulation has been
notified;

No request has been received for Open
Access.

Open Access Regulation has been
notified;

No request has been received for Open
Access.

Open Access Regulation notified by the
SERC;

Efforts have been made to bring the
Captive Power generation into grid.

Open Access Regulation notified which
covers phased introduction of open
access;

Transmission charges, wheeling charge
and surcharge have been determined by
SERC for implementation of open
access;

No consumer has availed open access.

Open Access Regulation notified in
November, 2005 which covers phased
introduction of open access;

86


3

nh,

12,

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

Open Access order was issued to one
consumer, namely, Indian Aluminum
Company.

Open Access Regulation notified which
covers phased introduction of open
access;

18 applications (17 CPP and 1 non-
captive consumer) have been received
and processed for the total capacity of
54.35 MW;

Out of 18 applications, Bulk Power
Transmission Agreements have been
executed for 17 applicants.

SERC has permitted open access to
consumers with more than 1MW
contract demand we.f. April, 2007;

SERC has developed “Transmission
Pricing Framework” for OA
transactions, which prevents pan-caking
of the transmission charges and
facilitates open access by reducing the
transaction cost;

Cross-subsidy surcharge has determined
as ‘zero’ for all distribution licensees in
the State;

SERC has specified open access charges
for short-term OA consumers between
19 paise/kWh to 94 paise/kWh and for
long-term OA consumers between
36 paise/kWh to 113 paise/kWh,
depending on voltage of injection &
drawl of power and respective
licensee’s wire cost;

Various Regulations on open access
notified by SERC for effective

implementation of provisions of the
Electricity $$$ ______ Beant Aco, 2003.

87


2

3

13.

14.

15.
16.

Im:

18.

19.

20.

Meghalaya

Orissa

Punjab
Rajasthan.

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

Measures are being initiated during the
year 2008.

Open Access Regulation notified in 2005
which covers phased introduction of
open access;

No OA consumer so far.
Open Access Regulation issued.

Open Access Regulation notified which
covers phased introduction of open
access;

Presently, there are nine (9) open
access cases involving 98.10 MW
transmission/wheeling of power within
the State and in addition to this fifty
three (53) consumers are also availing
open access of aggregate capacity of
46.25 MW (captive) based on renewable
energy (wind energy).

CERC has issued following orders/
regulations :

Intra-state Open Access Regulations,
2005 (wef. 3.8.05);

Order on Transmission & Wheeling
Charges (wef. 15.5.06).

The stage for open access is yet to
come, however, Regulations sent for
notification.

Open Access Regulation notified in 2004
which covers phased introduction of
open access.

UERC issued Regulations and Orders
‘on open access in distribution for SHP/
Bagasse based renewable sources laying
down various relaxations and
incentives.



2 3

pats

West Bengal * Regulation on Open access has been
specified covering transmission and
distribution;

* Transmission & Distribution charges
payable by OA customer are being
determined within the respective tariff
orders;

* Four applications have been received
from four consumers seeking OA. One
has been rejected and three have been
approved. However, one of the three
applications has challenged one of the
OA Charges (wheeling charges). All the
applicants are yet to avail OA;

* No OA application is pending with
Nodal agency, as of now.

1.87 During a study visit to Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and

Mumbai, the following information was provided by the SERCs
regarding implementation of Open Access in their respective States:

“Rajasthan

Open Access Regulation has been notified in the State which covers
phased introduction of open access; Presently, there are nine (9)
open access cases involving 98.10 MW transmission/wheeling of
power within the State and in addition to this fifty three (53)
consumers are also availing open access of aggregate capacity of
46.25 MW (captive) based on renewable energy (wind energy).
Gujarat

On the issue of Open Access, the Committee were informed that
Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC) on
29th September, 2005 had notified Regulation regarding open access
at distribution level and at present eight consumers (871 MW) are
using open access facilities for wheeling captive power from point
of generation to destination of its use by paying transmission
charges.

Karnataka

Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission (KERC) informed the
Committee that the Commission had issued necessary regulation

89


to introduce open access in Karnataka in four phases. At present,
the third phase of open access is under implementation (2007)
wherein open access is permissible upto a level of 3 MW. From
April 2008, all HT consumers of one MW and above will be
allowed open access. The Commission has determined the
transmission charges, wheeling charges and surcharge for
implementation of open access. None of the consumers have availed
the open access so far. However, the generators from the State are
selling power outside the State through open access.

Maharashtra

Regarding operationalisation of ‘Open Access’ in the State, it was
submitted that Open Access Regulations for transmission and
distribution business was developed by MERC and the Commission
permitted open access to consumers with more than 1 MW contract
demand wef April 2007. MERC has stipulated all the relevant
charges applicable for open access transactions. Further, MERC has
developed the “Iransmission Pricing Framework’ for Open Access
transactions, such that there is a single composite transmission
charge stipulated for the entire State, irrespective of ownership of
transmission network, which prevents pan-caking of the
transmission charges, and facilitates Open Access by reducing the
transaction cost.

The effective open access charges applicable in case of short-term
open access consumers in the State of Maharashtra were stated to
be ranging between 19 paise/kWh to 94 paise/kWh, depending
on the voltage of injection and drawal of power and the respective
distribution licensee’s wire cost. In case of long-term open access
consumers, the open access consumers in the State of Maharashtra
were stated to be ranging between 36 paise/kWh to 113 paise/
kWh, depending on the voltage of injection and drawal of power
and the respective distribution licensee’s wire cost.”

1.88 On enquiring about the steps taken by the Government for

operationalisation of open access, the Secretary, Ministry of Power
informed the Committee during evidence on 19th December, 2007:

90

“Tt is envisaged and mandated in the Act and we are taking every
possible measure to see that it is actually operationalised in letter
and spirit. We had convened a Conference of Chief Secretaries and
Power Secretaries earlier this year followed by a Conference of
Chief Ministers and Power Ministries which was chaired by the
Hon’ble Prime Minister himself and the issue of open access was


one of the four or five issues that were taken up for discussion in
these conferences. The idea was to bring forth the point of open
access being a desired objective besides being a mandated one. It
was also brought out in the conferences that while electricity is in
short supply, we should see to it that no idle generation is lying
parked anywhere and that power which is lying in a captive mode
with somebody should reach the consumers who are desirous of
taking it. This, of course, is initially relevant to consumers who
have a load of one mega watt and above.

The Chief Ministers Conference unanimously resolved to support
this proposition and a line was also given in the resolution that
the Governments would, if necessary, issue necessary directions or
advice in this regard. We followed this up in the meeting of the
Forum of Regulators. It is a forum of all the electricity regulators
in the country and is headed by the Chairman, CERC. We also
invited all the State Power Secretaries in this Forum in November
this year. We openly discussed and debated the constraints felt in
some States for exporting power out of the territory of that State.
We have noticed a disturbing trend in some States who are forcing
their regulators to bring directions that the power is to be
consumed within that State. There is also a tendency in some
States to impose excessive charges for Wheeling this power out or
cross subsidy charges which makes it unremunerative for people
to sell their power outside the State.”

1.89 The witness further added:

“We have impressed upon this to the Forum and to the State
Secretaries that this needs to be addressed. In fact, we have
persuaded the Forum of Regulators to bring out a website which
will post all the rates which have to be paid and charges which
are leviable for utilising open access and also indicate how many
applications are pending and how many sanctions are granted.”

H. Setting up of Power Exchanges

1,90 The Committee have been informed the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission issued guidelines for setting up of Power
Exchange in February 2007. The general approach of the Commission
was to allow operational freedom to the Power Exchange within an
overall regulatory framework. The promoters were asked to seek
permission from the Commission before start of operation. Asked about

91


the broad guidelines for developing Power Exchange, the Ministry
have informed the Committee as under:

* De-mutualised form of organization
© Reliable, effective and impartial management

* Ring fencing between ownership, management and
participation

¢ Investment support from the investors including institutional
investors

* ‘Transparency in operation and decision making
* Computerized trading clearing system
© Efficient clearing settlement and guarantee system

* Effective trade information dissemination system

1.91 Further, as informed by the Ministry, the Commission has
issued guidelines in February 2007 for setting up of power exchanges.
The rules, byelaws and procedures for operation of a power exchange
are approved by the CERC, and the promoters of the exchange have
the freedom to develop, manage and operate the power exchange
within the ambit of such approved rules, byelaws and procedures.

1.92 In accordance with the guidelines, Indian Energy Exchange,
a company registered under Companies Act 1956 had applied for
permission for setting up of the power exchange. The Commission in
its order dated 31.8.2007 has granted permission to Indian Energy
Exchange to set up the first power exchange in the country. The
Committee have been informed by CERC that the first power exchange
is likely to be operational during May, 2008.

1.93 Giving details of the power exchange, a representative of the
CERC informed the Committee during evidence on 19th December,
2007, as under:

“Earlier this year, we had given out guidelines on setting up of
power exchange. What we have proposed is that the power
exchange should be an option available to the utilities apart from
the other ways in which they can buy and sell power. They can
do it bilaterally, one to one. They can do a trading through a
trader. The power exchange will be another option available. There
will be no compulsion to go through a power exchange which is


the case in some Western countries that all trading should be
through power exchange only. So, we are not contemplating
anything like that. It will be for utilities to decide as to what suits
them the best. The State Electricity Boards and the distribution
companies can choose what suits them the best like if they want
to purchase some extra power or if they want to sell some surplus
power. So, we have not mandated a single exchange for the country
or for a region. We have left it open. Let the market decide and
the promoters decide how many exchanges will be there. So far,
we have received one application and that was from MCX. We
have given them a go ahead to set up a power exchange. Now,
they are under the process of finalizing their rules and regulations
in consultation with the Regional Load Dispatch Centres. We will
approve those rules and regulations making sure that the system
operates in a streamlined manner. NTPC had made an application
to say that they will be forming joint venture projects and setting
up a power exchange.”

1.94 Regarding first power exchange, a representative of CERC
informed the Committee during evidence on 23rd April, 2008, as under:

“Tt will be useful if I answer some of your queries. I would like
to say a word about power exchanges. I am happy to inform that
the first power exchange would be in operation next month. They
have almost finalised the rules, regulations and bye-laws on which
we are giving a final review. They are also interacting with RLDCs
for scheduling what will come through exchange. Hopefully, we
will have the first power exchange in operation next month. We
have received another application from NCDEX and MCX for
setting up of second exchange. We will take it up.”

1.95 In a post evidence reply furnished to the Committee, the
Ministry of Power have informed that CERC has given permission to
the following two entities to set up and operate power exchanges:

1. M/s, India Energy Exchange Ltd. - It has started operation
on 9th June, 2008.

2. Power Exchange India Ltd.
1.96 The application of M/s. NTPC Ltd. seeking permission to set
up and operate a power exchange (with other stakeholders viz.

M/s. NHPC and NCDEX) was, however, stated to be pending with
CERC.

93


1.97 When asked that will the power exchange end up in hiking
the rate of electricity, the Committee have been informed by a
representatives of CERC as follows:

eens as the situation in the country today is with the shortage
that we have, I am not very sure whether power exchange will be
able to bring down the prices. Of course, the price of power
depends on the time at which you want it. Now there are times
of the day when there is a shortage and there are times of the
day, night time or afternoon when all the generating capacity if
you add up together is more than the load of the system at that
time. So, there will be some time during the day when there is
surplus and if at that time somebody wants extra power, it should
not be costing that high. It should be available and it should not
cost that high and depending on the time at which utility wants
extra power, there would be a price.”

1.98 The witness further added:

“It depends on the situation. We already have trading going on.
Two parties can do directly or bilaterally between them or through
a trader. Power exchange will be another platform for trading. It
will give another option to both the buyers and the sellers. If the
buyers are more and sellers are less, then prices will go up. If
there are more sellers and less number of buyers, then prices will
come down.”

1.99 A power exchange is a voluntary platform and no existing
power purchase agreements or bilateral agreements are disturbed as a
result of setting up of a power exchange.

1.100 According to the information given by the CERC, 4 paise per
unit is the trading margin applicable for inter-State trading of electricity.

I. Power Purchase Obligation for Purchase of Electricity from
Renewable Sources of Energy

1.101 The Committee have been informed that section 86(I)e of the
Electricity Act-2003 provides that the State Commissions shall promote
cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources of
energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid
and sale of electricity to any person and also specify, for purchase of
electricity from such sources, a percentage of the total consumption of
electricity in the area of a distribution licensee.

94


1.102 Giving details of the Power Purchase Obligation from
Renewable Energy, the Ministry of Power have informed that the
National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy recognises the need to
Promote power generation from renewable energy sources. It also
suggests preferential tariff and implementation of section 860)९ with
progressively increasing percentages for renewable power generation.

1.103 The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have informed
the Committee that all the States have not specified the quota so far
for power purchase from renewable energy sources. Those who have

specified the same there is variation from 2% to 10% among different
States.

1.104 During a study visit to Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and
Mumbai during January-February, 2008, the Committee had desired to
know the steps taken by the State Electricity Regulatory Commission
to promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable
sources of energy. The following information was provided to the
Committee by the State Commissions:

“(@) Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission

The Government of Rajasthan has constituted Rajasthan
Renewable Energy Corporation Limited (RREC) on
9th August, 2002, as nodal agency for development of energy
from renewable energy sources in the State and for
promoting energy efficiency and energy conservation in the
State. Wind power projects to the tune of 490.545 MW have
been installed till December 2007. Owing to conducive policy
of the State and incentives as also benefits offered to
renewable sector, work on 4 Biomass projects, having
aggregate capacity of 45.5 MW is in progress and the projects
are expected to be commissioned by September 2008/
March 2009. Also 13 Biomass Projects of aggregate capacity
of 104.3 MW were reported to be at various stages of
implementation.

The Committee were given to understand that Rajasthan
has the best solar insulation in the country and has abundant
land availability at cheaply affordable price. Thus, the State
is likely to emerge as the power house of the country with
the potential of setting up solar power plants with installed
capacity exceeding 1,00,000 MW by using Concentrated Solar
Power (CSP) technology in an area of 60 x 60 sq. kms. in
the deserts of Rajasthan. In this context, it was submitted
to the Committee that the limitation of 10 MW cap for a
State subject to a maximum of 5 MW per developer set by
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy be relaxed so as to

95


increase the cap for Rajasthan al least upto 100 MW and
the cap per developer may also be raised beyond 10 MW.

(ii) Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission

The Commission had notified the Power Procurement
Obligation for distribution licensees through Gazette dated
29th October, 2005. Accordingly, the distribution licensees
have to procure minimum 1% of its total consumption of
electricity from renewable sources during Financial Year
2007-08. The Committee were apprised that this limit would
be increased to the level of 2% from the year 2008-09.

(iii) Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission

The total installed capacity of New and Renewable Energy
projects in the State was only 236 MW on 31.03.2001 and it
had gone upto 1543 MW, a phenomenal increase of nearly
6.5 times. The major contribution (about 838 MW) to this
increase was from Wind Energy. The Committee were
informed that Karnataka has cogeneration Plants in Sugar
Mills totaling to a capacity of about 355 MW. There were
also Mini Hydel Plants and Biomass Plants in the State
with a total installed capacity of 253 MW and 97 MW,
respectively.”

1.105 In a separate meeting held on 22nd April, 2008, with the
representative of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, the
Committee have been informed about implementation of 86(I)(e) of
Electricity Act in case of Wind Power generation in the country:

State Renewable Purchase Installed Capacity

Obligation (RPO) as on 31.03.2008
Percentage (MW)
Tamil Nadu 10 3873.4
Maharashtra 36 1755.9
Karnataka 7-10 Min. - 20 Max. 1011.4
Andhra Pradesh 5 122.5
Gujarat 2 1252.9
Rajasthan 75 538.8
Madhya Pradesh 10 187.7
Kerala 3 20
West Bengal 3-8 vA.
Haryana 3-10 -
Others as 3.2

96


1.106 Clarifying further, the representative of the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy stated during evidence on 23rd April, 2008:—

“This has been left to the State Commissions to decide as to how
to procure it. So, every State Commission goes through a regulation
process or order process. There is a variation from two to ten per
cent in different States as of now in terms of renewables. There is
no standard that it should be minimum five per cent, minimum
two per cent or minimum ten per cent. It varies. As of now, there
is no capital subsidy for wind power projects, at least, in case of
private sector participation. Fiscal incentives available today are
basically depreciation and tax holiday, which is there for any
infrastructure project. The way the Indian Electricity Act has been
framed and the powers have been given to the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission and the State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions, it has been left entirely to the discretion of the State
Electricity Regulatory Commissions to fix the Renewable Purchase
Obligations (RPO), keeping in view the resources that are available
in the State. Second, the SERCs have not been asked to do this
RPO technology-wise, but for renewables as a whole. Strictly
speaking, Tamil Nadu have touched more than ten per cent
contribution mainly because of large wind power capacity. But if
you ask a State like Punjab or Haryana who do not have wind
power, this renewable power obligation remains more on paper
than in implementation.”

1,107 Asked about the reasons for inability of some States to make
use of renewable sources of energy, the Secretary, Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy stated during evidence:

“The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission was to come out
with a policy alone, not exactly a percentage obligation. That,
unfortunately, has not been given by the CERC as yet. All these
percentages that we are talking about, they are the minimum
purchase obligations and not maximum. They have to procure
minimum. But as it would happen, if they notify today, they would
give a lead time of two to three years for the State utilities to
source as much of renewabie power as they prescribe. But what
happens if they choose to violate it is something which is yet to
be seen, as and when we make further progress. There is also
another initiative we are working on which goes beyond the
Electricity Act and the tariff policy. We hope to have it in position
in the near future. There are States which do not have a real
potential. But at the same time, just because a State does not have

97


the potential, we cannot say that they need not purchase
renewables. We are thinking of introducing a system by which
electricity that is generated in one State can be supplied to another
State, not exactly through transmission lines, but by the issue of
certificates which we would call ‘renewable certificates’ or ‘green
certificates’. While doing so, I ara going into the territory of a
market creation for renewable power. We have to take into account
the views of the Power Ministry and the Finance Ministry. The
certificates can be obtained by the generators. So, instead of getting
a utility somewhere, I purchase the certificate so as to fulfil my
obligation. This is something that we are doing some market
engineering to work on. We are engaging some Consultants to
work out a structure. Ultimately, I have to get the blessings of the
Finance Ministry to make it operational. We are working on it.”

1.108 Further, regarding fixing the minimum purchase obligation
renewable energy, a representative of Madhya Pradesh stated during
evidence:

००००४ we have fixed minimum purchase obligation for all the three
distributing agencies at 10 per cent, subject of course, to availability.
I am very happy to tell you that apart from issuing wind energy
tariff order we have recently issued a biomass tariff order. There
has been a tremendous response to that. We have never passed
such an order. We did it and within two months the nodal
department, Solar Energy Development Corporation of Madhya
Pradesh has been flooded with applications from the developers
all over the country and sites for generation of about 200 MW of
power have been fixed up. This is an unprecedented response
which we have got for biomass.

We are also trying to come out with tariff orders with respect to
co-generation, small hydro projects up to 25 MW. We are also
coming up with solar energy tariff. These are all very sincere efforts
of the Commission within a very short span of time. We hope that
we will come out well.”

1.109 Regarding promotion of non-conventional energy in Assam,
the representative of Government of Assam stated during evidence on
23.04.2008 that a 2.2 MW small scale hydro power project has been in
progress. The State also has one 10 MW biomass unit and one 6 MW
unit is there which would use municipal waste in Gauhati.

98


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE COMMITTEE

A. CERC, SERCs and their Role in Protection of the Interests of
Consumers

2.1 The Committee note that functions of the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC), an independent statutory body with
quasi-judicial powers, are mainly to regulate the tariff of generating
companies; regulate inter-State transmission of electricity; determine
tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity; issue licenses to
persons to function as transmission licensees, adjudicate upon
disputes involving generating companies or transmission licensees;
specify grid code having regard to grid standards; specify and enforce
the standards with respect to quality, continuity and reliability of
services by licensees and also fix trading margin in the inter-State
trading of electricity. Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides
that the SERCs shall be guided by the principles and methodologies
specified by the CERC for determination of tariff applicable to
generating companies and transmission licensees. Also under the
provisions of Section 107 of the Act, the Central Government has
powers to give directions to the CERC in matters of policy involving
public interest. The Committee, however, are surprised to find that
no such direction has ever been given by the Central Government
to the CERC (since coming in to force of the Electricity Act, 2003).
This proves that the Central Government has acted with complete
indifference or lack of any interest in the matter. The Committee
would like the Central Government to fulfil their responsibility in
protecting the interests of consumers by ensuring frequent and
meaningful interaction between the Central Government and CERC.
The Committee expect the Government to issue necessary direction
on policy related matters concerning consumers at the earliest. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.

2.2 As regards the transparency in the exercise of powers and
functioning of the CERC, the Committee have been given to
understand that the CERC floats discussion paper among
stakeholders, calls for comments and then holds public hearings
before preparing the draft regulation. The draft regulation is also

99


stated to be put on the website of the Commission for eliciting the
comments/response of the stakeholders and pursue at large with a
view to eventually notifying the regulation. The Committee desire
that suitable steps should also be taken to create public awareness
regarding the role of the Electricity Regulatory Commissions so that
large number of peoples’ groups/organisations and public can take
active part in the formulation of requisite consumer friendly policies.

2.3 The Committee are constrained to find that the post of
Chairman, CERC which was lying vacant since March 2007 was filled
up only on 15th April, 2008. While acknowledging the fact that the
process for selection of Chairman was initiated way back in August,
2006 and Statutory reference in this regard to the Selection Committee
was made on 09.10.2006, the Committee are perturbed to note that
instead of taking the required 3 months for finalising the process,
the Selection Committee's recommendation was made available only
on 14th August, 2007, i.e., after 10 months. What is surprising is the
fact that even Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) took
about 9 months thereafter to take the approval of the competent
authority for making appointment to the post. The Committee deplore
the inordinate delay in appointment of the Chairman of CERC which
according to them could have been curtailed. The Committee expect
the Government to take all necessary steps at the earliest to fill up
all other vacant posts in this Organisation.

2.4 The Committee also find that 8 SERCs in the States of Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Punjab, Tamil
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, have no Chairman and Members as on
15.07.2008. This is yet another instance which indicates the causal
approach with which the regulation of power sector - which has a
direct bearing on the consumers and their interests is being taken
up both by the Centre and States. The Committee would like the
Ministry of Power to take up and pursue the matter of vacancies in
SERCs at the appropriate level with the respective State Governments
so that these are filled up at the earliest. The Committee would like
to be informed of the steps taken in this direction.

2.5 The Committee observe that as per Electricity Act, 2003, the
appropriate Commission may, with the approval of the Appropriate
Government, specify the numbers, nature and categories of other
officers and employees. However, the salaries and allowances payable
and other service conditions of the Secretary, officers and other
employees are to be such as specified with the approval of the
Appropriate Government. In this connection, the Indian Institute of

100


Public Administration (IIPA) has conducted a study on the impact
of reorganization of State Electricity Boards (SEBs), wherein they
have recommended that the Commission should have full autonomy
in matters relating to staffing pattern, organisation structure and
adequate powers to recruit staff as required with an overall ceiling
on expenditure. Concurring with these views, the Committee
recommend that more and more autonomy need to be given to the
CERC & SERCs in the recruitment process for which Government
ought to take necessary steps.

B. National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy for Protection of
Interests of Consumers

2.6 The Committee find that as per the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003, the Electricity Regulatory Commissions shall be
guided inter alia by the National Electricity Policy and the Tariff
Policy. Besides laying emphasis on promoting competition in the
long run which would lead to reduction in tariff, the National
Electricity Policy also require the Electricity Regulatory Commissions
to regulate utilities based on predetermined indices on quality of
power supply, setting up Grievance Redressal Forums expeditiously
and appointment of Ombudsman within six months. The Committee -
observe that in most of the States where Electricity Regulatory
Commissions have been set, some sort of Grievance Redressal
Mechanism has also been put in place and Ombudsman appointed.
As regards the tariff policy notified by the Central Government on
06.01.2006, the Committee note that its main aim is to enhance
competition through the reduction in capital costs and bringing about
efficiency in operations. It also requires that all future requirement
of power should be procured competitively by the distribution
licensees except in the case of expansion of existing projects or in
case of State controlled/owned company as an identified developer.
Even for public sector projects, tariff for all new generation and
transmission projects needs to be decided on the basis of competitive
bidding. The Committee observe that as specified by Tariff Policy
that Accredited Transmission and Commercial (AT&C) reduction
needs to be incentivised by linking returns to the power utilities in
a Multi Year Tariff (MYT) framework to an achievable trajectory,
most of the States have yet to put in place the MYT framework. The
Committee further note that although distribution companies in the
States have been directed by SERC to bring down the AT&C losses
to a desired level by issue of MYT regulations with detailed
methodology related to sharing of excess profits/losses with consumer,
the same could not be achieved in-spite of measures taken such as

101


feeder separation schemes, adoption of theft preventive techniques,
replacement of old overhead lines, installation of new electronic
meters, etc. While appreciating the new policy initiatives to enhance
competition through reduction in capital costs and efficiency in
operations, the Committee recommend that the Government should
strive hard to see that both the CERC and SERCs ensure that AT&C
and high T&D losses are brought down to specified percentages at
the earliest so that consumers are also benefited by reduction in
tariff of electricity.

2.7 The Committee observe that as per Para 8.2.1 (2) of Tariff
Policy, third party verification/energy audit of technical and financial
data for different areas/localities could be used to impose area/locality
specific surcharge for greater AT&C loss levels and this, in turn,
would generate local consensus for effective action for better
governance. Further Para 8.2.1 (2) of the policy requires the SERCs
to institute a system of independent scrutiny of financial and
technical data submitted by the licensees. The policy also emphasises
that an in-depth scrutiny of the financial and technical data submitted
by the licensees would form the basis for tariff determination. The
Committee are, however, concerned to note that in many of the States
energy audits are being done in-house by the licensees themselves.
To ensure that the consumers are extended the benefit of energy
audit results and at the same time are not unnecessarily put to
disadvantage, the Committee feel that SERCs should ensure third
party verification of energy audit results by engaging experts/
independent consultants for scrutiny and analysis of the data
submitted by the licensees for tariff determination. The Committee
also desire that the Government should take the necessary steps so
that guidelines of tariff policy in this regard are followed by all the
SERCs.

2.8 The Committee have been informed that fixing tariff for the
various classes of consumers is State specific but the principles and
methodology for determination of tariff applicable to the generating
companies and transmission licensees in the Central sector have been
specified in CERC (Terms and conditions of Tariff) Regulations 2004.
These regulations also serve as guidelines for State Commissions to
specify the regulation for terms and conditions for determination of
tariff in respect of the generating companies and transmission
licensees under their control. The Ministry of Power have informed
the Committee that tariff rationalisation has not been achieved in
full, but the progress has been good. The Committee feel that the
consumers generally are not satisfied with the service rendered and

102


the tariff of electricity supplied to them, the whole Process of re-
organisation of Electricity Boards and the reforms as such have not
served the desired purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government should take the necessary measures to improve the
distribution system so that consumers get good service as well as
benefit of the tariff rationalisation.

2.9 Although, the provisions of Section 61 (f) of the Electricity
Act, 2003, provide that Appropriate Commission shall specify the
terms and conditions for the determination of tariff and is stated to
be guided by Multi Year Tariff (MYT) principles, only some States
have adopted this procedure. The Committee desire that such
arrangement should also be in vogue in the rest of the States for
which Central Government ought to impress upon them at
appropriate level. Further, since the licensees/distribution companies
are making huge profits by resorting to the setting up of tariff slabs
for various categories of consumers, the Committee would like to be
informed as to whether any such policy in regard to fixing different
tariff slabs for the consumers has been formulated by the
Government. The Committee feel that instead of resorting to different
slab systems across the country for fixation of power tariff,
Government should examine the feasibility of achieving particular
uniform rates of power supply for different categories of consumers,
ie. domestic, agriculture and industrial, etc. in the country.

2.10 The Committee note with satisfaction that most of the State
Governments are making efforts to reduce the cross subsidy and
hope that the same would be kept within limits, benefiting only the
most deserving sections of society, i.e., agriculturists/BPL households,
etc, At the same time, the Committee desire that it would be useful
if important details like the cost of electricity to the Government,
subsidy given to consumers thereon, etc. are clearly mentioned in
the bills issued to the consumers to educate and make them aware
of the money being spent by the Government - for making available
to them the electricity at a particular rate as is being done in certain
States like Rajasthan, etc.

C. Capacity Building of Consumer Groups and Consumer
Grievance Redressal Mechanism

2.11 The Committee have been given to understand that the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions are to facilitate capacity building
of consumer groups, Section 94 (3) of the Act provides that the
appropriate Commission may authorize any person as it deems fit
to represent the interests of the consumers in the Proceedings before
it. It is pertinent to note in this regard that a unique feature was

103


introduced by Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission by
constituting the Office of Consumer Advocacy (OCA) in the year
2001 under the similar provision of Karnataka Electricity Reforms
Act, 1999, Further, the OCA has been facilitating redressal of
consumer grievances and up to 31st March 2007, the OCA received
1043 complaints out of which 891 were resolved to the satisfaction
of the consumers and the action was being taken to dispose off the
remaining 152 complaints. Similarly, in Maharashtra, MERC has
formulated its Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums and Electricity
Ombudsman Regulations, 2006, which provides guidelines to the
Licensees in the matter. As per the guidelines, separate machinery
has been set up by MERC for the redressal of grievances. All the
five Distribution Licensees in the State have established Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forums in each Distribution Zone falling within
their area of electricity supply. The Committee further observe that
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Ltd. (MSEDCL)
has established twelve CGRF at each Zone, i.e., Amravati, Nagpur
(Urban), Nagpur (Rural), Aurangabad, Nashik, Pune, Beed, Latur,
Kolhapur, Kalyan, Konkan and Bhandup. While appreciating that
distribution companies in Maharashtra have established CGRF in
each Zone, the Committee recommend that the Government/CERC
should pursue all SERCs to ensure that CGRF/Ombudsman are set
up in each distribution zone at convenient and easily accessible
locations/places in each State to make them approachable by the
common consumers. As regards disposal of cases by the Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forums, the Committee note that in Madhya
Pradesh, the State Government has introduced the facility of on-
line-registration of complaints and fifty-eight percent of the cases
have been reported to be gone in favour of the consumers. Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC) held workshops
with 125 NGOs that have been registered with it who in turn educate
the consumers in the State. As satisfactory work is being done by
Electricity Commission in the aforesaid States, the Committee feel
that all such reform processes should also be put in place in other
States also so that there is greater involvement of consumer groups
in the policy decisions having a bearing on the interests of the
consumers and redressal of their grievances. For this, the CERC/FOR
need to take proactive role in consultation and coordination with
Electricity Commissions of those States.

2.12 The Committee find that Section 173 of the Electricity Act,
2003, provides that nothing contained in this Act or any rule or
regulation made thereunder or any instrument having effect by virtue
of this Act, rule or regulation shall have effect in so far as it is
inconsistent with any other provisions of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 or the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 or the Railways Act, 1989.

104


The said Act thus does not interfere with the rights of the consumers
within the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Any consumer of electricity
is, therefore, at liberty to approach any of the Consumer Courts for
a legal redressal of his/her grievance. The Electricity Act, 2003,
however, provides a more expeditious mode of consumer redressal
whereunder it has been made obligatory on the distribution company
~ a licensee to establish forum which shall be addressing consumer
grievances. Not satisfied with the decision of this forum, the
consumer can appeal to Ombudsman appointed for the purpose.
Taking note of the fact that the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forums (CGRFs) have been set up and Ombudsmen have been
appointed in almost all the States, the Committee are of the view
that the CERC/SERCs should ensure that these bodies function
independently out of any Governmental control(s), whatsoever.

2.13 The Committee also note that after exhausting the channel
of CGRF and Ombudsman, the affected consumer has no place to
go for appeal except for having an option to go through the normal
legal process as the Regulatory Commissions are not empowered to
hear any appeal. The Committee, therefore, desire that some sort of
mechanism needs to be worked out by the Government in this regard
so that the electricity consumers may be spared from the cumbersome
legal processes in seeking the redresssal of their grievances.

2.14 The Committee are surprised to note that only after the
Committee chose to take up for detailed examination the subject
‘Role of CERC and SERCs in Protection of Interests of Consumers’,
the Ministry decided to examine issues related thereto. A study on
the consumer redressal mechanisms was entrusted to Indian Institute
of Public Administration and Administrative Staff College of India
(ASCI for conducting the study and give a report within a period
of three months. The Committee have been informed that ASCI has
submitted the draft report which is being examined by the Ministry.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of this
study Report and the precise action taken by the Government
thereon.

2.15 The Standing Committee on Energy, in their 9th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on APDRP, presented to Lok Sabha on 25.08.2005,
had recommended that besides resolving the issues like steep tariff
hike and reduction in T&D losses, the private distribution companies
in Delhi should also sort out the issues relating to increasing
complaints of fast running of electricity meters. As regards the
number of complaints received by distribution companies in Delhi,
the Committee are informed during 2007-08, 17293 complaints related
to billing and 23051 complaints on metering problems were received
by the distribution companies. The DERC has also informed that

105


the Delhi Electricity Supply Code and Performance Regulations, 2007
require the electricity meters to conform to the Central Electricity
Authority (CEA) Installation and Operation of Meters Regulation
2006. The CEA regulations specify that meters shall comply with the
requirements of the relevant standard notified by the Bureau of
Indian Standards (BIS) which inter alia define the error limits of
meters. The error limits for electricity meters are set by BIS in their
relevant standards and current limits are + 1% and + 2.5% for
class I static (electronic) type meter under standard and on site
conditions. The Committee are happy to note that DERC has notified
ERTL (North), Okhla, Delhi and CPRI which are National
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABLs)
accredited Government laboratories, as independent third parties for
testing of meters. However, the fact remains that consumers in Delhi
are mainly dissatisfied with such measures. The Committee strongly
feel that ways and means should be found to ensure satisfaction of
the consumers in respect of over-billing as well as fast running of
meters. In case of complaints of fast running meters, quick action
needs to be taken to replace them. The Committee also recommend
that the consumers should be allowed to have a meter of their own
choice from a set of meters approved by the agencies like CPRI.
The Committee also feel that distribution companies should educate
the consumers as to how the electric appliances are to be used with
a view to ensuring minimum consumption of electricity which in
turn would reduce the possibility of the excess reading of sensitive
meters.

2.16 The Delhi Electricity Supply Code and Performance
Standards Regulations, 2007 envisage payment of compensation by
the Distribution companies to consumers in the event of default in
observance of the notified Standards of Performance. The
Commission has directed all the Distribution companies to pay
compensation to the affected consumers without there being a need
for such consumers to apply for the same. The Committee would
like to know details of the cases disposed off where compensation
have been paid by the Distribution companies to the affected
consumers. At the same time, the Committee would like the
Government/CERC to ensure that the other State Regulatory
Commissions also follow suit in the matter to protect and safeguard
the interests of the consumers.

D. Standards of Performance and Reliability Indices

2.17 Performance of power stations and inter-State Transmission
system regulated by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) is governed by the benchmark Standards of Performance

106


specified by the Commission as part of multi-year terms and
conditions of tariff notified by it. Further, the CERC has specified a
benchmark of target availability/capacity index in order to ensure
reliability of supply which ultimately has to reach the end consumer
through a distribution utility, the capacity of generating stations to
produce electricity and of a transmission utility/licensee to deliver
the same from the point of generation to the point of drawal. The
Committee note that in most of the States, the State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) have notified the Standards of
Performance for quality, continuity and reliability of service to the
consumers after consultation with licensees, stakeholders and general
public, Some States are stated to have taken initiatives to notify and
implement the Standards of Performance. In this regard, Karnataka
has made an innovation by introducing Office of the Consumer’s
Advocacy (OCA), who hears complaints about the non-compliance
of the Standards of Performance by the utilities. In Madhya Pradesh,
quarterly and annual Reports on the performance standards are being
published in newspapers and are available in Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC). The MPERC also hold
workshops with NGOs to disseminate information on the
performance standards among consumers. The distribution companies
have been directed by MPERC to display performance standards at
their offices. As per the directions of MPERC, six lakh pamphlets
containing details of performance standards were distributed
alongwith electricity bills in Bhopal, Indore and Jabalpur. Further,
Ombudsmen are directed to review performance standards bi-
annually. Similarly, Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission
(GERC) specified formats for submitting information related to
performance and obtains compliance reports from the Distribution
Licensees and same are also uploaded on the Commission’s website.
The Standards of Performance Regulations provide for the various
limits and time period for the parameters (interruption, Period of
Schedule Outages, Voltage variations, Harmonics) related to quality
of power. To enforce these standards, detailed procedures have been
prescribed in the Grid Code to be complied with by the licensees.
While the Committee appreciate the steps taken by some of the
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions, for monitoring the
Standards of Performance and reliability of supply through monthly
Reports, yet the Committee find out that many of these Commissions
have not so far fixed the pre-determined indices on quality of power
supply, to be followed by licensees. Taking note of the fact that as
many as 21 State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) have
laid down Standards of Performance, the Committee desire that the
Government should persuade all the SERCs to take elaborate steps
to ensure that the Distribution Companies supply the consumers

107


with the continuous, quality and reliable supply of power. To ensure
this, the Committee recommend that SERCs/Distribution companies
should regularly disseminate information on Standards of
Performance (SoP) being followed by the Distribution Companies.
This needs to be ensured that the quarterly reviews are carried out
by SERCs and the defaulting Distribution Companies are penalized.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Government in this regard.

2.18 The Committee note that as per the National Electricity
Policy, 2005 (Para 5.13.2), the SERCs are required to draw a road
map for the declaration of reliability under the Reliability Index
(RI) of supply of power to consumers of all cities and towns upto
district headquarters as also rural areas. The Committee are, however,
dismayed to note that till date the States like Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan,
Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have reportedly not specified
the Reliability Indices. The Committee feel that specifying the
Reliability Indices should have been the top priority of SERCs to
ensure consumer satisfaction. The Committee, deprecate the delay in
specifying the Reliability Indices in these States and strongly urge
the Government to intervene and pursue the matter with the
concerned SERCs to ensure that their Reliability Indices be declared
without any further loss of precious time.

2.19 The Committee observe that the Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) has been capturing ‘Outrage duration’ and ‘Number of
Outrages’ of 11 kv feeders in respect of State capitals, district
headquarters and towns with population of more than 8 lakhs.
Subsequently, the CEA has now covered the towns with a population
of more than 1 lakh. Since, National Electricity Policy also requires
that the data of Reliability Index of supply of power to consumer
should be completed and published by the CEA, the Committee
desire that speedy action needs to be taken up in the matter so that
relevant data collected by the Distribution Companies/State agencies
could be compiled by the CEA. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard.

E. Forum of Regulators
2.20 The Committee note that the Forum of Regulators (FOR)
which was constituted as per Section 166 (2) of the Electricity Act,

2003, consists of the Chairperson of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) and Chairperson of State Electricity Regulatory

108


Commissions (SERCs). The Forum is envisaged with functions like
analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of the Central
Commission and the State Commissions, harmonization of regulation
in power sector, laying of Standards of Performance of licensees as
required under the Act, sharing of information among members of
the Forum on issues of common approach, evolving measures for
the protection of consumers and promotion of efficiency, economy,
competition and also undertaking research work-in-house or through
outsourcing on the issues relevant to power sector regulation. The
Committee observe that one of the main functions assigned to the
Forum of Regulators is to strive for the harmonization of regulation
in power sector. The Committee are, however, constrained to find
that so far the FOR has held only six meetings since its inception
(February, 2005) where certain important issues like strengthening
the consumer advocacy system, Return on Equity (ROE) for
distribution, operationalisation of open access in distribution,
harnessing of surplus captive generation and Depreciation Rates for
distribution were discussed and consensus on them was evolved.
The Committee recommend that it would be only—and in line with
the mandate of the Forum of Regulators under the Act, if the FOR
holds its meetings more frequently and analyse the important issues/
challenges facing the power sector like tariff orders of State
Commissions, especially those which have been challenged by the
respective State Governments/Distribution companies. At the same
time, the Committee would also like the FOR to evolve consensus
and common approach on other important issues of common interest
like fixing of Power Purchase Obligations from the renewable energy
sources, implementation of power sector reform programmes, etc.

2.21 The Committee have been informed that the Forum of
Regulators has appointed the Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad as consultant for conducting a study on Electricity
Reforms and Regulations—a Critical Review of last 10 years
experience with the main objectives (a) To review the role of various
authorities involved in the process of reforms in the electricity sector
in India, more importantly, the role played by the Government
(Central as well as State), Government agencies, the Regulatory
Commission, Appellate Authorities, and (b) To assess the roles
envisaged for various stakeholders including the Government (Central
as well as State), Government agencies, Regulatory Commissions,
Appellate Authorities and the constraints and gaps on achievements
of the objectives set, and the way forward etc. According to the
Ministry, draft Report in this regard is expected shortly. The
Committee would like to be informed of the main findings of this
study and the remedial action taken by the Government thereon.

109


FE. Indian Electricity Grid Code

2.22 The Committee note with great concern that the major issue
brought to the notice by the CERC with regard to the violation of
Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) remain frequent overdrawal from
the Grid by certain States at lower frequencies. The Committee have
been informed that the procedure of day ahead scheduling and
pricing of deviations from the schedule (unscheduled interchange or
UD) was part of the IEGC prepared by Central Transmission Utility
and approved by the Commission which was implemented w.e.f. 1st
February, 2000. The provision for pricing of UI, however, became
effective only after implementation of the Availability Based Tariff
(ABT) progressively in various regions beginning from July, 2002.
The Committee also note that the ceiling rate of UI is fixed, at
49.0 Hz and is related to the price of electricity that can be produced
using the costliest fuel and thus reflects system marginal cost.
However, there have been instances when States have overdrawn
below the desired frequencies. In this regard, the Committee note
that while disposing of a petition filed by the Western Regional
Load Despatch Centre, the Central Commission vide its order dated
28th January, 2003 had directed that MPSEB shall pay a penalty of
Rs. one lakh only invoking powers conferred on the Commission
under Section 45 of now repealed ERC Act, 1998. Similarly, while
disposing of a petition filed by Northern Regional Load Despatch
Centre (NRLDC), the Commission had imposed a penalty of
Rs. One lakh only on Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited
(UPPCL) invoking powers vested with it under Section 142 of the
Electricity Act, 2003. A penalty of Rs. one lakh on UPPCL was also
imposed by the adjudicating officer appointed by the Commission
under Section 143 of the Act, to conduct an inquiry into the instances
of non-compliance by the respondent of the instruction of the
NRLDC during the period 1.4.2006 to 30.4.2006. The Committee feel
that the penalty imposed on the States overdrawing from the Grid
at low frequency is too meagre to discourage them from overdrawing
and to force them to follow the Grid Code. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that more stringent penalties should be taken by the
Central Government/CERC to prevent overdrawal from the Grid and
as such to protect the Grid from collapsing.

2.23 The Committee note that some of the States have not even
paid the UI charges. The Committee also take note of the fact that
in a petition filed by WRLDC, the Commission has directed MPSEB
to pay Rs. 25 crore on or before 25.06.2006 and the balance amount
of Rs. 25.7 crore by 27.07.2006. Further, Uttar Pradesh is also reported

110


to be not paying the outstanding arrears of Rs. 770 crore of
Unscheduled Interchange. In view of the huge outstanding arrears
on accounts of non-payment of UI changes, the Committee feel that
the Government should take up the matter at the highest level to
ensure that the States abiding by the Grid Code do not suffer on
account of the unauthorised overdrawl of power by other States.
The Committee fully endorse the view of the Government that the
outstanding amount from the defaulting States needs to be recovered
by way of the Central appropriation of their allocated funds and
desire that the action taken in this regard be reported to them.

2.24 The Committee agree with the concern expressed by the
Ministry about States violating the unscheduled interchange barrier
and overdrawing power to the detriment of other States, and expect
them to appropriately fix UI charges taking into account the cost of
generation of power from various kind of fuels including naphtha
and these charges may be allowed to increase as and when the fuel
cost is increased. The Committee also fully endorse the views of the
Government that the regulators should evolve such a practice that
when the Annual Return Rates (ARRs) are being filed, the damages
which have been imposed for the UI charges should be stated
separately and very clearly and those payments which are in the
nature of damages should not go to show purchase of power because
that really is the inefficiency or incompetence of that particular
Distribution company or entity. The Committee would, therefore,
recommend that the matter may be deliberated by FORs to arrive at
a consensus and the Committee may be apprised of action taken in
the matter. At the same time the Committee strongly recommend
that certain more stringent measures are needed to be evolved by
the Central Government in consultation with the CERC to avoid
any major grid disturbances in the future.

6. Open Access in Transmission and Distribution of Electricity

2.25 The Committee note that regulations for open access in
inter-State transmission issued by the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) in February, 2004, were amended in February,
2005, to further harmonise them with the requirements of trading in
electricity. The CERC has now finalised the new open access
regulations for the inter-State transmission after consultation with
the stakeholders and the new regulations have been reported to
become fully effective with effect from April 1, 2008. Steps are stated
to have been taken in 19 States to implement the provision of
Electricity Act, 2003 regarding issue/notification of the regulation for

111


open access. Further, 35 consumers in Chhattisgarh, 17 applicants in
Madhya Pradesh, 9 consumers in Rajasthan have been reported to
be availing/sanctioned open access of electricity. The Committee
observe that the annual volume of electricity traded through open
access route is only of the order of two per cent of the total available
energy. The new regulations for open access state that in case of
bilateral intra-regional transaction, the transmission charges for the
use of interstate transmission system shall be Rs. 30/MWh, for
bilateral, between adjacent regions, these will be Rs. 60/MWh and
Rs. 90/MWh for bilateral wheeling of electricity through one or more
intervening regions. Further, in case of the collective transactions
charges at the rate of Rs. 30/MWh for energy approved for
transmission for each point of injection and for each point of drawal
shall be payable for use of the inter-State transmission system. The
Committee also observe that the transmission charges recovered from
open access customers are to be utilised for reduction in the monthly
transmission charges payable by long-term customers of the region
after allowing 25% to be retained by the Central Transmission Utility
and the transmission charges for the use of State network to be
disbursed to the State Transmission Utility concerned. The Committee
believe that these new regulations which have come into force with
effect from 1st April, 2008, would not only improve the magnitude
of bilateral trade of power in the country where the present
transactions are taking place between the SEBs or their successor
utilities, but will also benefit the consumers once open access at
intra-State level also becomes effective. The Committee appreciate
the efforts made by the Ministry to see that the open access is
operationalised in the country and also take note of the fact that it
was unanimously resolved to support this proposition in the
Chief Ministers conference held during 2007, The Committee
recommend the State Governments should ensure that the open access
takes off in their States more steadily and progressively.

2.26 The Committee are concerned to note that some States are
reported to be forcing their regulators to bring directions to use
power within the State and also there has been a tendency of some
States to impose excessive wheeling charges for the export of power
which makes it unremunerative for generating companies to sell their
power outside the State. While appreciating the Government's action
to direct the Forum of Regulators to bring out a website which will
post all the rates which have to be paid and charges which would
be levied for utilising open access as well as the distribution
companies who intend to purchase power through open access, the
Committee urge the Government to take immediate steps to ensure

112


that all the Regulatory Commissions to follow a uniform policy
regarding open access and levying of wheeling charges therefor to
usher in effective operationalisation of open access in the country.

H. Setting up of Power Exchanges

2.27 The Committee note that the CERC has issued guidelines
in February 2007 for the setting up of power exchanges in the country.
The rules, byelaws and procedures for operation of a power exchange
are approved by the CERC and the promoters of the exchange(s)
have the freedom to develop, manage and operate the power exchange
within the ambit of such approved rules, byelaws and procedures.
Further, the Ministry have also specified that power exchange is a
voluntary platform and no existing power purchase agreements or
bilateral agreements are disturbed as a result of the setting up of a
power exchange. The Committee find that the CERC has given
permission to M/s India Energy Exchange Ltd. and the first power
exchange has started operation on 9th June, 2008. Further, the CERC
has also given permission to Power Exchange India Ltd. to set up
the power exchange. The application of M/s NTPC Ltd. seeking
permission to set up and operate a power exchange (with other
stakeholders viz. M/s NHPC and NCDEX) is, however, reported to
be pending with the CERC. According to the Government, power
exchange should be an option available to the utilities apart from
other ways in which they can buy and sell power, Although, the
Committee feel that the very purpose of the setting up of power
exchanges should have been to bring down the cost of electricity,
the Committee are concerned to take note of a candid submission
made by a representative of CERC ‘it will give another option to
both the buyers and the sellers. Thus, if the buyers are more and
sellers are less, then prices will go up and if there are more sellers
and less number of buyers, then prices will come down’. The
Committee apprehend that in the present scenario of power shortage
in the country, where the number of buyers are always going to be
more than the number of sellers, the power exchanges programme
may end-up in the increase in the rates of electricity and may not
benefit the consumers as envisaged originally. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government/CERC to formulate guidelines
whereby a higher limit of trading margin upto which the sellers
should be allowed to benefit, is fixed. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.

1. Power Purchase Obligations from Renewable Sources of Energy

2.28 The Committee note that Section 86 (I)(e) of the Electricity
Act, 2003, provides that the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions

113


shall promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from the
renewable sources of energy by providing suitable measuxes for
connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any person and
also specify, for purchase of electricity from such sources - a
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a
Distribution Licensee. The National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy
also suggest preferential tariff and implementation of Section 86 (D(e)
with progressively increasing percentages for renewable power
generation. Consequently some State Governments are making efforts
to exploit the available renewable energy potential in their States -
whether it is through the wind, biomass, solar, small hydro projects
and as a result of these efforts the States like Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh have
3873.4 MW, 1755.9 MW, 1011.4 MW, 1252.9 MW, 538.8 MW and
187.7 MW of installed capacity of electricity from renewable sources
of energy. Steps are also stated to be taken by the State nodal
agencies to further promote the development of energy from
renewable energy sources. The Committee are however, constrained
to note that a number of States have not as yet even specified the
Renewable Power Purchase obligation percentages. The States who
have specified the power purchase obligations, the figure varies from
2% to 10%. Although, the Committee acknowledge that State
Commissions should decide as to how and which renewable source
of energy needs to be tapped or procured, the Committee observe
that the non-implementation of provision of Section 86 (I)(e) of the
Electricity Act, 2003, by some of the States would further hinder the
exploitation and use of renewable energy in those States. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Central Government/CERC
should take up the matter at appropriate levels and ensure that all
the States lay down the obligations not only for the generation of
electricity from renewable sources of energy but also for the purchase
of such electricity by the Distribution Licensees. The Committee also
expect the Forum of Regulators (FOR) to play a proactive role in
promoting renewable energy and bringing about uniformity in the
Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation provisions in all the States.

2.29 The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have informed
the Committee during evidence that it is working on a different
proposition whereby those States who do not have the potential
renewable sources, can purchase from other States and that too not
exactly through transmission lines, but by the issue of certificates
which would be called ‘renewable certificates’ or ‘green certificates’.
According to the Ministry, these certificates can be obtained by the
power generators. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have

114


teportedly engaged some consultants to work out the modalities for
the same. The Committee would like to know the outcome of the
study carried out by the consultants as well as the action taken by
the Government thereon in due course. The Committee also
recommend the Government to ensure that the ‘green certificates’ be
strictly issued only in those States which do not have enough
renewable sources of energy.

New Det; GURUDAS KAMAT,
January 27, 2009 27, 2009 Chairman,
Magha 7, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

115


116

APPENDIX

MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON 19.12.2007

IN COMMITTEE ROOM B, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 15.00 hours to 16.50 hrs.

Pee
RES

13.
14.
15.

७9 eOnanean

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman

MemBeRS

Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailsh Baitha
. Shri Gaurishanker Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Mohan Jena

Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

. Smt. Susmita Bauri

. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri Motilal Vora

‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Shri J.S. Chauhan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Juby Amar = Under Secretary


WITNESSES

Ministry of Power

SLNo. Name of Officer Designation
1 Shri Anil Razdan Secretary (Power)
2. Shri Anil Kumar Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G.B. Pradhan Joint Secretary
4. Shri Jayant Kawale Joint Secretary
5. Shri V.P. Joy Joint Secretary
6. Shri Devender Singh Joint Secretary
7. Shri Rajesh Verma JS & FA
8. Shri Alok Kumar Director (R & R)
9. Shri Kapil Mohan Director (Dist.)

Central Electricity Authority

10. Shri VS. Verma Member (यह)
ng Shri V. Ramakrishna Member (PS)

12. Shri Sunil Verma Member (E&C)
13. Shri S.M. Dhiman Member (GO&D)

Central Electricity Regulatory Commission

14. Shri Bhanu Bhushan Member and Acting
Chairman

15. Shri Ravinder Cheif (Engineering)

16. Shri Sushant Chatterjee Dy. Chief (Regulatory Affairs)

Powergrid Corporation of India Ltd.
a7; Shri Sanjay Garg DGM

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of Ministry of Power to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Directions 55 & 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

2. The Secretary, Ministry of Power thereafter briefed the Committee
on the various aspects of the functioning of CERC and SERCs and
their role in protection of interests of consumers.

117


3. The Committee then sought clarifications on the various issues
having a strong bearing on the subject ‘Role of CERC and SERCs in
protection of interests of consumers’. The following important points
came up for discussion during the sitting of the Committee:

6)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)
(vi)

The role of CERC and SERC in matters of policy, tariff
rationalization, specification of standards of performance by
CERC and setting up of Power Exchange in the country.

The number and nature of complaints received by the SERCs
and their redressal.

The reduction in the AT&C losses by utilities and sharing
thereof with consumers.

Implementation of open access in the country in generation
and transmission sectors.

Tariff fixation and trading of power.

Procurement and exchange of power between different States
and policy guidelines in regard thereto.

4. The representatives of the Ministry of Power replied to the
queries of the Members on the aforesaid issues. The Chairman desired

that the

information that was not readily available with the

representatives of the Ministry of Power could be furnished to the
Secretariat in due course.

5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept

on record.

118

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2007-08) HELD ON 23.4.2008
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hours to 18.30 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chariman

Memsers
Lok Sabha

. Shri Kailsh Baitha

. Shri Mohan Jena

Prof Chander Kumar

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra

. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

चर छः एफ एक

. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Rana
Rajya Sabha

8. Dr. K. Kasturirangan
9. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
10. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Kumar _ Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — — Under Secretary

Witnesses

Ministry of Power

1. Shri Anil Razdan, Secretary
2. Shri G.B. Pradhan, Additional Secretary

119


3. Shri Anil Kumar, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Rajesh Verma, JS & FA
5. Shri Jayant 5. Kawale, Joint Secretary
6. Shri V.P. Joy, Joint Secretary

', Shri Devender Singh, Joint Secretary
8. Shri LC.P. Keshari, Joint Secretary

Central Electricity Authority

9. Shri Rakesh Nath, Chairperson

10. Shri V.S. Verma, Member (Plg.)

का. Shri Gurdial Singh, Member (Hydro)
12. Shri R. Dahiya, Member (Thermal)

13. Shri V. Ramakrishna, Member (PS)

14. Shri Sunil Verma, Member (E&C)

15. Shri $.M. Dhiman, Member (GO&D)

16. Shri D.S. Arora, Secretary

17. Shri Alok Gupta, Chief Engineer

18. Smt. Sangeeta Verma, Economic Advisor

Central Electricity Regulatory Commission

19, Shri Bhanu Bhushan, Member
20. Shri Ravinder, Chief (Engineering)
21. Shri Sushant Kumar Chatterjee, Dy. Chief (Regulatory Affairs)

Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission

22. Shri Himadri Dutta, Member
23. Smt. Neelima Dewri, Secretary

Bihar Electricity Regulatory Commission
24. Shri B.K. Halder, Chairman
Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission

25. Dr. J.L. Bose, Chairman

26. Shri K.K. Garg, Member (Engineering)

27, Shri Ashok Sharma, Commission Secretary
28. Shri Gajendra Tiwari, Director (Tariff)

120


Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission
29. Shri N.C. Mahapatra, Secretary
Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission

30. Shri Vijoy Kumar, Chairperson
31. Shri R.D. Gupta, Member

West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission

32. Shri Prititosh Ray, Member
33. Shri Anirban Guha, Director (Engg.)

Ministry of New and Renewable Energy

34. Shri K.P. Sukmaran, Scientist ‘G’
35. Dr. J.R. Meshram, Scientist ‘F’

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of Ministry of Power, representatives
of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) and the State
Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Directions 55 & 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.

3. The Secretary, Ministry of Power then briefed the Committee on
the various aspects of the subject Role of CERC and SERCs in
protection of interests of consumers. The following important points
came up for discussion during the sitting of the Committee:—

(i) Open access in transmission and distribution of power and
the present status of its implementation.

(ii) Standards of Performance notified by the State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions.

(iii) Study assigned to the Administrative Staff College of India
to assess the functioning of the grievance redressal
mechanism, under the Electricity Act, 2003.

(iv) Implementation of consumer redressal mechanism system
and role of Ombudsman therein.

(v) Existing T&D losses in various States and steps taken to
reduce them. Implementation of restructured APDRP scheme
and its role in reducing the AT & C losses.

121


(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Rationalisation and fixation of power tariff in different States.

Fixing of Renewable Energy Obligations (REOs) in various
States and efforts being made to fix the same in other States
including their implementation aspect.

Need to strengthen Regulatory Commissions to protect the
interest of the aggrieved consumers.

4. During the meeting the Chairman asked the representatives of

SERCs to present their views on the role of SERCs in protection of
consumers’ interests in their respective State. The following important
submissions were inter alia made by the representatives of the
commissions:—

122

0)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

Steps taken by the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission
to avoid major tariff hike in Delhi from 2004 onwards. The
Committee were informed that as on 31.3.2008. ie. the first
year of the Multi Year Tariff period, the T&D losses of NDPL
are around 18.5 per cent, starting from 48.1 in 2002. As
regards BRPL, the other discom, which is supplying to south
and south-west Delhi, these are around 27 per cent and in
the BYPL which started off at 57.2 per cent in 2002, it is
29.9 per cent today.

The representatives of the Orissa Electricity Regulatory
Commission informed the Committee about the power sector
reforms carried out in the State and the extent of tariff
regularisation achieved there. They further informed the
Committee that twelve Grievance Redressal Forums (GRFs)
and two Ombudsman had been appointed in the State.
Written submissions on the subject were also made by the
representatives of the State Commission.

Concern was raised by Chairman, Uttar Pradesh Electricity
Regulatory Commission to strengthen the Regulatory
Commissions in order to enable them to protect the interests
of the consumers as they had no other options but to go to
the Appellate Tribunal or Supreme Court after approaching
the Ombudsman. The Committee were also informed that
power shortage in the State was a major problem resulting
in overdrawl by the utilities.

Tariff rationalization taken up in West Bengal, the cross
subsidization and T&D losses in the State which had been
reduced from 41 per cent to 24.92 per cent were discussed
among other things.


(v) The facility of online registration of complaints made
available in Madhya Pradeesh, disposal of electricity related
disputes, inolvement of NGOs in the public hearings held
for tariff fixation and fixation of the minimum Purchase
Obligation for power utilities from renewable energy were
the main issues which came in for discussion.

(vi) Assam State Regulatory Commission informed the
Committee that the non-conventional sources of energy in
the State being promoted and power utilities are also being
encouraged to install electric meters in spite of resistance
from the consumers.

(vii) Bihar State Electricity Commission informed the Committee
about T&D losses in the State which were stated to be to
the tune of 41%. The Committee were informed that the
State Commission has asked the utilities to reduce the same
by 3% per annum. Implementation of orders regarding the
standards of performance and their adoption by the licencees
also came in for discussion.

5. The Committee were then apprised of the status of setting up
of power exchanges and trading of power in the country by the
representative of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC).
They (CERC) also felt that strict measures would have to be taken
against those States who are overdrawing from the grid and a more
severe penalty need to be imposed on them. The Committee were also
informed that discussion paper on harnessing various kinds of
renewable energy would also be issued by the Commission to the
State Governments.

6. The Members also raised several queries on the subject which
were replied to by the representatives of Ministry of Power, CERC
and SERCs, respectively.

7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

123


APPENDIX

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2008-09) HELD ON 27.1.2009

IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PHA, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1100 hours to 1150 hrs.

ANON

PRESENT
Shri Jesudasu Seelam—Iin the Chair
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

. Smt. Susmita Bauri

. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana
. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Rajya Sabha

. Dr. Bimal Jalan

8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri Sayed Azeez Pasha

10.
ll.

A
2.
3.
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri
Jesudasu Seelam, a Member of the Committee, under Rule 258(3) of

the Rule of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, to act
as Chairman for the sitting. The acting Chairman welcomed the

124

Shri Shivpratap Singh
Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT
Shri Raj Kumar — Deputy Secretary
Shri Shiv Kumar — Deputy Secretary
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary-II


Members of the Committee to the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration/adoption the following draft Reports and adopted
the same without any amendment/modifications:—

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Draft Report on the subject “Role of CERC and SERCs in
the Protection of Interests of Consumers”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on recommendations contained
in the 22nd Report of the Committee on the subject “Ultra
Mega Power Projects”.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 25th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2008-09.

Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2008-09.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned,

125


“All Feteeetey शाह dade Got Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www. parliamentofindia.nic.in’,

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”

ee