STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY

(2004-2005)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)

SIXTH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)


SIXTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2004-2005)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)

Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.4.2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.4.2005

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2005/Chatira, 1927 (Saka)


C.E. No. 151

Price : Rs. 36.00

© 2005 sy Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....

INTRODUCTION .......

PART I
CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

Analysis of Demands for Grants and Plan Budget of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources

(i) Utilization of Plan Outlay

(ii) Potential and achievement of various renewable sources
of energy

(iii) Training and Public Awareness...

(iv) Small Hydro Power

CHAPTER ता

Various programmes under Renewable Energy Sector

(i) Village Energy Security Programme (VESP)....

(ii) Urban & Industrial Waste Programme ......

(iii) Hydrogen Energy and Chemical Sources of Energy
Programme.

(iv) Biomass Gasifier Programme...

(v) Biomass Power/Co-generation Programme and National
Biogas Programme

Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Energy contained in the Report.....

PAGE

(iii)

(vy)

23
27

33
37

39

44


Aprenpix I.

Aprenpx II.

Aprenpix IIL.

Appenoix IV.

(ii)

PART वा

Statement showing the Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources. .... —

Approved 10th Plan Outlays, Budget Estimates,
Revised Estimates, Expenditure, Physical Targets
and Achievements during 10th Plan from
2002-03 to 2004-05 (as on 31.12.2004) under
various programmes. .

Minutes of the tenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Energy (2004-05) held on
23.3.2008. ....

Minutes of twelfth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Energy (2004-05) held on
11.4.2005.

Pace

66

74

79

82


23.
24.

26.

Senauewn

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2004-05)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary
Shri B. Vinod Kumar

Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

Shri Khiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Shri G. Venkataswamy

Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Kamal Akhtar

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah
Shri Bimal Jalan

(iii)


28.
29.
30.
31.

(iv)

Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Director
4. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
5. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary
6. Shri N.K. Jha — Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2005-2006) relating to the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources.

2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources on 23rd March, 2005.

3. The Committee wish to thank the representatives of the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources who appeared before the
Committee and placed their considered views. They also wish to thank
the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy for furnishing the replies on
the points raised by the Committee.

4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th April, 2005.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Deut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
19 April, 2005 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


PART I
CHAPTER 1
REPORT
Introductory

Energy is a basic input for almost all the economic activities. In
fact one of the indicators of economic growth has all along been the
per capita consumption of energy. Therefore, energy security has come
to be viewed as a factor of immense strategic importance in ensuring
all-round economic development of a nation. Fossil fuels such as coal
and petroleum, and bio fuels like wood, have been the energy sources
of the world for centuries. However, as the 20th century drew to a
close, ushering in the third millennium, there has been a growing
recognition, for more than one reasons, of the dangers inherent in
continuing with the model of economic development based on excessive
consumption of fossil fuels. Of late, world opinion has been growing
in favour of looking for alternatives to fossil fuels that would ensure
eco-friendly and sustainable development on the one hand and energy
security on the other. There was a surge of interest, commitment and
funding for developing and disseminating renewable energy
technologies and strategies in the aftermath of the first oil crisis during
the seventies. Subsequently, this interest declined due to the fall in oil
prices during the nineties. However, local and regional environmental
concerns such as air pollution, water pollution, land degradation, waste
generation and global environmental concerns such as the growth in
atmospheric concentration of the Green House Gases (GHGs) leading
to climate change have again brought renewable energy to the centre
stage. The broad goals of the Government of India under “Energy for
All’ concept assumes an increasing role for renewables, particularly
for meeting the energy needs of rural areas and for environmental
conservation. Under the influence of programmes of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol and
the need for promoting sustainable development, renewable energy
technology development and transfer and large scale funding are
projected for the future.

1.2 India is a large country with a population of around one billion.
Its population is expected to grow at a rate of about 1.6 per cent
annually and GDP growth rate is estimated to grow at over 6 per


cent, requiring an energy growth rate of 9 per cent. At present, there
is estimated peaking shortage of 13% and energy shortage is about
7.8%. The electricity demand is growing @ 8% annually in the country.
The shortage is much greater in rural areas. The present per capita
electricity consumption in India is little over 400 kwh, which is already
on a lower side and most of the consumption is in the urban areas.
Consumption of coal and petroleum fuels is projected to nearly double
by 2010. India is also projected to become an imported petroleum fuel
dependent economy. Conditions are thus compelling for India to
attempt to meet its growing energy needs in a self-reliant manner,
through renewable energy.

1.3 Recognising the relevance of renewable energy sources, the
Government of India set up in 1981 a Commission for Additional
Sources of Energy (CASE), on the lines of the Space Commission and
the Atomic Energy Commission in the Department of Science and
Technology. A year later, a separate Department of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources was created in the Ministry of Energy. Ten years later,
this was upgraded to the level of an independent Ministry. India has
thus earned the distinction of possibly being the only country in the
world to have an exclusive Ministry for Non-Conventional Energy
Sources (MNES) which has been implementing one of the world’s
largest programmes on renewable energy, like biogas, small hydro
Projects, wind, geothermal energy, solar photovoltaics, etc. spanning
the entire spectrum of technologies targeted towards all sections of the
society. The two-fold objectives of the Ministry are (i) to increase the
role of renewables in the energy sector and (ii) to reduce and mitigate
the pollution caused by conventional fossil fuels. To subserve these
objectives the Ministry functions as a catalyst, bringing into fruition
the project proposals in the renewable energy sector through a range
of policies and programmes.

1.4 Under the Allocation of Business Rules MNES has been assigned
to carry out the following activities:

* Research and development of biogas and programmes
relating to biogas units;
* Commission for Additional Sources of Energy (CASE);

* Solar energy including Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) devices and
their development, production and applications;

* All matters relating to small/mini/micro hydel projects of
and below 25 MW capacity;


* Programme relating to improved chulhas and research and
development thereof;

¢ Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA);

* Research and development of other non-conventional/
renewable sources of energy and programmes relating
thereto;

* Tidal Energy;
* Integrated Rural Energy Programme (IREP);

* Geothermal Energy.

15 Since renewable energy can be produced in a decentralized
manner, it can help to overcome the problems of distribution associated
with conventional sources of energy, especially in remote rural areas.
The significance of this is to be seen in the light of the fact that as
many as 93,347 villages in the country are un-electrified and 25,000 of
these villages are considered economically non-viable for grid connected
power. Moreover, de-electrified villages which had lost their faith in
conventional grid power could find a ray of hope through non-
conventional grid quality power. It has been proposed to electrify all
of these 25,000 remote villages and hamlets through locally available
renewable energy options like solar photovoltatics (SPV), small hydro,
biomas and hybrid systems within the next two Plan periods ie. by
the year 2012. During the 10th Plan period about 5000 unelectrified
census villages are proposed to be electrified through the Non-
Conventional Energy Sources.

1.6 The detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
18.03.2005. ‘Demand No. 65 of the Ministry under which provision
has been made for Plan and Non-Plan expenditure, consists of two
parts’, viz. Revenue Section and Capital Section for the year 2005-
2006. It contains the following figures:

(Rs. in crore)

Plan Non-Plan Total
Revenue Section 529.70 5.63 535.33
Capital Section 70.05 बन 70.05

Total 599.75 5.63 605.38



1.7 As a part of special initiative to develop the North-Eastern
Region, the Ministry has earmarked 10% of its Domestic Budgetary
Support for the North-Eastern States, including Sikkim, in its major
programmes. Special emphasis has been made to take up the
electrification of remote villages in this region.

1.8 A detailed statement showing the actual Revenue and Capital
expenditure for the year 2002-2003, Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
for 2003-2004 and Budget Estimates for 2004-2005 are given at
Appendix-I.

1.9 The details of financial outlay and physical targets &
achievements of various programmes/schemes during the 10th Five
year Plan and first three years of the Plan are given in Appendix-II.

1.10 The Committee have scrutinized the detailed Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources for the
year 2005-2006 and approve the same, subject to their observations
and recommendations which are contained in the succeeding
Chapters.


CHAPTER II

A. ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS AND PLAN BUDGET
OF THE MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES

(i) Utilization of Plan outlay

The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES) is
responsible for the promotion, development and utilization of various
new and renewable sources of energy in the country. The MNES have
presented the Demands for Grants to the tune of Rs. 605.38 crore (BE)
for the year 2005-06. The following table shows the Budget Estimates
(BE) and Actuals for the year 2003-04, Budget Estimates (BE) and
Revised Estimates (RE) for the year 2004-05 and Budget Estimates
(BE) for the year 2005-06 as under:

(Rs. in crore)
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
BE Actuals BE RE BE
Plan 624.80 375.81 599.80 400.00 599.75
N-Plan 5.35 5.51 05.47 5.47 5.63
Total 630.15 381.32 605.27 405.47 605.38

2.2 The following table shows the Budget Proposals and Physical
Target for 2005-06 in brief:

Programme BE (2005-06) Physical Target
(Rs. in crore)

1 2 3

Renewable Power 7 760 MW

Wind iF 450 MW

Biomass Co-gen 16 160 MW

Gasifier 10 (+1NE) 10 MW

2


है 1 2 3

SHP 30 (+20 NE 130 MW

Waste to Energy 15 10 MW

Remote Village Electrification 155 (+30 NE) 1400 villages/400 hamlets
Biogas 15 (+1 NE) 35000 biogas plants
Solar Photovoltaic 25 (+2 NE) 1 lakh Solar Lantern
SPV Pumps 5.00 500 SPV Water Pumps
Solar Thermal 51 (+2 NE) 3 lakh sq. m. collector areas
Renewable Energy/New 38.10 -
Technology R&D)

IREDA Equity 50.00 =

Others 99.90 (+4 NE) =

2.3 When asked about the reasons for variations between BE and
RE during the year 2004-05 and the schemes likely to be affected due
to reduced budgetary allocation during the year, the Ministry in a
written reply stated as follows:

“The reasons for the variation between BE and RE during the year
2004-05 is on account of the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) being
reduced by the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. The delay in
incurring expenditure was mainly due to the fact that the budget
for 2004-05 was approved only during August, 2004 and pending
budget approval as per vote on account no new projects could be
approved. It may also be mentioned that on account of the
directions received to align the schemes/programmes of this
Ministry with the National Common Minimum Programme
(NCMP), there was some unavoidable delay because the existing
schemes/programmes required recasting and accordingly action
could be commenced towards the close of the third quarter of the
year. An actual expenditure during 2004-05 will be about Rs. 235
crore, which is the limit set by the Finance Ministry.”

2.4 During the course of discussion, When the Committee wanted
to know about the initiatives taken by the Ministry to persuade the
Ministry of Finance not to slash the Budget at RE stage, Secretary,


Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources informed the Committee
as under:

“.. IT have made a request to the Secretary (Expenditure) and I
expect that in the month of April, he will give me time. I will sit
with him and tell him that if you are going to slash the amount
in December, at least, ask so that we could tell that these are the
sanctioned schemes which we may not be able to do. So, in the
month of April, separate discussion will take place.”

2.5 Elaborating further, one of the officials of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources also informed during the discussion as
under:

“.. 50, unilaterally or otherwise, the Ministry of Finance, because
of various constraints they also have cut down on the RE and
then this year what they have done is apart from the RE cut they
have said that not more than one-third of the RE will be spent in
the last three months. If one has to look from a wider perspective,
then I think, the more important thing is that we have to prepare
our scheme on time. We have not been doing that.”

2.6 When the Committee specifically enquired about the initiatives
being taken by the Ministry to spend equal amounts of Budget in all
quarters of the year and not to keep major portion of Budget for
spending during the last three months of the year as per the instruction
of Ministry of Finance, Secretary, Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources replied during the discussion as under:

“Sir, what we have done is that the entire items of expenditure
have been listed. I am going to prepare a brief for the discussion
with the Ministry of Finance on these lines saying that these are
the schemes which are unavoidable and that one has to spend. the
money only in the last quarter. There are big schemes. But there
are smaller ones where I personally find no reason as to why we
should not take off right from the beginning. The list is being
made. If you allow us time, I have a feeling that in the next
financial year I would be in a position to clearly indicate to the
Finance Ministry about the schemes which cannot be avoided and
for the rest of the schemes I would say that I would try my best
to see that it starts right from the beginning. This exercise is on...”

2.7 Explaining the rationale for allocating Rs. 605.38 crore (BE)
during the year 2005-06 when the actual expenditure during the year


2003-04 was Rs. 381.32 crore only and RE for the year 2004-05 was
brought down to Rs. 405.47 crore from Rs. 605.27 crore, the Ministry
replied as under:

“All renewable energy schemes/programmes have now been recast
focusing on grid interactive and distributed renewable power
systems; rural, urban, industrial and commercial applications;
research, development, demonstration and commercialization with
corresponding increase in the allocation for 2005-06.”

2.8 Elaborating on the subject further, the Secretary, Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources, stated:

“..Had the Ministry of Finance not imposed a cut after the RE
stage, we would have been able to clear another Rs. 150 crore to
Rs. 160 crore of expenditure for which proposals are already in
hand. As a result of these events, these proposals amount to
Rs. 150 crore to Rs. 160 crore would have to be met from the
Budget for next financial year. They are all pending in hand.”

2.9 The Committee note that as against the Budget Estimates of
Rs. 605.27 crore and Revised Estimates of Rs. 405.47 crore, the actual
expenditure of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
will be about Rs. 235 crore during the year 2004-05. The Committee
are not convinced with the justification given by the Ministry that
the reasons for variation between BE and RE is on account of Gross
Budgetary Support being reduced by the Ministry of Finance at the
RE stage and delay in Budget approval. The other reason that they
had to recast the existing programmes and schemes as per the
National Common Minimum programme of the new Government, is
also not convincing. The Committee understand that maximum
Budget (2004-05) was allocated for on-going schemes and Vote on
Account does not impose any restrictions on incurring expenditure
on that. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources are not utilising the funds equally in
all the quarters due to which the Ministry of Finance reduced their
allocation at RE stage from Rs. 605.27 crore to Rs. 405.47 crore and
further reduced it to Rs. 235 crore since Ministry was not permitted
to spend more than one-third of RE during the last three months.
The Committee, however, do not approve the approach of the
Ministry of Finance also that they curtailed the allocation without
consulting the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. The
Committee feel that instead of making a cut at RE stage based on
the utilisation of funds during the first two quarters of the financial


9

year, it should be the actual utilisation during the last financial
year. This would enable the Ministry of Finance to assess the real
position and provide the required budget at BE Stage to the
Ministries. The Committee approve the enhanced Budgetary allocation
of Rs. 605.27 crore for the year 2005-06 and strongly recommend that
Ministry should take initiatives to prepare and implement all their
schemes and programmes in advance and prepare a uniform
expenditure schedule spread over all quarters of the current financial
year so that Ministry of Finance may not get a chance to impose
any restriction at RE Stage. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should convey the
feelings of the Committee that Ministry of Finance must consider
the views of Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources before
curtailing the Budget Estimates of the Ministry at RE stage so that
implementation of important schemes do not suffer. The Committee
also desire that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
should also issue instructions to all concerned agencies responsible
for implementation of schemes/programmes to prepare a time-bound
programme for their implementation so that the expenditure may be
uniform in all quarters. The Committee also note that the budget of
the Ministry for the year 2005-06 has reduced as compared to BE in
the year 2003-04. Considering the fact that the Ministry has been
given the task of providing electricity to all the village households,
which are not grid connected, by 2010, the allocations to the Ministry
should have been suitable enhanced, where it has gone down.
Otherwise also, if we consider the fact that the Ministry have
outstanding liabilities to the tune of Rs. 150-160 crore, the left over
Budget with the Ministry may not be sufficient to achieve the set
targets for the year 2005-06. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that higher allocations be made at RE stage.

Gi) Potential and achievement of various renewable sources of energy

2.10 The estimated potential and the extent of exploitation for
various renewable sources of energy are given as under:—

NRSE Potential & Achievement

Potential Achievement
as on 31.12.2004

1 2,
Biogas Plants 120 lakh 37.10 lakh
Improved Chulhas 1,200 lakh 352 lakh

Wind 45,000 MW 2980 MW



10

1 2
Small Hydro 15,000 MW 1693.64 MW
Biomass Power/Co-generation 19500 MW 72753 MW
Biomass Gasifiers a 62 MW
Waste-to-Energy 2700 MW 41.98 MW
Solar Water Heating 1400 lakh sq. m. 10 lakh sq. m.

Collector Area Collector Area
Solar PV 20 MW/Sq. km 280 MWp*

‘of this 75 MWp SPV products have been exported.

2.11 However, the Ministry have decided to discontinue some of
the renewable energy programme whose BE/RE/Actuals for the years
2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 are given as under:—

(Rs. in crore)

Programme 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
BE Actuals BE RE BE
IREP 4.11 12.12 8.99 12.50 1.00
SPV Irrigation Pump 28.00 24.03 12.00 11.50 5.00
Solar PV Power 6.00 1.10 2.00 5.00 0.00
Battery Operated 4.00 1.35 4.00 2.00 2.50

Vehicles (Alternate
Fuel for Surface
Transport)

2.12 When asked about the reasons for overspending in the field
of Integrated Rural Energy Programme during the year 2003-04, the
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:

“Integrated Rural Energy Programme is a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme, which was significantly modified during the year 2003-04.
Under the modified IREP scheme, the unit of planning changed
from Development Blocks to the District. The modified scheme
included preparation of district and State level rural energy plans,
preparation and implementation of model Integrated Rural Energy


11

Projects in selected clusters of villages in the districts. The modified
scheme further included enhanced support to regional IREP
Training Centres and other technical backup units etc. The modified
scheme provided for 50:50 costs sharing between Centre and the
States as against the earlier share of 20:80. As a result of the
enhanced Central share, the Central Financial Assistance (CFA) was
increased as follows:—

(Rs. in Lakh)
CFA upto 2002-03 CFA since 2003-04
State Level IREP Cell 2.08 5.00
UT Level IREP Cell 1.06 5.00
Block Level IREP Cell 1.23 10.00

(for Districts Level IREP Cell in place
~ of Block Level IREP Cell)

Regional IREP Training Centre Funds provided 40.00
‘on case to case (Rs. 70.00 lakh
basis for Shillong)

The BE provided for the IREP during 2003-04 was based on the
provisions upto 2002-03, but with the modifications in the scheme,
the requirement was enhanced and therefore expenditure was more.
The expenditure made during 2003-04 was 50% of the sanctioned
amount, and balance 50% is yet to be released.”

2.13 Explaining the reasons for allocating the amount i.e. Rs. 1.00
crore only for IREP during the year 2005-06, while the actuals was
Rs. 12.12 crore during the year 2003-04 and the budgetary allocation
at RE stage fixed at Rs. 12.50 crore was increased from Rs. 8.99 crore

at BE stage during the year 2004-05, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

“The projection for BE in the Annual Plan 2005-06 was Rs. 35.00
crore based on the progress made in implementation of modified
IREP during 2003-04 and 2004-05. The Planning Commission
without consulting the Ministry unilaterally decided to transfer
this Centrally Sponsored Scheme to the States and informed this
decision to the Ministry in the first week of February, 2005.
Subsequently, as a result of the stand taken by the Ministry, the
Planning Commission agreed to allocate Rs. 1.00 crore for the same


12

pending further review of the scheme by them. Since the decision
of the Planning Commission was received late, it could not be
incorporated in the Demands for Grants for 2005-06. Thus, there is
no allocation made for IREP at BE stage for 2005-06 in the Demands
for Grants. The committed liabilities under IREP are of the order
of Rs. 28.00 crore as funds released to States during 2003-04 and
2004-05 were only 50% of the sanctioned CFA and balance is
required to be released based on progress made and utilization of
released CFA and the actual utilization of State share as the scheme
is implemented on a 50:50 cost sharing basis between Centre and
States. Meanwhile, the States have represented through letters sent
by the Chief Ministers to the Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission and to the Hon’ble Minister for NES that the scheme
should be continued in its present form as a Centrally sponsored
scheme during 10th Plan period.”

2.14 Specifying the reasons for non-allocation and reduced allocation
of funds for Solar PV Power and SPV Irrigation Pump Programme
respectively during the year 2005-06, the Ministry stated as under:

“Grid interactive installed SPV power system costs are around
Rs. 25 crore/MW. Moreover, such plants are not capable of
supplying electricity more than 1600 hrs./annum at peak rate
equivalent. Accordingly, the cost of power generated from such
power plants are of the order of Rs. 12-15 per kWh, which is high
compared to the conventional power. It has been decided to
discontinue support for grid interactive SPV power plants for the
aforesaid reasons. The spill over financial liabilities towards ongoing
projects may have to be met from some other head of account of
Photovoltaic Programme. Similarly, promotion of SPV Pumping
Systems for individuals users is being discontinued. It has been
decided to deploy SPV Pumps for community applications only.
Further, the subsidy on SPV Pumping Systems may also being
reduced. With these change in the Programme, a reduced physical
target of 500 SPV pumps has been proposed for 2005-06.
Accordingly, lower budget estimates have been proposed.”

2.15 It is mentioned in the Performance Budget (2005-06) that the
Ministry now have decided to discontinue the support to Battery
Operated Vehicles (BOVs) and will now support research, development
and demonstration of hybrid electric vehicles during 2005-06. When
asked about the reasons for discontinuation of and the cumulative
amount spent on BOVs programme after continuing it for more than
10 years, the Ministry stated as under:


13

“The Programme on Alternative Fuel for Surface Transportation
which includes BOVs is being continued during 2005-06. The
Programme comprises research & development and demonstration
of vehicles for surface transportation using alternate fuels. An
expenditure of Rs, 14.88 crore has so far been incurred since 1994-
95 on R&D projects and deployment of 161 battery-operated
vehicles (buses/mini buses, three-wheelers and passenger cars) in
15 States and three Union Territories.”

2.16 During the course of evidence, the Committee made an
observation that some renewable energy systems/devices are being
installed by the independent private bodies. When the Committee
enquired about the status of the private initiatives in the renewable
energy sector, Secretary, Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
informed the Committee as under:

“..I pointed out to my colleagues that when they talk of
achievement, they should not just talk about achievement because
there is something happening outside. One can say that biomass,
gasifiers can be used for thermal as well as electrical applications.
1 do not have the exact figures. I have reason to believe that 40
megawatt equivalent of thermal system have been already installed
in the ceramic industry in Gujarat. What happens under the
achievement column is an end estimate of what must be happening
outside. I do not want to say very much more. One of ways to
gauge success of our efforts is to see how much it gets done
outside the Ministry’s domain. The gasifier seems to be a very
definite step into the future.”

2.17 Elaborating further, the Secretary, Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources stated:

Ihave told the officers in the States and nodal agencies not to
shudder by this. You must also see what is happening outside.
Now, there is a great deal of happening outside. In fact, if you
look at it, we are not mentioning it. One or another thing has
taken place on its own. Similarly, biomass is likely to progress in
that direction. T am only saying that there is a fair indication that
we must now start looking at the activities outside our domain so
that we get a total picture.”

2.18 The Committee find that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources/Planning Commission have decided to transfer IREP
to State Governments and discontinue some of the other programmes


14

like SPV pumping systems for individuals, SPV power plants and
Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs) due to various reasons. The
Committee are surprised to note that Planning Commission has
unilaterally decided to transfer IREP, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme
to the States without consulting the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources. This has been done at the stage when the Centre's
committed liabilities under IREP are of the order of Rs. 28 crore
pertaining to years 2003-04 and 2004-05 and the Scheme had been
recast recently raising Central assistance from 20% to 50%. The
Committee feel that the Scheme should have been thoroughly
examined at that point of time instead of taking piece-meal decisions.
Now that the States have represented to the Planning Commission
and the Ministry to continue this scheme in the same form, the
Committee desire that the Scheme should be reviewed in its entirety
to decide all the matters and to ensure that the Scheme shall achieve
its desired goal.

2.19 The Committee further note that Ministry have also decided
to discontinue SPV power plants, SPV irrigation pumps for
individual and Battery Operated Vehicles during the year 2005-06 on
account of relatively high capital costs when compared to
conventional power systems. The Committee note that 2.80 MW
capacity SPV Power Plants, 6452 Nos. of SPV Irrigation pumps for
individuals and 161 BOVs have already been installed/deployed at
present. The Committee are, therefore, concerned about the fate of
operation, maintenance and upkeeping of these installed/deployed
systems and also about fulfilling the financial liabilities towards the
ongoing projects under these programmes. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should make specific arrangements for
the operation, management and upkeeping of the installed and
deployed systems so that they complete their designed life and
achieve the targets set for them and also recommend that the Ministry
should meet the financial liabilities of on-going projects under the
above-said programmes. The Committee feel that the performance
of these schemes and programmes could not give desired results
due to failure of the Ministry in reducing the cost of SPV module
and their new experiment in the field of Battery Operated Vehicles.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that R&D efforts of the
Ministry should now be focused on the reduction of SPV module
cost to at least one-half of current level. The Committee also desire
that the Ministry should make intensive efforts to see to it that the
equipment related to solar energy e.g- SPV system based on silicon
etc. are manufactured indigenously. The Committee specifically desire


15

that the Government should orient their R&D efforts towards
development of non-silicon solar voltaic systems on the pattern of
development of similar system in other parts of the world. At the
same time, R&D efforts should also be reoriented towards hybrid
vehicles in place of Battery Operated Vehicles.

2.20 The Committee note that India has been implementing one
of the largest renewable energy Programmes in the world. It has
formulated and implemented a large diversity of renewable energy
technologies such as wind, solar, biogas, biomass, small hydro and
many new technologies such as hydrogen energy, chemical sources
of energy including fuel cell energy, bio-fuels, etc. However, the
penetration of renewables is far less as compared to the potential
despite several innovative policies and measures used to promote
them. The reason is not beyond the comprehension of the Committee.
There are some renewable sources of energy like solar energy which
is abundantly available but the technology has not yet achieved
maturity. On the other hand, there are some renewable technologies
like wind power, biomass gasifiers, small hydro power having high
potentials of 45000 MW, 16000 MW and 15000 MW respectively and
are matured and proven and have reached commercialisation stage.
Yet these are unable to make any remarkable impact in the field of
renewable energy sector, As by the end of the year 2004, it is possible
to achieve only 2980 MW of wind energy, 62 MW of biomass gasifier
and 1693.64 MW of small hydro power. The Committee feel that
now it is the higher time to analyse and understand the significance
of renewables and the impact of policies and measures on their
penetration and performance. It is the opinion of the Committee
that technologies at different stages of development need different
sets of policies and programmes. Research, development and
demonstration are required for new emerging technologies which
are in the demonstration phase like SPV, hydrogen energy, fuel cell
energy, biofuels, etc. for cost reduction and high performance. On
the other hand, commercialisation and private sector’s involvement
are required for technologically mature and proven sources which
have reached the commercialisation phase like small hydro, wind
power, solar water heating system, biomas gasifier, etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that various renewable energy
resources pertaining to various programmes should be prioritised in
the light of the technological advancement and their potentialities
and allocate the higher budget for their advancement accordingly.
Massive campaign is also required for these types of technologies to
increase public awareness which alone would be helpful in increasing


16

the demand for renewable energy systems and devices. The
Committee also desire that Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources should persuade all the State Governments to amend their
building bye-laws and municipal laws to make it compulsory to
install solar water heating system in all the high rise buildings as
has been done in the States of Maharashtra and Karnataka.

2.21 The Committee note that in addition to efforts being made
by the Government agencies, renewable energy systems/devices are
also being installed and run through the private initiatives in
different parts of the country. For example 40 MW equivalent of
biomas power for thermal use has already been installed in ceramic
industry in Gujarat without taking any assistance from the
Government bodies. The Committee hope that similar other
renewable systems have been established. The Committee are
surprised to note that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have not tried to collect vital information about the
contribution of such independent initiatives being made in various
parts of the country in renewable energy sector. It will be vital
input for future planning. The Committee have a view that inclusion
of energy produced out of such important initiatives may add
significant quantity while compiling achievements in renewable
energy sector. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should take all initiatives to collect
vital information relating to the production of power from new and
renewable energy sources by independent agencies and also
incorporate and consider this data in preparation of present and
future planning relating to Non-Conventional Energy sector in the
country. The Committee desire that for this purpose they must take
the help of Non-Conventional Energy Sources officers in the States
and nodal agencies concerned with this sector.

(iii) Training and Public Awareness

2.22 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources are helping
the promotion of renewable energy for wider acceptance and creation
of awareness of the various Renewable Energy Programmes. This is
being achieved by information dissemination and training of manpower
and organisation of seminars/symposia, workshops, conferences and
short-term training programmes. Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have been providing financial assistance to Government/Semi-
Government/ financial and technical institutions /Non-Governmental
Organisations for organisation of national and international seminars/


17

conferences, short duration awareness campaigns, etc. in order to
facilitate interaction between all concerned and dissemination of
knowledge for effective development and promotion of renewable
energy programmes in the country. The Ministry have allocated
Rs. 35.00 crore for Information and Publicity and Rs. 2.00 crore for
training during the year 2005-06.

2.23 During the course of presentation before the Committee, the
Ministry have informed that they had initiated the following steps for
creating awareness.

¢ 20th August has been declared as “Rajiv Gandhi Akshya
Urja Diwas” to create mass awareness

* Release of special postage stamp on renewable energy

* Three major conferences organised with states on power,
rural and urban applications

* District Advisory Committee have been set up to oversee
implementation of renewable energy programmes at district
level

¢ Bi-monthly News Letter “Akshay Urja” has been released
in Hindi & English for wider circulation

* Pamphlets have been published and booklets are being
finalized to provide information on renewable energy
technologies and applications

* Renewable Energy Centres at state level for demonstration
and training

* Mobile Exhibition Vans
District Advisory Committee for Renewable Energy

2.24 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources are
constituting “District Advisory Committees on Renewable Energy” in
order to ensure the participation of various district level functionaries
in popularising the use of renewable energy systems & devices among
the common people.

2.25 The Committee will be headed by the District Collector/
Deputy Commissioner while the Project Director of the District Rural
Development Agency or Chief Executive Officer of Zila Parishad could
be its Member Secretary. Its membership will comprise of district


18

officers belonging to allied departments, such as Forests, Industries,
Agriculture, Information Technology, Education, Health, etc., District
Bar Council or Government Pleader, Lead Bank, selected Non-
Governmental Organisations, Rotary Club, Lions Chub, local industries
associations, scientists, opinion makers and local leaders, etc. At least
six members of the Committee will be women. The DAC will also
include 4-6 members nominated by the Members of Parliament in
respective districts. The Committee is expected to meet once in three
months and will send reports to the Ministry through the State Nodal
Departments/State Nodal Agencies.

Objectives

2.26 The main objectives of the DAC would be to create awareness
about various renewable energy devices and systems appropriate for
a given district. The terms of references of the DAC will include (i) To
support Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources in planning and
coordination of various renewable energy programmes and creation of
mass awareness in the district on a continuing basis; (ii) To suggest
mechanism for formulation and implementation of village energy plans
and programmes to cover remote and forest fringe villages for
electrification through renewable energy systems; (iii) To coordinate
and integrate implementation of various renewable energy programmes
in the district and suggest measures for accelerated progress; (iv) To
review achievements made under different programmes and suggest
corrective measures; if any; and (v) To organise and monitor post-
installation servicing of renewable energy divices/systems installed in
the district and to safeguard interests of the public and consumer. The
response from all the districts is very encouraging.

2.27 So far 400 MP’s have nominated about 1200 members for
these committees. Twenty Five States have issued notifications for
setting up of DACs in each district and consequently 375 DACs have
been setup in the country. The DACs in all districts are expected to be
setup by end of March 2005.

2.28 During the course of evidence, when the Committee desired
to know about the representation of the Zila Parishad in DACs, the
Secretazy, Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources stated as
under:

“It was suggested by our Minister that to start with, the
Committee should start functioning under the Collector. Once it
starts, people start getting used to it. We have to make
improvement a little later.”


19

2.29 On the issue of greater involvement of the staff working in
DACs, and making the Committees more responsive, the Secretary,
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, assured the Committee
during the course of discussion as under:

“..we would be sending a team of officers as soon as the Budget
Session is over. Nowadays, the Parliament is in Session and it is
very difficult for us to engage our officers in some other work. We
will try to send our team in every State. We will discuss this
matter with Energy Development Agency. One is our officers will
sit there and try to sort out the procedural difficulties. There are
States, which have already started functioning on this. Now, at
this stage, I would assure this august Committee that this situation
is likely to be improved in a couple of months.”

2.30 When asked about the tie-ups with ITIs to impart requisite
technical training to students to prepare a pool of trained personnel to
provide technical assistance to the users of various renewable systems
in the far flung areas, the Ministry replied as under:

“The Ministry provides support to State nodal agencies for
organizing technical training programmes by various institutions
at the State and the regional levels including ITIs. From last year
AMC coverage for SPV systems has been increased to 5-10 years
so that the responsibility of maintenance is that of the
manufacturers/suppliers. Further, in regard to biogas plants, users
training courses and free maintenance warranty for three years are
being provided.”

2.31 The Committee note that the country is implementing diverse
renewable energy technologies like wind, solar and biomass energy.
However, there is a lack of awareness amongst the public at large
about the utility of these sources and hence their proper utilisation.
The Ministry have informed that they have been providing financial
assistance to a number of Governmental and Non-Governmental
Organisations to disseminate knowledge for effective development
and promotion of renewable energy programmes. The Ministry
further informed the Committee that they are also constituting
District Advisory Committees to ensure the participation of district
level functionaries in the popularisation and use of renewables. A
number of functions have been assigned to DACs for the purpose.

The Committee feel that apart from the various steps taken by
the Ministry for popularisation of the renewals, there is a need to


20

bring awareness amongst students also by introducing the subject
in there curriculum. The Committee feel that apart from providing
awareness amongst the students it can also provide technical
manpower to install, operate and maintain the various systems of
renewable energy. The Committee therefore recommend that the
Ministry should take up the matter with AITEC and various
Education Boards to do the needful.

2.32 The Committee welcome the recently taken initiative by the
Government to form “District Advisory Committees (DACs) on
Renewable Energy” for the popularisation of renewable systems/
devices amongst the rural masses. The Committee, however, note
that DACs have been established in 400 districts of the country but
actually only 315 are functioning. The Committee desire DACs should
also be established in all the remaining districts of the country during
the shortest possible time. The Committee desire that the Government
should take the help of Public representatives, if necessary, for timely
formation of these committees in the districts where they have not
been formed. The Committee also recommend that the Central
Government should issue broad guidelines for these committees and
provide each State and adequately trained staff for periodic updating
of the data and continuous review of performance of various
renewable energy programmes at district levels. The Committee
specifically desire that the Government should develop a better
mechanism for closer coordination with States and district level
agencies for implementation of schemes relating to development of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

(iv) Small Hydro Power

2.33 This Ministry is also responsible for the exploitation of small
hydro power since the year 1989. The country has a small hydro power
(projects of upto 25 MW capacity) potential of about 15000 MW. So
far, 514 projects with an aggregate capacity of 1693.94 MW have been
installed. Besides, 159 projects with a capacity of 488 MW are under
implementation. The database of SHP projects created by Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources now includes 4,233 potential sites
with an aggregate capacity of 10,324 MW. An average capacity addition
of about 100 MW per year from small hydro projects is being achieved.
The Ministry made a resolve to add 2000 MW which is 2% of the
total addition of 10,000 MW by 2012 A.D. which is likely to be
overachieved. During the first three years i.e. 2002-05 of the Tenth
Five Year Plan, the Ministry have performed well in this sector.


21

Rs. 69.53 crore have already been spent out of the Revised Estimates
of Rs. 69.73 crore and they have achieved 254 MW out of the total
Tenth Plan target of 600 MW.

2.34 As regards the physical achievements in the small hydro sector,
the representatives of the Ministry elaborated during the course of
evidence as under:

“... it is like this. We have a target of 100 MW per year and we
have achieved 102 MW. We have cumulatively achieved 224 MW,
as has been mentioned here. This figure pertain to 30.12.2004. As
on date the achievement is 266 MW. We hope that by 31 March,
it will be 270 MW. For the coming year, i.e., 2005-06, our target is
130 MW. So, that makes it 400 MW. For the final year, the target
is 200 MW. I do not think, it would be achieved. It would only
be 150 MW or so. So, what we would achieve is 550 MW. However,
with your permission, I would like to add that our target of
600 MW emanated from the fact that we propose to add two per
cent to the additional capacity in the Tenth Plan. That two
percentage figure is being maintained and would be crossed, if we
achieve 550 MW.

2.35 The Committee find that the energy from Small Hydro Power
is the most reliable of all renewable energy sources which can
provide electricity for the rural, remote areas and hilly terrain in our
country in a cost effective and environmentally benign manner. Small
Hydro upto 3 MW was transferred to the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources during 1989. Ten years later, with effect
from 29th November, 1999, the small hydro power between 3-25 MW
were also brought under the purview of this Ministry. Within this
short span of time, the Ministry have been able to achieve
1693.94 MW out of the total hydro power potential of 15000 MW in
our country. Now, the Ministry have set a target of 600 MW to be
achieved by the end of the Tenth Five Year Plan ic. by the year
2007 A.D. and 2000 MW by the year 2012 A.D. During the first three
years of the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Ministry could achieve
254 MW with an expenditure of Rs. 69.53 crore, achieving cent-per-
cent utilisation. This shows that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources have now got the requisite skill, strength and
capabilities to install, operate and maintain even the Mega Hydro
Projects. Considering the fact that hydro power in itself is the most
important renewable source of energy, the Committee strongly
recommend that all the projects, including mega hydro power


22

projects, should be brought under the control of the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources. The Committee desire that this
matter should be taken up at the highest level in consultation with
the Ministry of Power and the outcome of the discussions should be
conveyed to the Committee within three months of the presentation
of the Report.


CHAPTER III
VARIOUS PROGRAMMES UNDER RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR
(i) Village Energy Security Programme (VESP)

At present, 80% of the total rural energy consumption comes from
non-conventional energy in the form of traditional biomass such as a
fuelwood, animal dung and agro wastes used for cooking and heating
at very low efficiencies. Technologies have now been developed and
tried out which can convert biomass into different forms of energy in
an efficient and cost effective manner. It is, therefore, thought that it
should now be possible to think in terms of a programme for providing
people in the villages the opportunity to progressively become free
from energy insecurity. Such a programme will extend beyond the
concepts of oil security or rural electrification per se as generally
understood.

Aims & Objectives

3.2 The objective of the village energy security programme is to
go beyond mere electrification through meeting the entire energy needs
of a village of cooking, lighting and motive power, with full
participation of the local community, including women. The projects
would generate local employment, thus improving the quality of life
by raising economic standards of the village community.

Scope

3.3 Test projects on village energy security are being taken up to
demonstrate the techno-economic parameters, provide operational
experience, mobilize local communities and firm up the institutional
arrangements. The test projects would be undertaken in remote villages
and hamlets, where grid extension is either not cost-effective or feasible,
within an emphasis on forest fringe and tribal villages.

Activities
3.4 The activities envisaged under these projects are:

(i) Identification of village/hamlet; (ii) Preparation of a Village
Energy Plan, including assessment of resources, energy

23


24

services required and configuration of energy production
systems; (iii) Formation of a Village Energy Committee; (iv)
Creation of a Village Energy Fund; (v) Plantations and
installation of energy production systems; (vi) Operation &
maintenance; (vii) Capacity building including training. The
energy production systems would comprise biogas
plants based on dung or leafy biomass, biomass gasifiers
coupled to 100% producer gas engines and biofuel run
pumpsets.

Implementation/Monitoring Strategy:

3.5 The test projects would be undertaken by a Village Energy
Committee duly constituted by the Panchayat, and facilitated by
implementing agencies such as District Rural Development Agencies
(DRDAs), forestry departments and NGOs, with overall coordination
and monitoring by the State Nodal Agencies.

Funding/Financing:

3.6 90% of the capital cost of the test projects would be met through
a Central grant, subject to a benchmark of Rs. 20,000/- per beneficiary
household for meeting the total domestic and community energy
requirements. The balance 10% towards the capital cost would be
mobilized by the community/implementing agency/State Nodal
Agency. The village energy security projects would evolve village-level
planning and implementation in order to meet the total energy
requirements of the village mainly through local renewable resources.
The energy services are to be owned and maintained by the village
community. The projects involve active community participation and
have considerable potential for local employment generation. The
Ministry has so far received 237 preliminary proposal from 14 States.
Of these, 95 proposals have been short-listed for preparation of detailed
proposals for the test projects, including 41 proposals from forest
departments, 41 from NGOs, 10 from DRDAs and 3 from tribal
development agency. 36 detailed proposals have so far been forwarded
to the Ministry. A total 200 projects are proposed to be taken up
initially in the test phase. A number of these are likely to be completed
during 2005-06. An amount of Rs. 20 crore has been proposed for the
village energy security test projects under the budget provision for the
RVE programme.


25

3.7 When asked about the different sources of financing the scheme,
the Ministry replied:

“Tt has been estimated that a village energy security test project
for a typical village of 100 households would require a capital
investment of about Rs. 20 lakhs. In addition, a sum of Rs. 8 lakhs
per village is required for meeting the implementation, coordination
and monitoring costs. 90% of the capital cost of the test projects,
subject to a benchmark of Rs. 20,000/- per household would be
met through a Central grant, and the balance 10% would be
mobilized by the community/implementing agency/State Nodal
Agency (SNA) or through MPLAD/MLALAD funds.”

3.8 As regards the details of operation, maintenance and
sustainability mechanism of the projects installed, under the VESP, the
Ministry replied as under:-

“The village energy security test projects would be set up by the
village community, which will-also be responsible for their
operation/management. The implementing agencies (DRDA/Forest
Department/NGO) would help them in setting up the projects
and their maintenance for a certain period after commissioning
through suitably trained local youth. The responsibility for
operation/management would subsequently be undertaken by the
Village Energy Committee. These services could also be leased out
to an entrepreneur. The Village Energy Committee will determine
and collect the user charges for the energy services, which will be
used towards operation, maintenance and management costs of
the projects. Availability and sustainability of the biomass resources
would be ensured through plantations of fast growing tree species
and oil-bearing plants raised by the Jocal community.”

3.9 Informing about the different mode of renewable energy
systems/technologies applied to provide energy security under VESP,
the Ministry replied as under:-

“The configuration of energy systems in a village energy security
test project would depend on availability of local resources and
the energy requirements of the community. An appropriate
technology mix will be selected from available biomass conversion
technologies such as:-

* Improved cookstoves

* Biogas plants using cattle dung, tree based organic
substrates, vegetable wastes, kitchen wastes, etc.


26

* Biomass Gasifiers coupled with 100% gas engines or dual
fuel engines run on bio-fuels in lieu of diesel.

* Stationary diesel engines run on straight vegetable oils or
bio-diesel.”

3.10 The Committee are happy to note that Village Energy
Security Programme is being launched by the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources to meet the total energy requirements
of all the villages, including cooking, lighting and motive power
with full participation of the local communities including women.
The Government have decided to set up 200 project in the test phase.
This programme is mainly based on the use of biomass. The test
projects would be undertaken mainly through the biomass which is
abundantly available even in remote villages and hamlets, where
grid connection is either impossible or not cost-effective, with an
emphasis on forest fringe and tribal villages on 90:10 cost sharing
basis between Centre and Community/implementing agencies/State
Nodal Agencies. During the year 2005-06, it is proposed to allocate
an amount of Rs. 20 crore under the budget provision for Remote
Village Electricity Programme. The Committee feel that to make this
programme a success, it is necessary to assess all the needs of the
villages selected and resources available and then develop a suitable
technology package to meet the total energy needs in a sustainable
and financially viable way. There is a need to evolve strategy for
village level planning and implementation also. The Committee,
therefore, desire that simultaneous initiatives be taken in these
directions. Another point which needs to be considered is that
feedstock needs to be grown to ensure sustainable supply. There are
land tenural problems also which should be taken on prioirty basis.
Tribal and the residents of forest fringe areas are difficult to reach
and converse because of difficult topography and also languages.
They are also averse to outsiders and also to new technologies. The
Ministry, therefore, should take cautious steps while approaching
them. Absence of community institutions will be a major problems
for this programme because this programme depends heavily on
Village Energy Committee for their operations and management. The
village energy committee may also be the victims of groupism and
internal bickering. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
also take this very important point into account before entrusting
accountability on any committees or organisations. The Committee
hope and trust that the Ministry will be able to overcome all the


27

problems associated with the scheme through their Research and
Development (R&D), field demonstration and capacity building
programme.

(ii) Urban & Industrial Waste Programme

3.11 It is estimated that about 30 million tonnes of solid waste and
about 4400 million cubic metres of liquid waste are generated in India
every year, This estimate is based on the database prepared for 299
Class-I cities and 36 Class-II cities. Most of these wastes find their
way into land and water bodies without proper treatment, leading to
problems of environmental pollution with adverse effect on public
health. A potential for generating about 1700 MW of power from
urban/municipal wastes [1450 MW from Municipal Solid Wastes (MSW)
and 250 MW from Municipal Liquid Wastes (Sewage)] and about 1000
MW from various industrial wastes (both solids and liquids) has been
estimated for the country Waste-to-Energy projects, especially those
for MSW, are a relatively new concept in India and state-of-the-art
technologies in general are not indigenously available. The technologies
of biomethanation of sewage and industrial waste are well established,
but those for municipal solid wastes are still under demonstration
phase,

3.12 Indicative costs of projects based on different technologies are
given below:

Technology Cost/MW (Rs./Crore)
° Combustion/ Incineration 6-7
. Gasification/ Pyrolysis 8-10
° Biomethanation
° Industrial waste 4-6
. Urban waste 10-12

3.13 Projects based on industrial wastes are generally commercially
viable because of the lower installation costs, captive use of the
generated biogas/power and negligible cost of raw material. The
viability of projects based of MSW, on the other hand, is critically
dependent on the price realized for generated energy/other bye-
products, cost of disposal of the rejects/residual waste, etc.

3.14 The Ministry has been implementing two programmes for
recovery of energy from Urban and Industrial wastes. National


28

Programme on Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial wastes
and UNDP/GEP assisted Project on ‘Development of High Rate
Biomethanation Processes as means of Reducing Green House Gases
Emission.

3.15 The National Programme on energy Recovery from Urban &
Industrial wastes, launched during the year 1995-96, has the following
objectives.

* To promote setting up of projects for recovery of energy
from wastes of renewable nature from Urban and Industrial
sectors; and

* To created conducive conditions and environment, with fiscal
and financial regime, to develop demonstrate and
disseminate utilisation of wastes for recovery of energy.

* To develop and demonstrate new technologies on waste-to-
energy through R&D projects and pilot plants.

3.16 The scheme is applicable to private and public sector
entrepreneurs and organisations as well as Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs) for setting up of waste-to-energy projects on
the basis of Build, Own & Operate (BOO), Build, Own, Operate and
Transfer (BOOT), Build, Operate & Transfer (BOT) and Build Operate
Lease & Transfer (BOLT). It is being implemented through State Nodal
Agencies, who forward the Detailed Project Reports, received from the
promoters, to Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources along with
their recommendations in respect of financial, managerial and technical
capabilities of the promoters and on assured availability of waste
materials on a long term basis (over 10 years) for operating the project
smoothly.

3.17 The BE, RE and actual expenditure since the year 2000 under
the Programme on Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial Wastes
are as follows:

(Rs. in lakhs)
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure
2000-01 2000 800 800
2001-02 1500 1500 1435
2002-03 2000 1100 1100
2003-04 1400 704 434.69
2004-05 1500 1000 442"

“up to March 15, 2005.


29

3.18 When asked about the reasons for variations between BE/RE
and actual, the Ministry replied as under:

“Variations in BE/RE and actual expenditure have mainly been on
account of the following factors. Under this Programme
considerable time is required for project development, financial
closure and implementation. Sustained efforts have to be made for
creating awareness among the municipalities and in industry,
motivating entrepreneurs; and, convincing financial institutions, in
view of perceived risks. Even after the sanction of the projects,
funds cannot be released on account of delay in signing of various
agreements for supply of waste, land lease, power purchase and
obtaining necessary statutory clearances, etc.”

3.19 Physical targets and achievements since the year, 2000 are as
follows:

Year/Plan Physical, Mega Watts

Target Achievement
2000-01 10.00 1.00
2001-02 10.00 5.55
2002-03 10.00 3.75
2003-04 10.00 15.50
2004-05 10.00 4.00"

“up to March 15, 2005

3.20 As regards the variations in physical targets and achievements,
the Ministry replied as under:-

“The variation between targets and achievements is mainly on
account of delays in project development, financial closure and
statutory clearances and implementation. Also in view of long
gestation, completion of projects has not been possible in the year
of the sanction. The physical and financial targets for the 10th
Plan period are 80 MW and Rs. 125.00 crore respectively. An
achievement of 23.25 MW has been made with an expenditure of
Rs. 19.67 crore against RE of Rs, 28.04 crore during the first three
years of the 10th plan period. The Ministry is in the process of
providing renewed thrust for acceleration of this programme.
However, the targets fixed for the 10th Plan period are not likely
to be achieved.”


30

3.21 As regards, the motivational/promotional steps taken by the
Ministry to enthuse Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and industries including
PUSs and corporate bodies to opt for such schemes, the Ministry stated
as under:—

“Ministry has been providing financial support and incentives for
setting up of waste to energy projects, demonstration as well as
commercial projects, to promoters, State Nodal Agencies, Urban
Local Bodies and Financial Institutions. These include funds for
awareness creation, training, preparation of projects reports,
workshops/seminars, etc. Two National conferences—(a) Workshop
on National Master Plan on Waste to Energy in April, 2004 and
(b) Conference on Renewable Energy for Urban Areas in September,
2004 were organised to motivate stakeholders for promotion of
energy recovery from wastes.”

3.22 When asked about the details of the thrust areas identified by
the Ministry in this sector and the various steps undertaken by the
Ministry, the Ministry replied as under:—

“Ministry is giving thrust for promotion of projects for recovery of
energy from urban wastes in all the cities and wastes from
industries which have a large potential for recovery of energy such
as distilleries, food and fruit processing industries, pulp & paper
and sugar industries, poultry, slaughterhouse, and tannery wastes,
etc. A National Master Plan has been prepared and is under
finalisation for the overall development of this sector, with a
perspective upto 2017.”

3.23 Details of the three completed projects on MSW are given as
under:

5 MW municipal solid waste (MSW) based project at Lucknow:
The project based on biomethanation technology has been executed by
M/s Asia Bioenergy Pvt. Ltd. (ABIL), Chennai on Build, Own, Operate
and Maintenance basis in association with Lucknow Nagar Nigam
(LNN) who are responsible for supply of required quality and quantity
of MSW at the plant site.

6 MW MSW based power plant at Vijaywada: The project based
on combustion technology has been executed by M/s Sriram Energy
Systems (P) Ltd., Hyderabad by availaing a soft loan from Technology
Development Board (Department of Science and Technology) and Indian
Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA). Total MSW treated
was around 50,000 Metric tonnes.


31

6 MW Municipal Solid waste project at Hyderabad: It was
commissioned in November 2003 by M/s SELCO International and is
running successfully. This project has generated 28 million units of
electricity till December 2004 by treating around 1 million metric tonnes
of MSW since inception.

3.24 A vist to 6 MW capacity MSW based power plant and RDF
preparation plant based on MSW installed by M/s SELCO International
at Hyderabad was made by the members of the Parliamentary
Committee on Energy during 17-18th October, 2004. Officials of Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources and State Government
accompanied the Parliamentary Committee. The Committee appreciated
the initiative taken by M/s SELCO International in treating the MSW
of Hyderabad City by way of installation of these plants.

3.25 The Committee have noted that he quantity of garbage
generated in the city of Mumbai is about 8000 metric tonnes per day
and the same is collected and transported every day to the dumping
grounds. The Municipal Corporation of Mumbai had finalised and
awarded three waste to energy projects in the year 1999. But this
could not start due to delay in clearance from Maharashtra Electricity
Regulatory Commission. These projects are still under review. They
have started work on appointment of Consultant for the study of
waste composition as well as to give advise in selecting the most
techno economically suitable processing technologies for disposal of
waste as well as long term scientific management of the dumping
ground/land fill sites.

3.26 The Committee note that as against the projected target of
80 MW under the Urban and Industrial Waste Programme during
the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Ministry has been able to achieve
23.25 MW during the first three years of the Plan period with an
expenditure of Rs. 19.67 crore. After analysing the utilisation of funds
under this programme, the Committee find that there are major
slippages during 2003-04 and 2004-05. During 2003-04 they could spent
only Rs. 4.34 crore against R.E. of Rs. 7.04 crore and during 2004-05
they have spent Rs. 4.42 crore only upto 13.3.2005 against the R.E. of
Rs. 10 crore. The Committee are not satisfied with the justification
given by the Ministry about the poor utilisation of fund allocated
for this project. The Committee find that the factors mentioned by
the Ministry like delay in signing various agreements for supply of
wastes, land lease, power purchase, obtaining statutory clearances
and delay in project development etc. for delay in implementing of
programme simply show the lack of proper efforts on the part of
the Ministry. With this type of casual approach, it does not seen
possible to achieve the targets set for the Tenth Five Year Plan. The
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should adopt a


32

multiprong approach to achieve the financial and physical targets of
Tenth Plan. The Committee desire that single window clearance
system should be developed to obtain clearances in a time-bound
manner. The Committee specifically desire that the Ministry should
finalise the National Master Plan for development of waste to energy.
They also desire that R&D efforts should be expedited for reduction
in cost of power production from Municipal waste. The Committee
would also like time-bound initiatives to modify financial support
scheme which is under review to give a major fillip to this
programme. The Committee may be apprised of the efforts’
undertaken by the Ministry and outcome thereof.

3.27 The Committee note that as per database prepared for
299 Class-I cities and 36 Class-II cities, it is estimated that more
than 30 million tonnes of solid waste and 4400 million cubic meters
of liquid waste are generated every year in the urban areas of the
country. There is a potential for generating about 1700 MW of power
from urban/Municipal wastes. The Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources had launched the National Programme on Energy
Recovery from Urban and Industrial waste during the year 1995-96.
But the Committee are sorry to note that no significant progress has
been made so far particularly in the field of energy from Municipal
Solid Wastes. Only three projects have been commissioned in the
field of power production from Municipal Solid Waste. These project
are situated at Lucknow (5MW), Vijaywada (6MW) and Hyderabad
(6MW). The Committee had an opportunity to visit one of such
projects situated at Hyderabad. The Committee are impressed and
appreciate the initiative taken by M/s SELCO International in treating
the Municipal Solid Waste of Hyderbad City by installation of
6 MW capacity MSW based power plant and RDF preparation plant
based on MSW. The Committee also have an information that in
the metro cities of Delhi and Mumbai and some other cities like
Vijaywada, Municipal bodies are willing to establish similar Waste-
to-Energy projects/plants. As an initial step, segregation of wastes
has already started. The Committee desire that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should prepare similar promising
projects for all the major cities where huge quantity of solid waste
is generated. For this purpose, they should provide the required
technologies and expertise to all the interested promoters in
consultation with State Government authorities and experts. The
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should give
all possible subsidies/incentive to the promoters interested in such
projects. The Committee also note that the state-of-art technologies
for energy projects for Municipal waste in general are not available
in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should take all the initiatives to make the state-of-
art technologies for such projects indigenously available.


33

(iii) Hydrogen Energy and Chemical Sources of Energy Programme

3.28 In recent years Hydrogen has been receiving worldwide
attention as a clean and efficient energy carrier with a potential to
replace liquid fossil fuels. Significant progress has been reported by
several countries including India in the development of hydrogen
energy as an energy carrier and an alternative to fossil fuels.

3.29 Hydrogen is colourless, odourless, tasteless and flammable
gaseous substance having highest energy content to the order of 120.7
Kilo Jouless/gram. Hydrogen can be used for a wide range of
applications including power generation and vehicular transport.
Hydrogen can be used either directly in IC engines or through fuel
cells for production of motive power and electricity. A fuel cell is an
electrochemical devise that converts energy into electricity and heat
without combustion. Fuel cell systems generally operate on pure
hydrogen and air to produce electricity with water and heat as the
only by-products. Fuel cells are modular in construction and their
efficiency is independent of size. Fuel cells are emerging as a clean
and fuel-efficient technology for stationary and portable applications.
Fuel cells can be potentially used in domestic, industrial, transport
and agricultural sectors and also in remote areas for reliable power
supply. A budgetary provision of Rs. 7.00 crore has been made for the
Hydrogen Energy during 2005-06 while only Rs. 0.70 crore could be
spent during the year 2003-04 and Rs. 2.00 crore was allocated at BE/
RE stage during the year 2004-05. Similarly Rs. 8.00 crore has been
made for the Chemical Sources of Energy programme during the year
2005-06 while only Rs. 0.37 crore could be utilised duirng 2003-04 and
Rs. 2.00/3.00 crore were allocated at B.E./R.E. stage during the year
2004-05.

3.30 When asked about the reasons for enhanced allocation of
budget of Rs. 7.00 crore Hydrogen Energy during the year 2005-06
while Rs. 0.70 crore only could be utilised during the year 2003-04,
the Ministry in their reply stated:—

“Hydrogen energy programme is in the initial stages of
development. This being a new area of technology it takes
considerable time to develop technically viable proposals; therefore,
the expenditure on hydrogen energy was low in 2003-04. During
2004-05 the expenditure so far is Rs. 1.30 crores. With a view to
accelerate progress in developing hydrogen energy as a fuel,
Ministry has set up National Hydrogen Energy Board consisting


34

of high level representation from Government, industry, academic
and research institutions and other experts. The Board has had
two meetings and has set up a Steering Committee under
Shri Ratan Tata to prepare a National Hydrogen Energy Road Map.
Based on the deliberations of the Board so far it is proposed to
significantly expand the activities of the hydrogen energy and fuel
cell programme for which initially a provision of Rs. 7.0 crore has
been made for hydrogen R&D and demonstration activities. Some
of the major activities proposed during 2005-06 include (i) R&D
on hydrogen production from renewable methods, development of
different types of solid state storage methods and improvements
in IC engine vehicles and generators involving industry etc., (ii)
Development and demonstration of hydrogen powered IC engine
vehicles-Buses and three wheelers etc. and (iii) Setting up of a
Hydrogen demonstration facility at Solar Energy Centre of the
Ministry.”

3.31 Similarly, extending the reasons for enhanced allocation of
budget of Rs. 8.00 more during 2005-06 for Chemical Sources of Energy
while Rs. 0.37 crore could be utilised during the year 2003-04 the
Ministry stated:—

“The programme on Chemical Sources of Energy, which deals with
development of fuel cell technology, is in the initial stages of
development. Being a new technology area, it takes considerable
time to development technically feasible proposals and therefore
the expenditure on Chemical Sources of Energy was low during
2003-04. During 2004-05 the expenditure upto 15.03.2005 is Rs. 1.096
crores. The fuel cell allocation has been enhanced on account of
the formation of National Hydrogen Energy Board and their allied
activities as mentioned in the proceeding para. During 2005-06 a
budgetary provision of Rs. 8.00 crore has been made for R&D and
demonstration activities. Some of the major activities proposed
during 2005-06 include (i) R&D on various aspects of fuel cells
including development of materials, components, sub-systems,
reformers, fuel cell stacks and fuel cell systems for both power
generation and transport applications, (ii) Improvements in fuel
cell vehicles and power packs involving industry etc., (iii) Setting
up of a Nodal Centre for the development of Fuel Cell Technologies
and (iv) Setting up of a Fuel Cell Demonstration Facility at the
Solar Energy Centre of the Ministry.”


35

3.32 As regards the thrust areas identified by the Government for
R&D on hydrogen and chemical sources of energy, the Ministry replied
as under:—

“The thrust areas identified for the programmes on Hydrogen
Energy include R&D on various aspects of hydrogen energy
including its production, mainly through non-hydrocarbon methods,
storage of hydrogen in solid state materials and development of
applications of hydrogen through combustion route including use
in vehicles. Ministry is holding consultations with various research
groups and industry to develop proposals on different aspects of
R&D and demonstration in hydrogen energy. The thrust areas
identified for the programmes under Chemical Sources of Energy
include R&D on various aspects of fuel cells, including development
of materials, components, subsystems, reformers, fuel cell stacks
and fuel cell systems. It has been decided to set up a National
Hydrogen Energy Board for both the programmes. The Board has
constituted a Steering Committee to prepare National Hydrogen
Energy Road Map, which will identify specific thrust areas,
technology gaps and set up targets to be achieved and programmes
to be developed to achieve these goals. It is expected that the
implementation of the Road Map would result in the accelerated
development of hydrogen energy technologies suitable for the
country.”

3.33 Elaborating the merits and demerits of the hydrogen energy
over the other New Technologies being pursued by the Government,
the Ministry informed as under:—

“Under the New Technology programme development is being
supported in (i) hydrogen energy, (ii) chemical sources of energy-
mainly fuel cells, (iii) electric vehicles and (iv) bio-fuels. Fuel cells
require hydrogen as a fuel. Therefore, among these options (i)
hydrogen and fuel cells and (ii) bio-fuels can be considered for
both decentralized power generation as well as in transport
applications, Hydrogen is available in abundance. It is found in
water, biomass and hydrocarbons. However, it is not found as an
independent gas in the atmosphere. At present, hydrogen is being
produced as a part of the process in fertilizer and petroleum
refining industries. Hydrogen is produced as a by-product in chlor-
alkali industry. At present, it is considered necessary to support
development of all new technology options and take up
demonstration in vehicles and power generation. Since the


36

programmes on hydrogen energy and chemical sources of energy
are still in the development stages, it would be desirable to pursue
all the options which are suitable for the country.”

3.34 The Committee observe that Hydrogen is one of the most
important environmentally benign renewable sources of energy
having the higher energy content and is abundantly available. It is
also observed that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
have been supporting a broad based programme on Research and
Development (R&D) and demonstration for over a decade a various
aspects of hydrogen energy which includes, inter alia, its production
mainly through non-hydrocarbon methods, storage in solid state
materials and its utilisation as fuel. Institutions like IITs, CSIR
laboratories and industrial and governmental organisations are
actively involved in the promotion, development and utilisatioin of
hydro-energy through these programmes with much enthusiasm.
Furthermore, the Ministry have set-up a National Hydrogen Energy
Board (NHEB) to prepare Energy Road Map to integrate and co-
ordinate the national efforts on different aspects of hydrogen and
fuel cell technologies. The Committee note that during the last three
financial years, the budget had not been utilised. However,
considering the fact that this is a new and emerging technology, the
Committee feel that there is a need to show progress in R&D sector.
In view of the above mentioned efforts, the Committee hope and
support the enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs. 7.00 crore and
Rs. 8.00 crore during the year 2005-06 for the hydrogen and chemical
sources of energy respectively. The Committee, however, feel that
this budget should be used for further research to develop clean
and low cost hydrogen generation techniques from renewable sources,
to make storage methods, especially solid-state methods more
efficient, compact and its safe transport and delivery at different
places keeping in view of the different need and requirement and
difficult terrain of the country. Research should also incorporate the
development of standards, codes and regulations to address our
concerns about safety and security. To achieve all these objectives
expeditiously in a time-bound manner, the Committee recommend
that National Hydrogen Energy Board should expedite the process
of preparation of National Hydrogen Energy Road Map by
identifying thrust areas, strengthening the various national level
Research and Development efforts and by defining the goals and
preparing the action plans accordingly. The Committee also desire
that the Government should make sincere efforts for international
tie-ups in the field of Hydrogen energy to take advantage of R&D
work being undertaken in other parts of the world in this field.


=

37

3.35 The Committee observe that the Programme on Alternate
Fuel for Surface Transportation which includes research and
development and demonstration of Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs)
using alternate fuels was launched during 1994-95, Till now, the
Ministry have been successful in deployment of 161 BOVs (buses/
mini-buses, three-wheelers and passenger-cars) in 15 States and three
Union Territories at the cumulative expenditure of Rs. 14.88 crore.
Now, during the year 2005-06, it has been decided by the Ministry
to replace this programme by hybrid electric vehicle programme.
Rs. 2.50 crore has been allocated for this programme during the year
2005-06. The Committee welcome this step of improvement. However,
they are of the view that one of the major limitations of the existing
vehicles using lead-acid batteries is the limited driving range of the
vehicle per charge of the battery. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should make all efforts to develop
and deploy newer types of rechargeable batteries having higher
capacity at lower costs through focussed R&D efforts.

(iv) Biomass Gasifier Programme

3.36 Biomass can be converted into gaseous form through the
gasification route. Biomass gasifiers convert solid biomass materials
such as wood, agricultural and agro-industrial waste etc. into producer
gas through thermo-chemical gasification process. A physical target of
10 MW equivalent biomass gasifier systems has been fixed and
Rs. 10.00 crore (BE) has been allocated for the same during the year
2005-06. During 2003-04, Rs. 2.69 crore only out of the budgetary
allocation of Rs. 4.00 crore could be utilised and during the year
2004-05. Rs. 11.00 crore was allocated at the BE stage which was further
reduced to Rs. 5.00 crore at the RE stage.

3.37 The activities under the Biomass Gasifier Programme are:

*

Supporting /facilitating development demonstration and
commercialization of technologies in biomass gasification for
various end-uses.

Supporting/facilitating R&D on gasification, producer gas
engines, and related activities.

Support to demonstration projects for 100% indigenously
developed and manufactured producer gas engines coupled
with gasifiers for power generation.


38

* Support to and enlargement of these activities, through
awareness creation, publicity measures, seminars/

workshops/business meets/training programmes etc.

3.38 The details of physical and financial achievements for the last
3 years and present financial year are given below:-

A. PHYSICAL (in MW)

2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
(upto Feb. 05)

Target Achiev. Target Achiev. Target Achiev. Target Achiev.

7 W.2 10 2.07 5 48 10 8.33

B. FINANCIAL {in Crores of Rupees)

2001-02 2002-03 2003-4 2004-05
(upto Feb. 05)

BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual

6.0/6.70 6.95 5/35 3.69 4/220 2.69 11/5.0 3.48

3.39 The Committee noted that only an amount of Rs. 2.69 crore
was used during 2003-04. Similarly, as against the BE of Rs. 11 crore
and RE was kept as Rs. 5 crore during 2004-05. When the Committee
wanted to know about the justification for allocating Rs. 10 crore during
2005-06, the Ministry replied as under:—

“During 2003-04, the financial achievement in biomass gasifier
programme was affected due to delay in completion of village
electrification projects in the North-Eastern States, whose component
in the target was around 50%. The biomass gasifier projects in
North-Eastern States were delayed due to difficult site conditions.
The difference in BE/RE and actual expenditure during 2002-03
was because of a mandatory cut imposed by Ministry of Finance.
During 2004-05, the different between BE and RE was primarily
on account of the fact that a number of planned initiatives such
as a scheme for installation of biomass gasification in engineering
colleges as an educational tool, setting up of 4 regional biomass
gasification testing centers, etc. could not be taken up for a variety
of reasons. The allocation at RE stage has been further reduced
due to restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance.”

ase


39

3.40 The Committee note that during the last several years, the
Ministry has not been able to utilize the amount allocated for the
Biomass gasifier programme. This shows the lack of proper attention
by the Government on such an important programme. The Committee
are of the view that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
should be more specific in identifying the reasons for under
achievements in the physical and financial field and then pursue
their case on sound footing with the Ministry of Finance so that
they may not be able to impose financial cut on the Biomass Gasifier
Programme during the current financial year. The Committee,
however, find that the target fixed for the programme is quite low
particularly when the biomass generation potential is of the order
of 19,500 MW and the technology to harness them is quite mature.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should fix
higher targets and allocate more budget for the Biomass gasifier
programme from the next financial year so that the abundantly
available biomass resources may be harnessed expeditiously in a
time bound manner. To get better results, the Committee desire that
the Government should provide more incentives to Village Panchayats
interested in Biomass Gasifiers Programme.

(v) Biomass Power/Co-generation Programme and National Biogas
Programme

3.41 Biomass Energy and Co-generation Programmes is being
implemented with the main objective of promoting technologies for
optimum use of country’s biomass power generation potential estimated
at 19,500 MW, including 3,500 MW of exportable surplus power from
bagasse based co-generation in sugar mills. During 2003-04, the actual
utilisation was Rs. 11.95 crore against the BE of Rs. 17.65 crore. The
BE/RE for the year is Rs. 14.54 crore/Rs. 2.54 crore. Now, a budgetary
provision of Rs. 16.00 crore for the year 2005-06 has been kept for the
programme.

3.42 The major activities under the Biomass Power/Co-generation
Programme are given below:

(i) Promotion of technologies of co-generation, specifically
including bagasse based cogeneration in sugar mills, and
direct biomass utilization for megawatt scale electricity
production.

(ii) Development of a Biomass Resource Atals based on biomass
resource assessment studies in different regions of the
country.


40

(iii) Support to R&D for the development of technologies such
as Advanced Biomass Gasification and applications research
for enhancement of potential in identified areas of thrust.

(iv) Support to promotional activities such as awareness creation,
publicity measures, seminars/workshops/business meets etc.

3.43 The details of physical and financial achievements for the last
3 years and present financial year are given below:

A. Physical (in MW)

2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 (upto Feb. 05)

Target Achiev. Target. Achiev. + ‘Target_—Achiey. Target Achiev.

80 89 100 102.63 125 129,50 125 126.1

B. Financial (in Crore of Rupees)

2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 (upto Feb. 05)
BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual BE/RE Actual

15.00/21.75 21.75 —19.28/16.78 1678. 180016500.. ‘11.95 1454/1254 «5.78

3.44 When asked about the justifications for allocating Rs. 16.00
crore during the year 2005-06, when the actuals during the year
2003-04 was Rs. 11.95 crore only and the BE of Rs. 14.54 crore which
is reduced to Rs. 12.54 crore at RE stage during the year 2004-05, the
Ministry stated as under:

“The difference in actual expenditure and the RE figures during
2003-04 was primarily on account of withholding release of financial
assistance to many mature biomass power/cogeneration projects
at the end of the financial year in Karnataka due to cancellation
of signed PPAs by the State Government. Similarly during
2004-05, the actual expenditure is less than the BE and RE as this
issue could not be resolved and also on account of the unforeseen
cut/restriction imposed by the Ministry of Finance.”

3.45 As regards the hindrances faced by the developers to exploit
the targeted potential, the Ministry replied as under:

“The main constraints faced by the developers in exploitation of
the targeted potential of biomass power/cogeneration are:

asian


4

(i) Difficulties in obtaining loans for cogeneration projects on
account of poor creditworthiness of most sugar mills, especially
cooperative. Since the cooperative sugar mills form a significant
component of the sugar sector in the country, their inability to
install cogeneration facilities results in a significantly lower
exploitation of potential. (ii) Near obsolescence of a large number
of sugar mills in the country. Many old sugar mills have small
capacities which are lower than even the minimum economic
capacity specified by the Government. These mills neither have
the financial resources nor sufficiently long crushing periods which
would make their optimum cogeneration projects viable. (iii)
Availability of adequate quantity of biomass. Adequate availability
of biomass for grid interactive power generation has been a
problem in some areas. (iv) Non-fixation of attractive preferential
tariff, wheeling and banking rates and third-party sale rates in
some potential States has led to under exploitation of the potential.
There are a few reports that project promoters are not being paid
in time for the electricity supplied by them in some States.”

National Biogas Programme

3.46 The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has been
promoting family type biogas plants since 1981-82 with objectives:

(i) to provide clean and affordable source of biogas energy,

(ii) to produce and use enriched organic manure,

(iii) to develop management systems for using digested slurry
for value added products,

(iv) to improve sanitation and hygiene by attaching toilets with
biogas plants,

(v) to mitigate drudgery of women and girl children; and

(vi) to generate employment in rural areas.

3.47 A cumulative total of 36.70 lakh plants have been set up in
the country, against an estimated potential of about 120 lakh plants.
The reported achievement during the financial year 2004-05 till
December 2004 is around 43,593 against the annual target of 1 lakh
plants.

3.48 The Programme is being implemented through State nodal
departments and agencies and Khadi and Village Industry Commission
besides a few Non-Governmental Organisations: One of the main


42

components of the programme is to create awareness and impart
training for construction and maintenance of various models of biogas
plants. In many States Village Panchayats and Local Bodies such as
Mahila Mandals and Yuvak Kendras are actively associated for such
activities.

3.49 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources was able to utilise Rs. 11.95 crore only
out of the Budget Estimates of Rs. 18 crore and Revised Estimates
of Rs. 16.50 crore the Biomass Power/Co-generation programme
during the year 2003-04. Similarly, during the year 2004-05 only,
Rs. 5.78 crore could be utilised (upto February 2005) out of Rs. 14.54
crore of B.E. and Rs. 12.54 crore. One of the reasons as extended by
the Ministry, for the difference in actual expenditure and Revised
Estimates during the year 2003-04, was that the financial assistance
was withheld at the end of the financial year due to cancellation of
the signed Power Purchase Agreements by the State Government of
Karnataka. Unfortunately, the issue was not resolved immediately
and the actual utilisation during the year 2004-05 also got affected.
As a result of which, the difference between RE and actuals increased
from Rs. 4.55 crore during the year 2003-04 to Rs. 6.76 crore during
the year 2004-05. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should go into the details of the reasons for the
cancellation of PPAs signed by the State Government of Karnataka
and settle the problem once for all. The Committee also desire that
preventive measures should be taken to stop such cancellations in
future so that the actual utilisation of the allocated fund is not
affected.

3.50 The Committee have noted that the Biomass power/Co-
generation programme are being implemented by the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources to exploit the estimated potential
of 19,500 MW including 3,500 MW of exportable surplus power from
bagasse-based Co-generation in sugar mills. As on 31.12.2004, 727.53
MW which includes 473.03 MW from bagasse Co-generation and
290.50 MW from biomass combustion projects have been set up in
the country. This accounts for only 3.7 per cent of the total assessed
potential of 19,500 MW. The Committee feel that the Ministry are
not making much headway in harnessing the huge potential of
biomass. Analysing the various problems associated with the
programmes, the Committee further noted that Co-generation projects
are unable to obtain loans from the various financial institutions on
account of poor financial position of most sugar mills especially Co-


43

operative. Inadequate availability of biomass for the power projects
are the other major problems. Sometimes, the project promuters are
not paid in time for the electricity supplied by them in some States.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
make all out efforts to rectify all these problems by convincing the
various financial institutions to provide loans on softer terms to
sugar mills, especially the Co-operatives; promoting energy plantation
having fast growing and high energy density biomass, giving
directions to all potential States to issue attractive preferential tariff,
wheeling and banking rates and third party sales and to pay in for
their outstanding dues for the electricity supplied by them. The
Government should, consider a Single Window Clearance System for
sugar factories intending to start co-generation projects. The
Committee may be apprised of the various efforts made and resultant
outcome thereof.

3.51 The Committee observe that as against the estimated
potential of 120 lakh Biogas plants only 36.70 lakh plants have been
set up in the country. The Ministry has not been able to achieve the
targets set during the year 2003-04 and 2004-05. The Committee note
that in some States, Village Panchayats and Local Bodies are being
associated with such activities. The Committee desire that
Government should ensure more and more participation of these
bodies in setting up of biogas plants to spread public awareness in
the region. The Committee also desire that suitable tie-ups should
be done with Dairy Organisations to harness the full potential.

New Deut; GURUDAS KAMAT,
19 April, 2005 _ __ Chairman,

29 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.


STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
CONTAINED IN THE REPORT

91.00. Reference Conclusions /Recommendations
Para No. of
the Report
1 2 3
1 29 The Committee note that as against the

Budget Estimates of Rs. 605.27 crore and
Revised Estimates of Rs. 405.47 crore,
the actual expenditure of the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
will be about Rs. 235 crore during the
year 2004-05. The Committee are not
convinced with the justification given
by the Ministry that the reasons for
variation between BE and RE is on
account of Gross Budgetary Support
being reduced by the Ministry of
Finance at the RE stage and delay in
Budget approval. The other reason that
they had to recast the existing
programmes-and schemes as per the
National Common Minimum
programme of the new Government is
also not convincing. The Committee
understand that maximum Budget
(2004-05) was allocated for on-going
schemes and Vote on Account does not
impose any restrictions on incurring
expenditure on that. The Committee
strongly feel that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources are not
utilising the funds equally in all the
quarters due to which the Ministry of
Finance reduced their allocation at RE
stage from Rs. 605.27 crore to Rs. 405.47

44


45

3

crore and further reduced it to Rs. 235
crore since Ministry was not permitted
to spend more than one third of RE
during the last three months. The
Committee, however, do not approve
the approach of the Ministry of Finance
also that they curtailed the allocation
without consulting the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources. The
Committee feel that instead of making
a cut at RE stage based on the
utilisation of funds during the first two
quarters of the financial year it should
be the actual utilisation during the last
financial year. This would enable the
Ministry of Finance to assess the real
position and provide the required
budget at RE Stage to the Ministries.
The Committee approve the enhanced.
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 605.27 crore
for the year 2005-06 and strongly
recommend that Ministry should take
initiatives to prepare and implement all
their schemes and programmes in
advance and prepare a uniform
expenditure schedule spread over all
quarters of the current financial year
so that Ministry of Finance may not get
a chance to impose any restriction at
RE Stage. The Committee also desire
that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources should convey the
feelings of the Committee that Ministry
of Finance must consider the views of
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources before curtailing the Budget
Estimates of the Ministry at RE. stage
so that implementation of important
schemes do not suffer. The Committee



46

2.18

also desire that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should
also issue instructions to all concerned
agencies responsible for implementation
of schemes/programmes to prepare a
time-bound programme for their
implementation so that the expenditure
may be uniform in all quarters. The
Committee also note that the budget of
the Ministry for the year 2005-06 has
reduced as compared to BE in the year
2003-04. Considering the fact that the
Ministry has been given the task of
providing electricity to all the village
households, which are not grid
connected, by 2010, the allocations to
the Ministry should have been suitably
enhanced, where it has gone down.
Otherwise also, if we consider the fact
that the Ministry have outstanding
liabilities to the tune of Rs. 150-160
crore, the left over budget with the
Ministry may not be sufficient to
achieve the set targets for the year
2005-06. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that higher
allocations be made at RE stage.

The Committee find that the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources/
Planning Commission have decided to
transfer IREP to State Governments and
discontinue some of the other
programmes like SPV pumping systems
for individuals, SPV power plants and
Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs) due
to various reasons. The Committee are
surprised to note that Planning
Commission has unilaterally decided to



47

3

2.19

transfer IREP, a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme to the States without consulting
the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources. This has been done at
the stage when the Centre’s committed
liabilities under IREP are of the order
of Rs. 28 crore pertaining to years
2003-04 and 2004-05 and the Scheme
had been recast recently raising Central
assistance from 20% to 50%. The
Committee feel that the Scheme should
have been thoroughly examined at that
point of time instead of taking piece-
meal decisions. Now that the States
have represented to the Planning
Commission and the Ministry to
continue this scheme in the same form,
the Committee desire that the Scheme
should be reviewed in its entirety to
decide all the matters and to ensure
that the Scheme shall achieve its desired
goal.

The Committee further note that
Ministry have also decided to
discontinue SPV power plants, SPV
irrigation pumps for individual and
Battery Operated Vehicles during the
year 2005-06 on account of relatively
high capital costs when compared to
conventional power systems. The
Committee note that 2.80 MW capacity
SPV Power Plants, 6452 Nos. of SPV
Irrigation pumps for individuals and
161 BOVs have already been installed/
deployed at present. The Committee
are, therefore, concerned about the fate
of operation, maintenance and
upkeeping of these installed/deployed



48

systems and also about fulfilling the
financial liabilities towards the ongoing
projects under these programmes. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should make specific
arrangements for the operation,
management and upkeeping of the
installed and deployed systems so that
they complete their designed life and
achieve the targets set for them and
also recommend that the Ministry
should meet the financial liabilities of
on-going projects under the above-said
programmes. The Committee feel that
the performance of these schemes and
programmes could not give desired
results due to failure of the Ministry in
reducing the cost of SPV module and
their new experiment in the field of
Battery Operated . Vehicles. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
R&D efforts of the Ministry should now
be focused on the reduction of SPV
module cost to at least one-half of
current level. The Committee also desire
that the Ministry should make intensive
efforts to see to it that the equipment
related to solar energy e.g. SPV system
based on silicon etc. are manufactured
indigenously. The Committee
specifically desire that the Government
should orient their R&D efforts towards
development of non-silicon solar voltaic
systems on the pattern of development
of similar system in other parts of the
world. At the same time, R&D efforts
should also be reoriented towards
hybrid vehicles in place of Battery
Operated Vehicles.



49

3

2.20

The Committee note that India has been
implementing one of the largest
renewable energy programmes in the
world. It has formulated and
implemented a large diversity of
renewable energy technologies such as
wind, solar, biogas, biomass, small
hydro and many new technologies such
as hydrogen energy, chemical sources
of energy including fuel cell energy, bio-
fuels, etc. However, the penetration of
renewables is far less as compared to
the potential despite several innovative
policies and measures used to promote
them. The reason is not beyond the
comprehension of the Committee. There
are some renewable sources of energy
like solar energy which is abundantly
available but the technology has not yet
achieved maturity. On the other hand,
there are some renewable technologies
like wind power, biomass gasifiers,
small hydro power having high
potentials of 45000 MW, 16000 MW and
15000 MW respectively and are matured
and proven and have reached
commercialisation stage. Yet these are
unable to make any remarkable impact
in the field of renewable energy sector.
As by the end of the year 2004, it is
possible to achieve only 2980 MW of
wind energy, 62 MW of biomass gasifier
and 1693.64 MW of small hydro power.
The Committee feel that now it is the
high time to analyse and understand
the significance of renewables and the
impact of policies and measures on
their penetration and performance. It is
the opinion of the Committee that
technologies at different stages of



50

2.21

development need different sets of
policies and programmes. Research,
development and demonstration are
required for new emerging technologies
which are in the demonstration phase
like SPV, hydrogen energy, fueld cell
energy, biofuels, etc. for cost reduction
and high performance. On the other
hand, commercialisation and private
sector’s involvement are required for
technologically mature and proven
sources which have reached the
commercialisation phase like small
hydro, wind power, solar water heating
system, biomas gasifier, etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
various renewable energy resources
pertaining to various programmes
should be prioritised in the light of the
technological advancement and their
potentialities and allocate the higher
budget for their advancement
accordingly. Massive campaign are also
required for these types of technologies
to increase public awareness which
alone would be helpful in increasing
the demand for renewable energy
systems and devices. The Committee
also desire that Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should
persuade all the State Governments to
amend their building bye-laws and
municipal laws to make it compulsory
to install solar water heating system in
all the high rise buildings as has been
done in the States of Maharashtra and
Karnataka.

The Committee note that in addition
to efforts being made by the



St

3

Government agencies, renewable energy
systems/devices are also being installed
and run through the private initiatives
in different parts of the country. For
example 40 MW equivalent of biomas
power for thermal use has already been
installed in ceramic industry in Gujarat
without taking any assistance from the
Government bodies. The Committee
hope that similar other renewable
systems have been established. The
Committee are surprised to note that
the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources have not tried to collect
vital information about the contribution
of such independent initiatives being
made in various parts of the country
in renewable energy sector. It will be
vital input for future planning. The
Committee have a view that inclusion
of energy produced out of such
important initiatives may add
significant quantity while compiling
achievements in renewable energy
sector, The Committee, therefore, desire
that Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources should take all
initiatives to collect vital information
relating to the production of power
from new and renewable energy
sources by independent agencies and
also incorporate and consider this data
in preparation of present and future
planning relating to Non-Conventional
Energy sector in the country. The
Committee desire that for this purpose
they must take the help of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources officers in
the States and nodal agencies concerned
with this sector.



52

3

2.31

2.32

The Committee note that the country
is implementing diverse renewable
energy technologies like wind, solar and
biomass energy. However, there is a
lack of awareness amongst the public
at large about the utility of these
sources and hence their proper
utilisation. The Ministry have informed
that they have been providing financial
assistance to a number of Governmental
and Non-Governmental Organisations
to disseminate knowledge for effective
development and promotion of
renewable energy programmes. The
Ministry further informed the
Committee that they are also
constituting District | Advisory
Committees to ensure the participation
of district level functionaries in the
popularisation and use of renewables.
A number of functions have been
assigned to DACs for the purpose.

The Committee feel that apart from the
various steps taken by the Ministry for
popularisation of the renewals, there is
a need to bring awareness amongst
students also by introducing the subject
in there curriculum. The Committee feel
that apart from providing awareness
amongst the students it can also
provide technical manpower to install,
operate and maintain the various
systems of renewable energy. The
Committee therefore recommend that
the Ministry should take up the matter
with AITEC and various Education
Boards to do the needful.

The Committee welcome the recently
taken initiative by the Government to



33

ba

3

2.35

form “District Advisory Committees
(DACs) on Renewable Energy” for the
popularisation of renewable systems/
devices amongst the rural masses. The
Committee, however, note that DACs
have been established in 400 districts
of the country but actually only 315 are
functioning. The Committee desire
DACs should also be established in all
the remaining districts of the country
during the shortest possible time. The
Committee desire that the Government
should take the help of Public
representatives, if necessary, for timely
formation of these committees in the
districts where they have not been
formed. The Committee also
recommend that the Central
Government should issue broad
guidelines for these committees and
provide each State and adequately
trained staff for periodic updating of
the data and continuous review of
performance of various renewable
energy programmes at district levels.
The Committee specifically desire that
the Government should develop a
better mechanism for closer
coordination with States and district
level agencies for implementation of
schemes relating tq development of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

The Committee find that the energy
from Small Hydro Power is the most
reliable of all renewable energy sources
which can provide electricity for the
rural, remote areas and hilly terrain in
our country in a cost effective and
environmentally benign manner. Small



54

Hydro upto 3 MW was transferred to
the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources during 1989. Ten years
later, with effect from 29th November,
1999, the small hydro power between
3-25 MW were also brought under the
purview of this Ministry. Within this
short span of time, the Ministry have
been able to achieve 1693.94 MW out
of the total hydropower potential of
15000 MW in our country. Now, the
Ministry have set a target of 600 MW
to be achieved by the end of the Tenth
Five Year Plan i.e. by the year 2007 A.D.
and 2000 MW by the year 2012 A.D.
During the first three years of the Tenth
Five Year Plan, the Ministry could
achieve 254 MW with an expenditure
of Rs. 69.53 crore, achieving cent-per-
cent utilisation. This shows that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have now got the requisite skill,
strength and capabilities to install,
operate and maintain even the Mega
Hydro Projects. Considering the fact
that hydro power in itself is the most
important renewable source of energy,
the Committee strongly recommend
that all the projects, including mega
hydro power projects, should be
brought under the control of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources. The Committee desire that this
matter should be taken up at the
highest level in consultation with the
Ministry of Power and the outcome of
the discussions should be conveyed to
the Committee within three months of
the presentation of the Report.



3.10

The Committee are happy to note that
Village Energy Security Programme is
being launched by the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources to meet
the total energy requirements of all the
villages, including cooking, lighting and
motive power with full participation of
the local communities including
women. The Government have decided
to set up 200 project in the test phase.
This programme is mainly based on the
use of biomass. The test projects would
be undertaken mainly through the
biomass which is abundantly available
even in remote villages and hamlets,
where grid connection is either
impossible or not cost-effective, with an
emphasis on forest fringe and tribal
villages on 90:10 cost sharing basis
between Centre and Community/
implementing agencies/State Nodal
Agencies. During the year 2005-06, it is
proposed to allocate an amount of
Rs. 20 crore under the budget provision
for Remote Village Electricity
Programme. The Committee feel that to
make this programme a success, it is
necessary to assess all the needs of the
villages selected and resources available
and then develop a suitable technology
package to meet the total energy needs
in a sustainable and financially viable
way. There is a need to evolve strategy
for village level planning and
implementation also. The Committee,
therefore, desire that simultaneous

initiatives be taken in these directions.
.



56

3

10.

3.26

Another point which needs to be
considered is that feedstock needs to
be grown to ensure sustainable supply.
There are land tenural problems also
which should be taken on prioirty basis.
Tribal and the residents of forest fringe
areas are difficult to reach and converse
because of difficult topography and also
languages. They are also averse to
outsiders and also to new technologies.
The Ministry, therefore, should take
cautious steps while approaching them.
Absence of community institutions will
be a major problems for this
programme because this programme
depends heavily on Village Energy
Committee for their operations and
management. The village energy
committee may also be the victims of
groupism and internal bickering. The
Committee desire that the Ministry
should also take this very important
point into account before entrusting
accountability on any committees or
organisations. The Committee hope and
trust that the Ministry will be able to
overcome all the problems associated
with the scheme through their Research
and Development (R&D), field
demonstration and capacity building
programme.

The Committee note that as against the
projected target of 80 MW under the
Urban and Industrial Waste Programme
during the Tenth Five Year Plan, the
Ministry has been able to achieve
23.25 MW during the first three years



57

of the Plan period with an expenditure
of Rs. 19.67 crore. After analysing the
utilisation of funds under this
programme, the Committee find that
there are major slippages during
2003-04 and 2004-05. During 2003-04
they could spent only Rs. 4.34 crore
against R.E. of Rs. 7.04 crore and during
2004-05 they have spent Rs. 4.42 crore
only upto 13.3.2005 against the R.E. of
Rs. 10 crore. The Committee are not
satisfied with the justification given by
the Ministry about the poor utilisation
of fund allocated for this project. The
Committee find that the factors
mentioned by the Ministry like delay
in signing various agreements for
supply of wastes, land lease, Power
Purchase, Obtaining Statutory clearances
and delay in project development etc.
for delay in implementing of
programme simply show the lack of
proper efforts on the part of the
Ministry. With this type of casual
approach, it does not seem possible to
achieve the targets set for the Tenth
Five Year Plan. The Committee,
therefore recommend that the Ministry
should adopt a multiprong approach to
achieve the financial and physical
targets of Tenth Plan. The Committee
desire that single window clearance
system should be developed to obtain
clearances in a time-bound manner. The
Committee specifically desire that the
Ministry should finalise the National
Master Plan for development of waste
to energy. They also desire that R&D
efforts should be expedited for
reduction in cost of power production



58

I.

3.27

from Municipal waste. The Committee
would also like time-bound initiatives
to modify financial support scheme
which is under review to give a major
fillip to this programme. The
Committee may be apprised of the
efforts undertaken by the Ministry and
outcome thereof.

The Committee note that as per
database prepared for 299 Class-I cities
and 36 Class-II cities, it is estimated
that more than 30 million tonnes of
solid waste and 4400 million cubic
meters of liquid waste are generated
every year in the urban areas of the
country. There is a potential for
generating about 1700 MW of power
from urban/Municipal wastes. The
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources had launched the National
Programme on Energy Recovery from
Urban and Industrial waste during the
year 1995-96. But the Committee are
sorry to note that no significant
progress has been made so far
particularly in the field of energy from
Municipal Solid Wastes. Only three
projects have been commissioned in the
field of power production from
Municipal Solid Waste. These project
are situated at Lucknow (5MW),
Vijaywada (6MW) and Hyderabad
(6MW). The Committee had an
opportunity to visit one of such project
situated at Hyderabad. The Committee
are impressed and appreciate the
initiative taken by M/s SELCO
International in treating the Municipal
Solid Waste of Hyderbad City by



59

a

12.

installation of 6 MW capacity MSW
based power plant and RDF
preparation plant based on MSW. The
Committee also have an information
that in the metro cities of Delhi and
Mumbai and some other cities like
Vijaywada, Municipal bodies are willing
to establish similar. Waste-to-Energy
projects/plants. As an initial step,
segregation of wastes has already
started. The Committee desire that
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources should prepare similar
promising projects for all the major
cities where huge quantity of solid
waste is generated. For this purpose,
they should provide the required
technologies and expertise to all the
interested promoters in consultation
with State Government authorities and
experts. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Government
should give all possible subsidies/
incentive to the promoters interested in
such projects. The Committee also note
that the state-of-art technologies for
energy projects for Municipal waste in
general are not available in the country.
The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Government
should take all the initiatives to make
the state-of-art technologies for such
projects indigenously available.

The Committee observe that Hydrogen
is one of the most important
environmentally bening renewable
sources of energy having the higher
energy content and is abundantly
available. It is also observed that the



Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources have been supporting a board
based programme on Research and
Development (R&D) and demonstration
for over a decade a various aspects of
hydrogen energy which includes, inter-
alia, its production mainly through non-
hydro-carbon methods, storage in solid
state materials arid its utilisation as fuel.
Institutions like IITs, CSIR laboratories
and industrial and governmental
organisations are actively involved in
the promotion, development and
utilisation of hydro-energy through
these programmes with much
enthusiasm. Furthermore, the Ministry
have set-up a National Hydrogen
Energy Board (NHEB) to prepare
Energy Road Map to integrate and co-
ordinate the national efforts on different
aspects of hydrogen and fuel cell
technologies. The Committee note that
during the last three financial years, the
budget had not been utilised. However,
considering the fact that this is a new
and emerging technology, the
Committee feel that there is a need to
show progress in R&D sector. In view
of the above mentioned efforts, the
Committee hope and support the
enhanced budgetary allocation of
Rs. 7.00 crore and Rs. 8.00 crore during
the year 2005-06 for the hydrogen and
chemical sources of energy respectively.
The Committee, however, feel that this
budget should be used for further
research to develop clean and low cost
hydrogen generation techniques from
renewable sources, to make storage
methods, especially solid-state methods



61

13.

2.35

more efficient, compact and its safe
transport and delivery at different
places keeping in view of the different
need and requirement and difficult
terrain of the country. Research should
also incorporate the development of
standards, codes and regulations to
address our concerns about safety and
security. To achieve all these objectives
expeditiously in a time-bound manner,
the Committee recommend that
National Hydrogen Energy Board
should expedite the process of
preparation of National Hydrogen
Energy Road Map by identifying thrust
areas, strengthening the various national
level Research and Development efforts
and by defining the goals and
preparing the action plans accordingly.
The Committee also desire that the
Government should make sincere efforts
for international tie-ups in the field of
Hydrogen energy to take advantage of
R&D work being undertaken in other
parts of the world in this field.

The Committee observe that the
Programme on Alternate Fuel for
Surface Transportation which includes
research and development and
demonstration of Battery Operated
Vehicles (BOVs) using alternate fuels
was launched during 1994-95. Till now,
the Ministry have been successful in
deployment of 161 BOVs (buses/mini-
buses, three-wheelers and passenger-
cars) in 15 States and three Union
Territories at the comulative
expenditure of Rs. 14.88 crore. Now,
during the year 2005-06, it has been



62

3

14.

3.40

decided by the Ministry to replace this
programme by hybrid electric vehicle
programme. Rs. 2.50 crore has been
allocated for this programme during the
year 2005-06. The Committee welcome
this step of improvement. However,
they are of the view that one of the
major limitations of the existing vehicles
using lead-acid batteries is the limited
driving range of the vehicle per charge
of the battery. The Comunittce, therefore,
recommend that the Government
should make all efforts to develop and
deploy newer types of rechargeable
batteries having higher capacity at
lower costs through focussed R&D
efforts.

The Committee note that during the last
several years, the Ministry has not been
able to utilize the amount allocated for
the Biomass gasifier programme. This
shows the lack of proper attention by
the Government on such an important
programme. The Committee are of the
view that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should be
more specific in identifying the reasons
for under achievements in the physical
and financial field and them pursue
their case on sound footing with the
Ministry of Finance so that they may
not be able to impose financial cut on
the Biomass Gasifier Programme during
the current financial year. The
Committee, however, find that the
target fixed for the programme is quite
low particularly when the biomass
generation potential is of the order of
19,500 MW and the technology to
harness them is quite mature. The



63

3

3.49

Cemmittee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should six higher targets
and allocate more budget for the
Biomass gasifier programme from the
next financial year so that the
abundantly available biomass resources
may be harnessed expeditiously in a
time bound manner. To get better
results, the Committee desire that the
Government should provide more
incentives to Village Panchayats
interested in Biomass Gasifiers
Programme.

The Committee observe that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources was able to utilise Rs. 11.95
crore only out of the Budget Estimates
of Rs. 18 crore and Revised Estimates
of Rs. 16.50 crore the Biomass Power/
Co-generation programme during the
year 2030-04. Similarly, during the year
2004-05 only, Rs. 5.78 crore could be
utilised (upto February 2005) out of
Rs. 14.54 crore of 5.8. and Rs, 12.54 crore.
One of the reasons as extended by the
Ministry, for the difference in actual
expenditure and Revised Estimates
during the year 2003-04, was that the
financial assistance was withheld at the
end of the financial year due to
cancellation of the signed Power
Purchase Agreements by the State
Governments of Karnataka.
Unfortunately, the issue was not
resolved immediately and the actual
utilisation during the year 2004-05 also
got affected. As a result of which, the
difference between RE and actuals
increased from Rs. 4.55 crore during the



64

16.

3.50

year 2003-04 to Rs. 6.76 crore during
the year 2004-05. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the
Government should go into the details
of the reasons for the cancellation of
PPAs signed by the State Government
of Karnataka and settle the problem
once for all. The Committee also desire
that preventive measures should be
taken to stop such cancellations in
future so that the actual utilisation of
the allocated fund is not affected.

The Committee have noted that the
Biomass power/Co-generation
programme are being implemented by
the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources to exploit the estimated
potential of 19,500 MW including 3,500
MW of exportable surplus power from
bagasse-based Co-generation in sugar
mills. As on 31.12.2004, 727.53 MW
which includes 473.03 MW from
bagasse Co-generation and 290.50 MW
from biomass combustion projects have
been set up in the country. This
accounts for only 3.7 percent of the
total assessed potential of 19,500 MW.
The Committee feel that the Ministry
are not making much headway in
harnessing the huge potential of
biomass. Analysing the various
problems associated with the
programmes, the Committee further
noted that Co-generation projects are
unable to obtain loans from the various
financial institutions on account of poor
financial position of most sugar mills
especially Co-operative. Inadequate
availability of biomass for the power
Projects are the other major problems.
Sometimes, the project promoters are



65

3

17.

not paid in time for the electricity
supplied by them in some States. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Government should make all out
efforts to rectify all these problems by
convincing the various financial
institutions to provide loans on softer
terms to sugar mills, especially the Co-
operatives; promoting energy plantation
having fast growing and high energy
density biomass, giving directions to all
potential States to issue attractive
preferential tariff, wheeling and banking
rates and third party sales and to pay
in for their outstanding dues for the
electricity supplied by them. The
Government should consider a Single
Window Clearance System for sugar
factories intending to start Co-
generation projects. The Committee may
be apprised of the various efforts made
and resultant outcome thereof.

The Committee observe that as against
the estimated potential of 120 lakh
Biogas plants only 36.70 lakh plants
have been set up in the country. The
Ministry has not been able to achieve
the targets set during the year 2003-04
and 2004-05. The Committee note that
in some States Village Panchayats and
Local Bodies are being associated with
such activities. The Committee desire
that Government should ensure more
and more participation of these bodies
in setting up of biogas plants to spread
public awareness in the region. The
Committee also desire that suitable tie-
ups should be done with Dairy
Organisations to harness the full
potential.



66

AAREASTUMUPY YAg 5ए्रणाध्णावात
५70 sayey ‘quay ‘sasuadxg

ayo ‘sasuadxq —aavay उम्र
एागण 4 गाष्णपव्त “YO मुफ्ण्ण्ण्जू
५9880 sastaduuon peayy sy 89६ 8 ays 169 oS 169 Iss WS ॥्शप्रथभ००5 TSE पृ
a Il OL 6 8 Z 9 g 14 ६ t if
UeEYON प्थव UE|g-UON प्यव URY-UON UY ULION Ue
aa Evy 38 [श्र
90900: 90100: 10-90: aps spre = ON
syreway uonoag anuaaay aunuessorg soley ढ़
89909 900८ ६048५
Po, rade, anuaaay
(e101 UT “sy)

HO XULSINIA HL 30 (90-002) SINVYD WOT SANVWACG SHL DNIMOHS LNaWALVIS

Godoy ग्पा jo 61 ere apia)
(59 ‘ON GNVWd) SHDNOS AOWANA TWNOLLNAANOO-NON

1 XIGNadd¥
11 Lavd


67

ueqin, wor ASrouq ‘se8o1g
Joy aumuex8org yeuoneN

‘quiumesSo1g — sseutolg 0} शमप्ु
गपथभ९ ABzaug-01g '$9॥05 Jo saninog
प्रभु [७४०प्००४०००-४०ए [एप्ण०३१००)
CRY sasudwoo pray su, — 809% CT a 12॥ 115॥ +UON itd
गफ़ाड
pur voiday
‘ump Waser HON,
pue worden woqseg- YON गण uosiaard
oy uowstaoud wmsdomy | — 000७ wr ow - पाता 1982
aqua; Suey
एक 3} TeuOHEN, गण कप yuaundofanap emmy
जान) ‘oumumes8ory (TY Joy गापाथविणतु
sapnput गराएशहैण sty, — - cn = ol - sr0 qepadg 10st
0
[euoiZay ‘A81auy jo 5०5
[euoIppy गण vorsstuTwOD
‘eouatag jeuorssayorg “GONaNd
3 Suisysaapy  ‘sasuadxg
a 114 aL 8 rf 9 % ६ t



uoqeapi 2914 aa
‘puny — ण्णाश्ण[शूउग्पाएा03)
ABojouysay, —‘quautdoyaaaq
[euogyysuy ‘drysinauardanuy
ABraugq jeiny ‘aurewso1g
woddng Asaug emmy gaNA
पड Surpnpuy saeig पक
“YON णु uoIstAory wnsdwan’]
‘VQaNI % slug 305
(ping ‘sapua8y jepony गथ5
ध्थिथ३ wajsey-yHON, ‘olorg
uonRysuouag vary [eiadg
‘ASzoug, ayqemauay 1० ainyysuy
Jeuoyeny ABiouy weary #थिभपु
uaSorphy  ‘uonepodsueay
aovping 1० [गाव ग्याध्णगाए
‘“A81auq Jo saxmog jeonuay
‘syaaloag oupAH ATH 49)
/ACIND ‘aumureadorg vonowioug
dH§ ‘uaudojeraq 22७०7
ompdy [५४५ 'पथ॥ [शफाएणु
woy (4० “aseyy jedonunyy

a

ol



एण्थ5 गण JayIses) sseurorg

‘suoneyuejg AB:aug “Sunjenbug
sseumorg ‘quaurdojaaag
se8org ‘suonnnsuy

pue Ajrununnoy गाव
39 Suistueapy ‘juaurdojaaaq
‘A@roug-org उप somarpg ण्णतु
payosuodg enue) 40} sues)
A8raug puyy ‘sumumero1g
Jomog orp] se,
{oy sjuaMUra0AS) ag o} spre
Usual) sopnppur prop भपा,

svoneradoay,
Jeuoyeusayuy — ‘aueuyBo1g
ayqng एप. voryemz0juy
nutayshg juama8eueyy
aad ‘DvalL ‘sexy छा
गण soorarag (भ्िगापु पश्शू) uo
polorg jeuonen) “wwaudoyenag
ASxaug ayqemauay
pue waurom ‘aumeur801g

66

£800

69

12 ॥ /

वृण्भणा773009
गथ5 ण

109

a



70

saonosay एण॥७ = ग्रगण्०)
A8rauq pum ‘awurexBorg
720०4 एण॥ ५ aduejsissy
‘aunuer8o1] wonereues) 19004
PUIM ५ aouRjsissy 4palorg
SI 20} squery 4a ‘spalorg
JaMOg AdSY__ pajauuod
PHN voHerauag somog
Jeuoyy sejog ‘aumurer801g
dumg Ads 'ण५०७ euorssayay
‘suonestues1Q /suonnisuy
TOYO YIM Ypreasay aanjoe
जथणु ‘axjuaz) ABrauq rejog
‘gunuez8o1g Sururezy, भाणी
dn-youg peorupay, jeuor8oy
'गापजगापणए aAlsseg IejOS
‘qurures8o1g {819g peunuy
‘Tayrses) एण1२००००७ 779
एणाशापृ्र०) pue एणुशआ 80)
sseumoig ‘preog A8r0uq-01g
Teuonen ‘uoneorddy auoyy

a

its

ol



&

70 10४9 ‘suoyeTsuouag
PUI Joy 5०१२६ UeTd ध्पण्ग)
Joy SURI SOpNpUT Peay SY,

“ups Surpnppur ब्यथ५ एक
AAUON 10 vorstaoad usc]
‘Sunoyuo — ‘aururer801q
Suruuyjg A8saug—peny
payeaayyy ‘sajse, amymousy
2 १०९] woxy ASroug ‘SeuTMyD
parody uo auruesS01g
Jeuoyey ‘ouruex8o1g ABroug
Teuayy, jog ‘ywourdojanaq
sedorg yeuonnyysuy
pure Ayrumunito) “quawudoyaaaq
sedong 70 aunurex2org [euOHEN
‘saysem Pes एप weqzy|
wo A8roug ‘juamdoyaaaq
1५1 ॥॥॥| ayqemauay
pue uauiom == “Yefooy,
paaoudwy uo auues8org
ए्ण्णाणुर ‘juawssassy

£07

वण्गपाए7१४०0
#गप्प्गू प्णण] 0}
Ie-t-S}URI)

TOE

a



72

(vara)
sajuasy quaudojaaaq
Arouq aiqemauay
UeIpuy = «UT uauysaauT

pue aruary ABrauq seog ayy
Ul SYJOM JOUR 10 JUaUSaAUT
[धा१७ sopnpur peopy अपा,

‘seary
Temy 7ण saopareg A8sauq
ueaj) uo jalorg euoneN
‘Suuojwoyy aunurexBorq (क्षभापु
Teny payezZayuy “ध्पाण्पू
parordwy uo awurer301g
Jeuoneny ‘oururex8ory (मप्र
Jeuayy गशु०५ ‘yuaudojaaaq
se8oig Jeuonnyysuy pur
Agumunmoy gaN गण aways
uejg parosuods Aqyeruap

99५

90
(८6७8

W0S
9656

oS

WS
9600S

wor
LLE60

10 saninog
Teuoquaauo?
ON, Uo
Aepng pendey

amanay [धणु

OIF

a

OL



13

का
ysnouy paywauaydunr (पशणार्‌
ayy 1० yalorg yuamdojanaq
savmnosay ajqemauay eIpuy
Japun syuei8 jo squauoduro
(380) ए०प्रध्च०4103
2०४९७ 10400 ystueq: pur
(Va) प्ण्पशु०8ए yuauidojanag
feuogeusayuy गण एतप्रध्ठा ण प्श्ण्‌
ऋष्वाग्रणा० sapnppur peay si

a

999५

4८66५
900८

4५

0005
100८

007

oS

08665
10%

009%

185८
Wz

(४००७) [elo
rade peo

Brau [0

Puopwantioy
WON 30} SUB]

0189



74

we 4818 00% 0््णा aururerZo1g [थ्प्प्ग्पू णु०५ 9
MIN OF Ez MIN 08 ११1) $087 00'6r OO'szt saysey PR. प्णण AStoug
MW ६८0 MIN 9 ep a 00st 005 #२५०३ जुथ[०॥००पृव॒ ग्यण५
ले MW का छ0 oro 0091 000s Jamog [श्प्पम्पूत॒ 7००५
३०७० तु ARIS vv
MIN €79FE = MIN 006 rte iF aris 00'S1 woneiauado, /1aMog sseworg 8
MIN SPPSZ = MIN 009 ६8969 0099 00६8 005८8 22४०4 capay [ews श्र
MIN 608७... MIN 00ST 96°81 OFZ OF oor 2०७०१ PUIM t
8 Z 9 ५ ॥। € z 1
(wor) ut sy) (गण) ut sy) (गण) mT sy) (aso) ण sy)
HOCTITE ०० se (0-00) 12 /।/] ७0700 enn
squourasanpy parey amypuadyg a aa panorddy
weld OL weld OL weld ‘BOL weld OT weld OL Weld ‘AOL sourayps /saunueido1y “NTS

(00८टा18 NO SV) $0-F00Z OL €0-2002 WOW NVId HLOl ONRING SLNSWAATIHDV GNV SLADYVL

SAWNVASONd SNORIVA YAGNN

‘TVOISAHd ‘AA.LIGNAdXA ‘SALVWILSA GASIATY ‘SHLWWILSA LEDdNd ‘SAVILNO NV1d HLOL GAAONddV

Tl XIGNadd¥


75

हद
MW १४05८ MX 008
‘SON FIZ ‘SON 008

ws
dur ६८३ dwt 0७
SON ८6८8 ‘SON, 000009
‘SON 661801 “SON 005

6706
MIN 78°01 MIN 0s 286

squed swe] ६ swued sue] OL 09%
“SON 00005 “SON 002502

Pale Jopayjoo —eale 1ण)ग[०
Tut 00009६ cu 000905

79°80

96५

#जा

00५्रा(मप्रद्चा) ग्प्पप्थ3ण१ ABr9ug yey payesayyy

0091

000८
00५8
00919

8 “ 9

surayskg pugsy

sdumg pur,

suiajsXs sayjo pur 5०१४५
pugdy ३ ASsauy puyyy [Tews
(778 yo)

800४५ 1०५1० 7०९ अण्शूव Ads
surayue] AdS

उप awoH] Ads

aurumesorq Ads

ए०पथ्पा४९७ sseWOIK,
(QNINAN) अण्थव 5०४०
TaYOOD IETS

‘sig Sunray 3य७॥ ग्थु०५

z



76

धगष्ण्प्‌ कक
+5ग्था।॥ धद्श

“SON 08८८

sadeqA 000५
“SON 0008

Bl
49६
96६
wo
OT

6z0
#10
as
wel
lias

PLT
wiss

SUT
06'S
OOF
६90
97

wo
wo
07
80°67
OOF
000

118
0969

SLT
06५
05५
08T
ae

Ort
0६६
ost
0०्छ
009
000

0990६
on

009 sopuasy [कणर गथ5
006 ग्प्र0 [eucisey
॥ 01 #णणथा, 9 ताप
006 एणप्रण्ण्रणव ४०%स 2p 1०००१००७० 3गग्थप

008 एण०प्रधग10०) [०००प्रष्पयणु

पण्गप्रवण०५०0 jeuoRNyAsUT
॥॥॥ /dtysmauasdayug ABiauq peny
oor spuny feprsunuo) ASojouy>ay,
Oost val
ण्फा ABojoupay, MAN
00086 PRE AS
005६८ गपाप्ाशडणत ००॥प्रागजगप ब््या॥
00४८ sdumg 228७ 015

8

||

9

€ 4

Te

‘ol

“SI
‘a
1
‘1
६4५

‘el
a



77

81798
Ist
108
८58८८
005८.
॥8॥
009
wel
486

rags

८८8

s¥0
6F0

1790
ogg
898
0055
0च्च
0ध्श
0णा

॥
OO'eT
Irel

O6eT

690
SOT

SLCHI
ous
980
0969
90556
059
006
क्र
009
फ़्श

५96

890
SOT

0015६
00५
000

0002
00५
0052
00७
000६

000

(580) [धण

dal/da9

eyjny.) parcudwyy

sourumesZalg 3S] YON

vagal Ginba

ABoponpay, Adiauy एण७ गण axa
AMIN

anjuad ABraug seo

Appygng ३ uoweULoyU

yeueyaDag Weld

510 /७॥॥
uonpysuowag eary [श०११5

quauidoajreq
ABroug ajqemauay 2y uauioy

wmisoduiXg/saeuruas

"Se

ee

Te

‘62



78

vauuesZoid somod svjos aanoviayut puS 10j yoddns ayy anuguorsip 0} pappap uaeq sey 41,

920812 99८5८ १८222] 0029८ AepNO [OL
ण्द्व्शा %शध ०9शा 00298 Uda e
9S 2001 14020 5द6#ा 00006 (589) [OL
000 000 0061 0000८ pafory RIUEYRYY ग्ण WRI) JAD ‘8
898 09५ 099 009 ७9 |.७१॥4|॥| ८६
00८६ ण्ख्ा ॥। 8४ 0009: फ़्श्ता 98
(aya) spalorg papry आब्पकप्॒
9 5 5 q z I



APPENDIX का

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD ON 23RD MARCH,
2005 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 139, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 16.30 hrs. to 18.10 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

MEMBERS

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid

ypenaane en

Shri Kiren Rijiju

. Shri M. Shivanna

. Shri Vijyendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav
Shri Kamal Akhtar

. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Shri Bimal Jalan

Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Jesu Das Seelam

fog eo ae =
8 ७ ४& 09 छ#छ छ+फ्न 9 9४898

79


oP Pp Pe

em a

Bee
VvNPS

14.

80

SECRETARIAT

. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni
. Shri PK. Bhandari

. Shri Surender Singh

. Dr. Ram Raj Rai

— Joint Secretary
— Director

— Deputy Secretary
— Under Secretary

WITnesses

Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources

Shri A.M. Gokhale
Shri A.K. Rath

Dr. S.K. Chopra

Shri Sunil Khatri

Dr. E.V.R. Sastry

Dr. K.C. Khandelwal
Shri Ajit K. Gupta
Dr. T.C. Tripathi
Shri N.p. Singh

Shri Sudhir Mohan
Shri K.P. Sukumaran
Dr. B. Bandopadhyay
Shri Debashish Majumdar
Shri M.P. Ramesh

Secretary
AS&FA

Sr. Adviser
Jt. Secretary
Scientist “G”
Scientist “G”
Scientist “G”
Scientist “G”
Scientist “G”

Scientist “G”

Scientist “G”

Scientist “G”

MD (IREDA)

Executive Director (C-WET)

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of
the provision of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

3. The discussion started with a detailed presentation by the
Ministry on the various aspects pertaining to the promotion and
development of renewable energy sector. The following important
points were discussed by the Committee:

the year 2004-05 and Go:

6) Physical and financial performance of the Ministry during

als set for the year 2005-06.

(ii) Remote Village Electrification Programme including Village

Energy Security Programme through various sources of

renewables.


(ii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

81
Biomass Power/Cogeneration Programme and the problems
associated therewith,

Biomass Gasifiers Programme—steps taken to expedite the
programme,

Wind Energy Programme—promotion and development
thereof,

Solar Energy Programme—tesearch and development thereof,

Formation of District Advisory Committee for monitoring
various renewable energy programmes at the district level,

Training and various awareness programmes for the
promotion and development of renewable energy
programmes.

4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX IV

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2004-05) HELD ON 11TH APRIL,
2005 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI

The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.

PRESENT
Shri Gurudas Kamat—Chairman

‘MEMBERS

. Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

. Shri Ajay Chakraborty

. Shri B. Vinod Kumar

. Shri Chander Kumar

. Shri Prashanta Pradhan

. Shri Rabindra Kumar Rana

५ Shri Kiren Rijiju

. Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh

. Shri E.G. Sugavanam

POnaneon

ee
BS

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

a
Nn

. Shri Sudarshan Akarapu
. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
. Shri Bimal Jalan

. Dr. K. Kasturirangan

. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
. Shri Matilal Sarkar

. Shri Motilal Vora

PPP Pepe
SIA 0 &R ®

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
2. Shri PK. Bhandari — Director
3. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
4. Dr. Ram Raj Rai — Under Secretary
82


83

2. At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy
welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:

(i) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Power.

(ii) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

4. The Committee adopted draft Reports with minor additions/
deletions/amendments suggested by the Members of the Committee.

5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports after incorporating the amendments suggested
by the Members of the Committee and making consequential changes
arising out of factual verification by the concerned Ministries and to
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.