STANDING COMMITTEE

ON ENERGY
11 (2005-2006)

FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-06)

[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

ELEVENTH REPORT

(५.10)

सगे जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)


ELEVENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2005-2006)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL
ENERGY SOURCES

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)

Presented to Lok Sabha on 10,3.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.3.2006

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)


CE. No. 156

Price : Rs. 42.00

© 2006 By Lox SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.


ComPosITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...

INTRODUCTION

Carter I

Cuaprer II

Cxarrer वा

Cuarter IV

CuarTeR V

IL.

CONTENTS

REPORT

Report

Recommendations /Observations which have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies ...

Recommendations/ Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee

Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited .....

ANNEXURES

Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the
Standing Committee on Energy (2005-06)
held on 28,2.2006

Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations contained in the
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on
Energy (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)

12

21

24

29

33

(i)


2 Ae eee
BBSESRREBRES

22,
23.
24.
25,

oo oN De & पूंछ

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2005-06)

Shri Gurudas Kamat — Chairman
Menosrs

Lok Sabha

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen

Shri Ajay Chakraborty
Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan

Shri A.B.A. Ghani Khan Choudhary

Shri 8. Vinod Kumar
Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Subodh Mohite

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Prashanta Pradhan
Dr. Rabindra Kumar Rana
Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri Nandkumar Sai

Shri M. Shivanna

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh
Shri M.K. Subba

Shri E.G. Sugavanam

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri G. Venkatswamy
Shri Chandrapal Singh Yadav

Rajya Sabha

Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

Shri Sudarshan Akarapu

Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal

Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptullah

(ii)


(iv)

26.
27s
28.
29.
30.
31.

Shri Bimal Jalan

Dr. K. Kasturirangan
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesudas Seelam

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Shiv Kumar — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Neena Juneja — Senior Executive Assistant


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
6th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on Demands for
Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources.

2. The Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy was
presented to Lok Sabha on 21st April 2005. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
12th August, 2005.

3. The Standing Committee on Energy considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 28th February, 2006.

4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee is
given at Annexure-II.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.

New Dewy; GURUDAS KAMAT,
February 28, 2006 Chairman,
Phalguna 9, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

(v)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy on the
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources which was presented to the Lok Sabha on 21st April,
2005.

2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:

Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 16, and 17

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:

SL. Nos. 8, 13, 15

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in tespect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:

Sl. Nos. 3, 4 and 14

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

Sl. Nos, 2, 10, 11

3. The Committee also desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Government to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons,
the matter should be teported to the Committee in time with reasons
for non-implementation.


4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations:

A. Uneven utilisation of Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (SI. No. 1, Para No. 2.9)

5. The Committee had noted that as against the Budget Estimates
of Rs. 605.27 crore and Revised Estimates of Rs. 405.47 crore, the actual
expenditure of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources was
about 235 crore during the year 2004-2005. Although the Committee
had approved the enhanced Budgetary allocation of Rs. 605.27 crore
for the year 2005-06 and strongly recommended that the Ministry
should take initiatives to prepare and implement all their schemes and
programmes in advance and prepare a uniform expenditure schedule
spread over all quarters of the current financial year so that the
Ministry of Finance may not get a chance to impose any restriction at
RE stage. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional energy Sources should also issue instructions to all
concerned agencies responsible for implementation of schemes /
programmes to prepare a time-bound programme for their
implementation so that the expenditure may be uniform in all quarters.
The Committee had also recommended a higher allocation at RE stage
considering the fact that the Ministry have been given the task to
provide electricity in rural households not connected with gird by
2010 and also considering the fact that the Ministry have outstanding
liabilities to the tune of Rs. 150 to 160 crore.

6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has merely stated that the
observations of the Committee have been noted and the same have
been duly conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.

7. The Committee had desired in their recommendation that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should issue
instructions to all concerned agencies responsible for implementation
of schemes and programmes in a time bound manner so that the
budget is uniformly in all the quarters. The Committee had also
desired that the allocation to the Ministry should be suitably
enhanced and there should not be any reason to make a cut at RE
stage by the Ministry of Finance.

8. The Ministry has, however, not touched on these aspects in
its action taken reply but have merely stated that the recommendation
has been conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.

2


9. The Committee once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that all agencies responsible for the
implementation of the schemes of the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources carry out works in a time bound manner so that the
finances allocated are utilized justifiably. The Committee are upset
to note that expenditure of the MNES was curtailed at RE stage. As
the programmes of the MNES are located in the States & rural areas,
it requires substantial amount of time for implementation and hence
the utilization of funds is also slow at times. This, therefore, does
not necessarily imply that expenditure should be curtailed by the
Ministry of Finance at RE stage.

B. Integrated Rural Energy Programme (IREP) of the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.18)

10. The Committee in its recommendation were surprised to note
that Planning Commission had unilaterally decided to transfer
Integrated Rural Energy Programme (IREP), a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme to the States without consulting the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources. This had been done at the stage when
the Centre’s committed liabilities under IREP were of the order of
Rs. 28 crore pertaining to years 2003-04 and 2004-05 and the Scheme
had been recast recently raising Central assistance from 20% to 50%.
The Committee had felt that the Scheme should have been thoroughly
examined at that point of time instead of taking piece-meal decisions.
The Committee had also come to know that States had represented to
the Planning Commission and the Ministry to continue this scheme in
the same form, the Committee had, therefore, desired that the Scheme
should be reviewed in its entirety to decide all the matters and to
ensure that the Scheme achieves its desired goals.

11. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has merely stated that
the observations of the Committee have been noted and conveyed to
the Planning Commission.

12. The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue the matter
regarding continuation of the IREP Scheme in the same form
vigorously with the Planning Commission and let the Committee
know final outcome of the deliberations to this effect stating clearly
as to what prompted the Planning Commission to shift the Schemes
to the States. In the meantime, the Ministry should review the
working of that Scheme and remove deficiencies, if any.


C. SPV Power Plants, SPV Irrigation Pumps and Battery Operated
Vehicles

Recommendation (51, No. 3, Para No. 2.19)

13. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had decided to
discontinue SPV Power Plants, SPV Irrigation Pumps for individual
and Battery Operated Vehicles during the year 2005-06 on account of
relatively high capital costs when compared to conventional power
systems. The Committee had shown concern about the fate of operation
maintenance and upkeeping of these installed/deployed systems and
also about fulfilling the financial liabilities towards the ongoing projects
under these programmes. The Committee had, therefore, recommended
that the Ministry should make specific arrangements for the operation,
management and upkeeping of the installed and deployed systems so
that they complete their designed life and achieve the targets set for
them. The Committee had pointed out that the low performance levels
of these schemes were on account of failure of the Ministry in reducing
the cost of SPV module and their new experiment in the field of
Battery Operated Vehicles. The Committee had also recommended that
the R&D efforts of the Ministry should be focused on the reduction of
SPV module cost to at least one-half of the present level. The
Committee had also desired that intensive efforts be made to see that
equipment related to solar energy ¢.g. SPV system based on silicon
etc. are manufactured indigenously and that R&D efforts should be
towards development of non-silicon solar voltaic systems on the pattern
of similar systems developed in other parts of the world.

14. The Ministry in its action taken reply has informed that it has
been supporting R&D in non-silicon thin film solar cell technologies.
However, thin film solar cell technologies still require further
development to be reliable and cost-competitive. The Ministry has also
informed that the Prices of indigenous solar cells were competitive
with respect to international prices as a major share of domestic
production was currently being exported.

15. In its reply, the Ministry has further informed that renewable
energy system/devices are so designed so that long-term maintenance
contract costs are included into initial system. The systems and devices
are generally owned by individuals, legal entities or state governments
who as beneficiaries are expected to take care of repairs and
maintenance after the initial contract period is over.

4


16. The Committee are surprised to note that all grants to SPV
systems have been done away with and individuals/beneficiaries are
required to take care of maintenance and other costs on their own
account. The Committee note in particular that all the solar based
programmes of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
(MNES) are ambitious programmes and all out efforts should be
made to maintain them as also steps should be taken to bring down
the cost of SPV module. R&D efforts should be towards development
of non-silicon solar voltaic systems and bringing down the costs.
The Committee again reiterate that the Ministry should make specific
arrangements for operation, management and upkeeping of the
installed and deployed systems so that they complete their designed
life and achieve the targets set for them and all efforts should be
made to utilize one of most reliable sources of renewable energy i.e.
solar energy for which there is an ample scope in our country.

D. Promotion of Technologies of Renewable Energy
Recommendation (51, No. 4, Para No. 2.20)

17. The Committee had noted that India had been implementing
one of the largest renewable energy programmes in the world. A large
number of renewable energy technologies such as wind, solar, biogas,
biomass, small hydro and many new technologies such as hydrogen
energy, chemical sources of energy including fuel cell energy, bio-fuels,
etc. had been used in the field.

18. The Committee also noted that some important renewable
technologies like wind power, bio-mass gasifiers, small hydro power
are having high potentials of 45000 MW, 16000 MW and 15000 MW
respectively. As against these figures only 2980 MW of wind energy,
62 MW of biomass gasifier and 1693 MW of small hydro power were
available at the end of year 2004.

19. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that
commercialisation and private sector’s involvement were required for
technological mature and proven sources which had reached the
commercialisation phase like small hydro, wind power, solar water
heating system, biomass gasifier, etc. The Committee also desired that
various renewable energy resources pertaining to various programmes
should be prioritised in the light of the technological advancement
and their potentialities and allocate the higher budget for their
advancement accordingly. Massive campaign was also required to
increase public awareness which alone would be helpful in increasing

5



the demand for renewable energy systems and devices. The Committee
also desired that the Ministry should persuade all the State
Governments to amend their building bye-laws and municipal laws to
make it compulsory to install solar water heating systems in all the
high rise buildings as has been done in the States of Maharashtra and
Karnataka.

20. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that emphasis
on mass awareness on renewable energy through the launch of different
media campaigns has been carried out. Also a publicity campaign to
create awareness on the benefits of solar water heating systems is
being initiated throughout the country through the electronic and print
medias. As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry’s endeavour
would be to persuade State Governments/local bodies to amend bye-
laws for compulsory use of solar water heating systems, wherever
such systems are considered feasible and cost effective.

21. The Committee note that huge potential to the tune of
45000 MW lies in the case of wind power, 16000 MW in biomass
power and 15000 MW in the small hydro projects. A very smali
amount of these resources i.e. 2980 MW of wind energy, 62 MW of
biomass gasifier energy and 1693 MW from small hydro power had
been tapped by the year 2004. The Committee once again reiterate
that private sector participation and commercialisation of these
technologies was the need of the hour and steps taken in this
direction should be intimated to the Committee. Massive campaigns
were required to increase the use of renewable energy devices such
as solar water heaters on the higher rise buildings & Committee
again desire that the other State Governments should follow the
example of Maharashtra & Karnataka by making in their building
bye-laws it mandatory to install solar water heating systems on high
rise buildings. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources should make all out efforts to
increase the use of solar, wind, bio-mass as well as hydro power so
as to exploit from the renewable energy resources in the country to
the maximum. R&D efforts on other forms of energy such as
hydrogen energy and chemical energy should also be pursued
vigorously to generate additional capacities from the renewable
energy sources.

E. Persuasion of State Government to take up renewable technologies
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.21)

22. The Committee had recommended that date on all renewable
systems established by private initiatives should be taken note of by

6


the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources and vital information
relating to the production of power from new and renewable energy
sources by independent agencies should also be incorporated and the
data may be considered in Preparation of present and future planning
relating to Non-Conventional Energy Sector in the country. The help
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources officers in the States and nodal
agencies concerned needs be taken up in the matter.

23. The Ministry has replied that all possible steps were being
taken to maintain a robust data-base on new and renewable energy
deployment and the observations of the Committee in this regard have
been noted for appropriate action.

24. The Committee once again desire that the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources should depute nodal officers in the
States and districts to collect vital information on the availability of
renewable sources in these areas. The Committee also desire that
the availability of Energy Sources which are renewable, needs to be
surveyed in detail and release of the data on the web site of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources needs to be
expeditiously done. The web site should give details of all the major
renewable sources of energy available in India, with mapping and
the programmes initiated by the Ministry for exploitation of the
resources, the route to be followed to get capital and other subsidies
for the setting up of projects for power generation from these
renewable sources.

F Waste to Energy Programme of the Ministry
Recommendation (SI. No. 10 & 11, Para No. 3.26 & 3.27)

25. The Committee had noted that there was poor utilization of
funds in the Urban and Industrial Waste Programme of the Ministry.
The reasons cited by the Ministry like delay in signing various
agreements for supply of wastes, land lease, power purchase obtaining
statutory clearances and delay in project development ete., for delay
in implementing of programme simply showed the lack of Proper
efforts on the part of the Ministry. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry should adopt a multiprong approach
to achieve the financial and physical targets of Tenth Plan. The
Committee had also desired that single window clearance system for
the project of MSW should be implemented. The Committee had also
desired that the Ministry should finalize the National Master Plan for
development of waste to energy.


26. The Committee had also pointed out that as per the database
prepared—299 Class-I cities and 36 Class-II cities had been estimated
to have 30 million tones of solid waste and 4400 million cubic meters
of liquid waste. This had a potential of about 1700 MW of power. The
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources had launched the
National Programme of Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial
waste during the year 1995-96. But the Committee were sorry to note
that no significant progress had been made that far in the programme.
The Committee had further noted that Municipal bodies of metro cities
of Delhi and Mumbai were willing to establish similar Waste-to-Energy
projects/plants. As an initial step, segregation of waste had already
started. The Committee had desired that required technologies and
expertise to all the interested promoters in consultation with State
Government authorities and experts should be provided and that all
possible subsidies/incentives to the interested promoters. The
Committee had also desired that state-of-art technologies should be
indigenously available.

27. The Ministry has stated in their action taken reply that a
programme has been formulated for the accelerated promotion of
projects for Energy Recovery from Urban Solid Waste. The following
strategies have also been adopted:

(i) Development of projects through public-private partnership
for specific cities.

(ii) Assistance for fast track project activities that include
identification of project site, assessment of quality and
quantity of waste, preparation of waste collection and
transportation plan, finalization of power purchase
agreement, development of a bankable project with
Feasibility Report and Detailed Project Report; obtaining all
statutory clearances for the project, firming up of means of
project finance, preparation of bid document, and
supervision during implementation and commissioning.

(iii) Provision of central financial assistance for making such
projects financially viable. A higher level of assistance for
the state-of-the-art (to be defined) demonstration projects.

(iv) Financial support for R&D under the R&D policy of the
Ministry.

28. Review of the draft National Master Plan for the development
of waste to energy had been completed and the final document was

8


under preparation. A detailed Information Package was also being
prepared for providing necessary information to all stakeholders.

29. The Committee note that although the National Programme
of Energy Recovery from Urban and Industrial Waste was launched
in the year 1995-96, no major headway had been made in the
programme. Only three projects could be commissioned so far only
in three cities. Although the Ministry had formulated a programme
for the accelerated promotion of projects for Energy Recovery from
Urban Solid Waste and also prepared a draft National Master Plan
for the development of waste to energy, the programme has so far
not been taken up in major cities of India despite the fact that
Municipal bodies of metro cities of Delhi and Mumbai etc. were
willing to establish such programmes. The Committee further note
that there is a huge potential of 1700 MW of power from Urban/
Municipal Waste. The Committee again reiterate that all out efforts
should be made to tap this huge potential and various technologies
and expertise should be made readily available to the private/public
parties interested in these programmes. The Committee desire that
National Master Plan should be finalized and implemented at the
earliest. Information Package also should be widely distributed so
that people can take advantage of the Scheme.

6. Hydrogen as a source of Energy
Recommendation (51, No. 12, Para No. 3.34)

30. The Committee had observed that Hydrogen was one of the
most important environmentally benign renewable sources of energy
having the higher energy content and was abundantly available. The
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources had been supporting
R&D efforts for over a decade on various aspects of hydrogen energy
which includes, inter-alia, its production mainly through non-
hydrocarbon methods, storage in solid state materials and its utilization
as fuel. Furthermore the Ministry had also set up a National Hydrogen
Energy Board (NHEB) which was to prepare Energy Road MAP to
integrate and co-ordinate the national efforts on different aspects of
hydrogen and fuel cell technologies. The Committee had also noted
that the budget for the programme had not been utilized for the last
3 years. The Committee had recommended that in order to achieve
the objectives laid by the National Hydrogen Energy Board, the
Ministry should expedite the process of preparation of National
Hydrogen Energy Road Map and also desired that the Government
should make sincere efforts for international tie-ups in the field of
Hydrogen Energy.


31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that
observations of the Committee have been noted for appropriate
action.

32. The Committee note that Hydrogen is a new and
environmentally benign renewable source of energy having a very
high energy content and being abundantly available. The Committee
note that despite a decade of research work in the field, more R&D
efforts are required for proving technologies for identification and
use of this fuel. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate that
more R&D funding and utilization thereof should be made by the
Ministry to achieve the required breakthrough in the field. The
Committee further desire that international technolcyies should be
utilized through cooperation in this field. The Committee once again
reiterate that the National Hydrogen Energy Board should expedite
the process of preparation of National Hydrogen Energy Road Map
in a time bound manner and the progress so far achieved in this
direction should also be reported to the Committee.

H. Incentive to Village Panchayats interested in Biomass Gasifier
Programme

Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 3.40)

33. The Committee had noted that during the last several years,
the Ministry had not been able to utilize the amount allocated for the
Biomass Gasifier Programme. The Committee were of the view that
the Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources should be more
specific in identifying the reasons for under achievements in the
physical and financial field and then pursue their case on sound footing
with the Ministry of Finance so that they may not be able to impose
financial cut on the Biomass Gasifier Programme during the current
financial year. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should fix higher targets and allocate more budget for the
Biomass Gasifier Programme from the next financial year so that the
abundantly available biomass resources may be harnessed expeditiously
in a time bound manner. To get better results, the Committee had also
desired that the Government should provide more incentives to Village
Panchayats interested in Biomass Gasifier Programme.

34. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated that the
gross potential of bio-energy was estimated at 22,200 MW which
included: (i) 16,000 MW from agro residues and forestry wastes
(ii) 3,500 MW surplus power from bagasse co-generation and

10


(iii) 2700 MW from urban and industrial wastes apart from 50000-
100000 MW from biomass that can be obtained from plantations on
wastelands.

35. The Ministry has further stated that the target for bio-power
during the 10th and 11th Plan periods is 3000 MW (corresponding to
30% of the additional power generation capacity to be set up during
the 10 year period) of which the target for the 10th Plan is 830 MW.
During the first three years of 10th Plan, 398 MW of bio-power i.e.,
300 MW from biomass combustion, 68 MW from bagasse cogeneration,
15 MW from biomass gasification, and 30 MW from urban & industrial
waste-to-energy had been installed, which was 3% of the additional
power generation capacity set up during the said period.

36. The Ministry has further informed that the barriers to
accelerating the growth of bio-power were (i) raw material availability
in requisite quantity and quality (ii) plant capacity limitations on
account of nature of raw materials and difficulties associated with its
collection and transportation to the plant site (iii) requirement of fiscal
and financial incentives and (iv) requirement of preferential tariffs.

37. The Committee note that in spite of huge potential in Biomass
Gasifier Programme, the targets fixed for Tenth Five Year Plan are
very low. The Committee are not convinced with the arguments of
the Ministry that the target for bio-power is 3% of the additional
generation capacity to be set up during these two plans. As this is
a comparatively easier source to tap, the targets should be suitably
enhanced. The Committee should be kept informed of the decision
taken in the matter.

1


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.9)

The Committee noted that as against the Budget Estimates of
Rs. 605.27 crore and Revised Estimates of Rs. 405.47 crore, the actual
expenditure of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources will
be about Rs. 235 crore during the year 2004-2005. The Committee are
not convinced with the justification given by the Ministry that the
reasons for variation between BE and RE is on account of Gross
Budgetary Support being reduced by the Ministry of Finance at the
RE stage and delay in Budget approval. The other reason that they
had to recast the existing programmes and schemes as per the National
Common Minimum Programme of the new Government is also not
convincing. The Committee understand that maximum Budget (2004-
05) was allocated for on-going schemes and Vote on Account does not
impose any restrictions on incurring expenditure on that. The
Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources are not utilizing the funds equally in all the quarters due to
which the Ministry of Finance reduced their allocation at RE stage
from Rs. 605.27 crore to Rs. 405.47 crore and further reduced it to
Rs. 235 crore since Ministry was not permitted to spend more than
one third of RE during the last three months. The Committee however,
do not approve the approach of the Ministry of Finance also that they
curtailed the allocation without consulting the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources. The Committee feel that instead of
making a cut at RE stage based on the utilization of funds during the
first two quarters of the financial year it should be the actual utilization
during the last financial year. This would enable the Ministry of Finance
to assess the real position and provide the required budget at RE
stage to the Ministry. The Committee approve the enhanced Budgetary
allocation of Rs. 605.27 crore for the year 2005-06 and strongly
recommend that Ministry should take initiatives to prepare and
implement all their schemes and programmes in advance and prepare
a uniform expenditure schedule spread over all quarters of the current
financial year so that Ministry of Finance may not get a chance to
impose any restriction at RE Stage. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should convey the

12


feelings of the Committee that Ministry of Finance must consider the
views of Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources before curtailing
the Budget Estimates of the Ministry at RE so that implementation of
important schemes do not suffer. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should also issue
instructions to all concerned agencies responsible for implementation
of schemes/programmes to prepare a time-bound programme for their
implementation so that the expenditure may be uniform in all quarters.
The Committee also note that the budget of the Ministry for the year
2005-06 has reduced as compared to BE in the year 2003-04. Considering
the fact that the Ministry has been given the task of providing electricity
to all the village households, which are not grid connected, by 2010,
the allocations to the Ministry should have been suitably enhanced,
where it has gone down. Otherwise also, if we consider the fact that
the Ministry have outstanding liabilities to the tune of Rs. 150-160
crore the left over budget with the Ministry may not be sufficient to
achieve the set targets for the year 2005-06. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that higher allocations be made at RE Stage.

Reply of the Government

The observations of the Committee have been noted and the same
have been duly conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 7, 8 and 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 5, Para No. 2.21)

The Committee note that in addition to efforts being made by the
Government agencies, renewable energy systems/devices are also being
installed and run through the private initiatives in different parts of
the country. For example 40 MW equivalent of biomass power for
thermal use has already been installed in ceramic industry in Gujarat
without taking any assistance from the Government bodies. The
Committee hope that similar other renewable systems have been
established. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources have not tried to collect vital
information about the contribution of such independent initiatives being
made in various parts of the country in renewable energy sector. It
will be vital inputs for future planning. The Committee have a view

13


that inclusion of energy produced out of such important initiatives
may add significant quantity while compiling achievements in
renewable energy sector. The Committee, therefore, desired that Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should take all initiatives to collect
vital information relating to the production of power from new and
renewable energy sources by independent agencies and also incorporate
and consider this data in preparation of present and future planning
relating to Non-Conventional Energy sector in the country. The
Committee desire that for this purpose they must take the help of
Non-Conventional Energy Sources officers in the States and nodal
agencies concerned with this sector.

Reply of the Government

All possible steps are being taken to maintain a robust data-base on
new and renewable energy deployment and the observations of the
Committee in this regard have been noted for appropriate action.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 6, Para No, 2.31)

The Committee note that the country is implementing diverse
renewable energy technologies like wind, solar and biomass energy.
However, there is a lack of awareness amongst the public at large
about the utility of these sources and hence their proper utilization.
The Ministry have informed that they have been providing financial
assistance to a number of Government and Non-Government
Organisations to disseminate knowledge for effective development and
promotion of renewable energy programmes. The Ministry further
informed the Committee that they are also constituting District Advisory
Committees (DACs) to ensure the participation of district level
functionaries in the popularization and use of renewables. A number
of functions have been assigned to DACs for the purpose.

The Committee feel that apart from the various steps taken by the
Ministry for popularization of the renewable, there is a need to bring
awareness amongst students also by introducing the subject in their
curriculum. The Committee feel that apart from providing awareness
amongst the students it can also provide technical manpower to install,

14

ere टाजज,


operate and maintain the various systems of renewables energy. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take up
the matter with AITEC and various Education Boards to do the needful.

Reply of the Government

State/district-level energy parks are being established for mass
awareness creation, education of children in particular and the public
in general regarding benefits of the use of renewable energy systems/
devices. Renewable energy as a subject has also been introduced in
the school curriculum through NCERT publications.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Recommendation (SI, No. 7, Para No. 2.32)

The Committee welcome the recently taken initiatives by the
Government to form “District Advisory Committees (DACs) on
Renewable Energy” for the popularization of renewable systems/devices
amongst the rural masses. The Committee, however, note that DACs
have been established in 400 districts of the country but actually only
315 are functioning. The Committee desire DACs should also be
established in all the remaining districts of the country during the
shortest possible time. The Committee desire that the Government
should take the help of Public representatives, if necessary, for timely
formation of these committees in the districts where they have not
been formed. The Committee also recommend that the Central
Government should issue broad guidelines for these committees and
provide each State an adequately trained staff for periodic updating of
the data and continuous review of performance of various renewable
energy programmes at district levels. The Committee specifically desire
that the Government should develop a better mechanism for closer
coordination with States and district level agencies for implementation

of schemes relating to development of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources.

Reply of the Government

The formation of District Advisory Committee in districts where
such committees have not already been constituted is being pursued
vigorously. Guidelines regarding functioning of the Committees have
been issued and such Comumittees, wherever formed, are being involved
in the work allocated to them. ,

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

15


Recommendation (SI. No. 9, Para No. 3.10)

The Committee are happy to note that Village Energy Security
Programme is being launched by the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources to meet the total energy requirements of all the villages,
including cooking, lighting and motive power with full participation
of the local communities including women. The Government have
decided to set up 200 projects in the test phase. This programme is
mainly based on the use of biomass. The test projects would be
undertaken mainly through the biomass which is abundantly available
even in remote villages and hamlets, where grid connection is either
impossible or not cost-effective, with an emphasis on forest fringe and
tribal villages on 90:10 cost sharing basis between Centre and
Community/implementing agencies/State Nodal Agencies. During the
year 2005-06, it is proposed to allocate an amount of Rs. 20 crore
under the budget provision for Remote Village Electricity Programme.
The Committee feel that to make this programme a success, it is
necessary to assess all the needs of the villages selected and resources
available and then develop a suitable technology package to meet the
total energy needs in sustainable and financially viable way. There is
a need to evolve strategy for village level planning and implementation
also. The Committee, therefore, desire that simultaneous initiatives be
taken in these directions. Another point which needs to be considered
is that feedstock needs to be grown to ensure sustainable supply. There
are land tenural problems also which should be taken on priority
basis. Tribal and the residents of forest fringe areas are difficult to
reach and converse because of difficult topography and also languages.
They are also averse to outsiders and also to new technologies. The
Ministry, therefore, should take cautious steps while approaching them.
Absence of community institutions will be major problems for this
programme because this programme depends heavily on Village Energy
Committee for their operations and management. The Village Energy
Committee may also be the victims of groupism and internal bickering.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should also take this very
important point into account before entrusting accountability on any
committees or organizations. The Committee hope and trust that the
Ministry will be able to overcome all the problems associated with the
scheme through their Research and Development (R&D), field
demonstration and capacity building programme.

Reply of the Government

Development of proposals for the Test Projects entails preparation
of detailed Village Energy Plans (VEPs) that includes assessment of
the energy needs and availability of renewable resources on the basis

16


of which an optimal fuel-mix is arrived at to meet village and
household energy needs in a cost-effective and sustainable manner.

Planning and implementation of projects is required to be carried
out by the Village Energy Committee (VECs), set up by the Gram
Panchayat through a Gram Sabha Resolution. The Forest Departments,
Rural Development Departments and NGOs are being involved as
facilitators to assist VECs in resolving issues regarding identification
of suitable land for sustainable supply of wood and oilseeds. In order
that solidarity is maintainable and untoward consequences of groupism
and internal bickering are avoided, selection of a village under the
test projects is being made on the basis of social cohesiveness and a
conducive environment in the village. NGOs will help in mobilizing
the local community in areas having difficult access and language
related issues. Capacity building/training will be provided for operation
and maintenance of the projects.

The test projects would be closely monitored by the concerned
State Nodal Agency (SNA) and depending upon the feedback on
technology, operation and maintenance, financing and institutional
issues a larger programme might be developed.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Recommendation (SI. No. 12, Para No. 3.34)

The Committee observe that Hydrogen is one of the most important
environmentally benign renewable sources of energy having the higher
energy content and is abundantly available. It is also observed that
the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have been supporting
a broad based programme on Research and Development (R&D) and
demonstration over a decade on various aspects of hydrogen energy
which includes, inter-alia, its production mainly through non-
hydrocarbon methods, storage in solid state materials and its utilization
as fuel. Institutions like IITs, CSIR laboratories and industrial and
governmental organizations are actively involved in the promotion,
development and utilization of hydro-energy through these programmes
with much enthusiasm. Furthermore, the Ministry have set-up a
National Hydrogen Energy Board (NHEB) to prepare Energy Road
MAP to integrate and co-ordinate the national efforts on different
aspects of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies. The Committee note
that during the last three financial years, the budget had not been
utilized. However, considering the fact that this is a new and emerging

17


technology, the Committee feel that there is a need to show progress
in R&D sector. In view of the above mentioned efforts, the Committee
hope and support the enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs. 7.00 crore
and Rs. 8.00 crore during the year 2005-06 for the hydrogen and
chemical sources of energy respectively. The Committee, however, feel
that this budget should be used for further research to develop clean
and low cost hydrogen generation techniques from renewable sources,
to make storage methods, especially solid-state methods more efficient,
compact and its safe transport and delivery at different places keeping
in view of the different need and requirement and difficult terrain of
the country. Research should also incorporate the development of
standards. Codes and regulations to address our concerns about safety
and security. To achieve all these objectives expeditiously in a time-
bound manner, the Committee recommend that National Hydrogen
Energy Board should expedite the process of preparation of National
Hydrogen Energy Road Map by identifying thrust areas strengthening
the various national level Research and Development efforts and by
defining the goals and preparing the action plans accordingly. The
Committee also desire that the Government should make sincere efforts
for international tie-ups in the field of Hydrogen energy to take
advantage of R&D work being undertaken in other parts of the world
in this field.

Reply of the Government

The observations of the Committee have been noted for appropriate
action.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 32 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 16, Para No. 3.48)

The Committee have noted that the Biomass power/Co-generation
programme are being implemented by the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources to exploit the estimated potential of
19,500 MW including 3,500 MW of exportable surplus power from
bagasse-based co-generation in sugar mills. As on 31.12.2004,
727.53 MW which includes 437.03 MW from bagasse co-generation
and 290.50 MW from biomass combustion projects have been set up
in the country. This accounts for only 3.7 per cent of the total assessed

18


potential of 19,500 MW. The Committee feel that the Ministry are not
making much headway in harnessing the huge potential of biomass.
Analyzing the various problems associated with the programme, the
Committee further noted that co-generation projects are unable to obtain
loans from the various financial institutions on accounts of poor
financial position of most sugar mills especially co-operatives.
Inadequate availability of biomass for the power projects are the other
major problems. Sometimes, the project promoters are not paid in time
for the electricity supplied by them in some States. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should make all out efforts
to rectify all these problems by convincing the various financial
institutions to provide loans on softer terms to sugar mills, especially
the co-operatives; promoting energy plantation having fast growing
and high energy density biomass, giving directions to all potential
States to issue attractive preferential tariff, wheeling and banking rates
and third party sales and to pay in for their outstanding dues for the
electricity supplied by them. The Government should consider a single
Window Clearance System for sugar factories intending to start co-
generation projects. The Committee may be apprised of the various
efforts made and resultant outcome thereof.

Reply of the Government

There are several barriers to the tapping of potential for bagasse
co-generation in co-operative and public sector sugar mills. These
include inability of such milis to develop bankable projects on account
of their financial and liquidity problems which can be addressed only
through appropriate management action at the mill level and/or
through appropriate policies at the State level. However, some State
Governments are considering permitting joint ventures in co-operatives
and public sector mills whereby the joint venture partner would bring
in a bulk of additional funds for setting up co-generation facilities. It
may also be stated that generally co-generation is viable in mills having
a longer crushing season unless other parameters are highly favourable
that support co-generation in mills having a relatively shorter crushing
season. Thus, it is possible that co-generation may not be viable in
every sugar mill. Further, sugar mills of less than 2500 tpd capacity
are not considered economically viable and find it difficult to access
bank loans. Quite many co-operative sugar mills fall in this category.
It would be appreciated that this Ministry, on its part, can assist in
introducing more advanced technologies and provide financial
incentives or make a case for fiscal incentives but the bulk of the
work has to be done by mill owners and State Governments.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

19


Recommendation (SI. No. 17, Para No. 3.49)

The Committee observe that as against the estimated potential of
120 lakh Biogas plants only 36.70 lakh plants have been set up in the
country. The Ministry has not been able to achieve the targets set
during the years 2003-04 and 2004-05. The Committee note that in
some States, Village Panchayats and Local Bodies are being associated
with such activities. The Committee desire that Government should
ensure more and more participation of these bodies in setting up of
biogas plants to spread public awareness in the region. The Committee
also desire that suitable tie-ups should be done with Dairy
Organizations to harness the full potential.

Reply of the Government

The Biogas programme is being implemented through State nodal
departments/agencies, the Khadi and Village Industries Commission
(KVIC) and some Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) which are
given targets directly. These organizations in turn involve grass-roots
level voluntary agencies and self-employed trained workers for
promoting and constructing biogas plants apart from providing
maintenance services. Village panchayats and local bodies such as
Mahila Mandals and Yuvak Kendras are also being associated for
organization of awareness camps, selection of villages and beneficiaries
in many States. Some States have also linked the implementation of
the National Biogas Programme with other rural development schemes
such as the Rural Sanitation Programme in Maharashtra and Himachal
Pradesh and the Watershed Development and Integrated Tribal
Development Programme in Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. Other
States have been advised to take similar measures for delivering a
comprehensive package of rural related services.

Emphasis is also being placed on rural cattle dung based power
plants for which an allocation of Rs. 2.00 crore has been made during
2005-06. In addition, cattle dung based power plants in urban dairies/
dairy complexes is also being supported under the Urban, Industrial
and Commercial Applications programme.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

20


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Recommendation (SI. No. 8, Para No. 2.35)

The Committee find that the energy from small hydro power is
the most reliable of all renewable energy sources which can provide
electricity for the rural, remote areas and hilly terrain in our country
in a cost effective and environmentally benign manner. Small Hydro
upto 3 MW was transferred to the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources during 1989. Ten years later, with effect from
29th November, 1999 the small hydro power between 3-25 MW were
also brought under the purview of this Ministry. Within this short
span of time, the Ministry have been able to achieve 1693.94 MW out
of the total hydropower potential of 15000 MW in our country. Now,
the Ministry have set a target of 600 MW to achieve by the end of the
Tenth Five Year Plan i.e., by the year 2007 A.D. and 2000 MW by the
year 2012 A.D. During the first three years of the Tenth Five Year
Plan, the Ministry could achieve 254 MW with an expenditure of
Rs. 69.53 crore, achieving cent-per-cent utilization. This shows that the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have now got the
requisite skill, strength and capabilities to install, operate and maintain
even the Mega Hydro Projects. Considering the fact that hydro power
in itself is the most important renewable source of energy, the
Committee strongly recommend that all the projects, including mega
hydro power projects, should be brought under the control of the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. The Committee desire
that this matter should be taken up at the highest level in consultation
with the Ministry of Power and the outcome of the discussions should
be conveyed to the Committee within three months of the presentation
of the Report.

Reply of the Government

The recommendation of the Committee has been taken due note
of and necessary action in the matter is being taken in consultation
with various agencies, including the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Power. It would be appreciated decision-making of this
nature is highly complex and time consuming.

{Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

21


Recommendation (SI. No. 13, Para No. 3.35)

The Committee observe that the Programme on Alternate Fuel for
Surface Transportation which includes research and development and
demonstration of Battery Operated Vehicles (BOVs) using alternate fuels
was launched during 1994-95. Till now, the Ministry have been
successful in deployment of 161 BOVs (buses/minibuses, three-wheelers
and passenger-cars) in 15 States and three Union Territories at the
cumulative expenditure of Rs. 14.88 crore. Now during the year
2005-06, it has been decided by the Ministry to replace this programme
by hybrid electric vehicles programme. Rs. 2.50 crore has been allocated
for this programme during the year 2005-06. The Committee welcome
this step of improvement. However, they are of the view that one of
the major limitations of the existing vehicles using lead-acid batteries
is the limited driving range of the vehicle per charge of the battery.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
make all efforts to develop and deploy newer types of rechargeable
batteries having higher capacity at lower costs through focused R&D
efforts.

Reply of the Government

The existing Programme on Aliernative Fuels for Surface
Transportation includes Research and Development in, among other
things, high energy density batteries.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Recommendation (SI. No. 15, Para No. 3.47)

The Committee observe that the Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources was able to utilize Rs. 11.95 crore only out of
the Budget Estimates of Rs. 18 crore and Revised Estimates of
Rs. 16.50 crore the Biomass Power/Co-generation programme during
the year 2003-04. Similarly, during the year 2004-05 only, Rs. 5.78 crore
could be utilized (upto February 2005) out of Rs. 14.54 crore of BE.
and Rs. 12.54 crore. One of the reasons as extended by the Ministry,
for the difference in actual expenditure and Revised Estimates during
the year 2003-04, was that the financial assistance was withheld at the
end of the financial year due to cancellation of the signed Power
Purchase Agreements by the State Governments of Karnataka.
Unfortunately, the issue was not resolved immediately and the actual
utilization during the year 2004-05 also got affected. As a result of
which, the difference between RE and actuals increased from

22



Rs. 4.55 crore during the year 2003-04 to Rs. 6.76 crore during the
year 2004-05. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should go into the details of the reasons for the
cancellation of PPAs signed by the State Government of Karnataka
and settle the problem once for all. The Committee aiso desire that
preventive measures should be taken to step such cancellations in
future so that the actual utilization of the allocated:fund is not affected

Reply of the Government

The Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL)
has informed that the Power Purchase Agreements were terminated
for reasons such as non-fulfilment of conditions like: (i) achievement
of financial closure within the stipulated period, (ii) obtaining permits
and clearances, (iii) commencement of projects construction work within
the scheduled date, and (iv) completion of project within stipulated
date, etc. The promoters approached the High Court of Karnataka
against the orders of termination of the Power Purchase Agreements.
It has also been informed that KPTCL is negotiating with a few
developers who have agreed for negotiated tariffs and terms and
conditions. Necessary supplementary Power Purchase Agreements have
been sent to the Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission for their
clearance. In the case of other developers, action will be taken as per
the orders of the High Court, where matter is currently pending.
Although the matter was taken up with the concerned authorities in
the State Government at the appropriate level, it would be appreciated
that the subject of tariff fixation is of a quasi judicial nature in the
implementation of which the Central Government has no direct role.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

23


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation (SI. No. 3, Para No. 2.19)

The Committee further note that Ministry have also decided to
discontinue SPV power plants. SPV irrigation pumps for individual
and Battery Operated Vehicles during the year 2005-06 on account of
relatively high capital costs when compared to conventional power
systems. The Committee note that 2.80 MW capacity SPV Power Plants,
6452 Nos. of SPV irrigation pumps for individuals and 161 BOVs have
already been installed/deployed at present. The Committee are,
therefore, concerned about the fate of operation, maintenance and up-
keeping of these installed/deployed systems and also about fulfilling
the financial liabilities towards the ongoing projects under these
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should make specific arrangements for the operation, management and
up-keeping of the installed and deployed systems so that they complete
their designed life and achieve the targets set for them and also
recommend that the Ministry should meet the financial liabilities of
on-going projects under the above-said programmes. The Committee
feel that the performance of these schemes and programmes could not
give desired results due to failure of the Ministry in reducing the cost
of SPV module and their new experiment in the field of Battery
Operated Vehicles. The Committee, therefore, recommend that R&D
efforts of the Ministry should now be focused on the reduction of SPV
module cost to at least on-half of current level. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry should make intensive efforts to see to it that
the equipment related to solar energy ९. §-, SPV system based on silicon
etc. are manufactured indigenously. The Committee specifically desire
that the Government should orient their R&D efforts towards
development of non-silicon solar voltaic system on the pattern of
development of similar system in other parts of the world. At the
same time, R&D efforts should also be re-oriented towards hybrid
vehicles in place of Battery Operated Vehicles.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry has been supporting research and development in
non-silicon thin film solar cell technologies. However, thin film solar

24


cell technologies still require further development to be reliable and
cost-competitive. As a matter of fact over 90% of the world production
of solar cells in 2004 was based on crystalline silicon which is at
present considered more reliable and cost-efficient. Prices of indigenous
solar cells appear to be competitive with respect to international prices
as a major share of domestic production is currently being exported.

As regards maintenance of renewable energy systems/devices, the
endeavour has been to build in long-term maintenance contract costs
into initial system cost. Systems/devices are generally owned by
individuals, legal entities or State Governments who as beneficiaries
are expected to take care of repairs and maintenance after the initial
contract period for repair and maintenance is over.

The Committee's recommendation to reorient R&D focus on the
development of IC engine electrie motor hybrid vehicle has been duly
noted although development work on BOVs needs to proceed on a
parallel track.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (51, No. 4, Para No. 2.20)

The Committee note that India has been implanting one of the
largest renewable energy programmes in the world. It has formulated
and implemented a large diversity of renewable energy technologies
such as wind, solar, biogas, biomass, small hydro and many new
technologies such as hydrogen energy, chemical sources of energy
including fuel cell energy, bio-fuels, etc. However, the penetration of
renewables is far less as compared to the potential despite several
innovative policies and measures used to promote them. The reason is
not beyond the comprehension of the Committee. There are some
renewable sources of energy like solar energy which is abundantly
available but the technology has not yet achieved maturity. On the
other hand, there are some renewable technologies like wind power,
biomass gasifiers, small hydro power having high potentials of
45000 MW, 16000 MW and 15000 MW respectively and are matured
and proven and have reached commercialisation stage. Yet these are
unable to make any remarkable impact in the field of renewable energy
sector, As by the end of the year 2004, it is possible to achieve only

25


2980 MW of wind energy, 62 MW of biomass gasifier and 1693 MW
of small hydro power. The Committee feel that now it is the high
time to analyse and understand the significance of renewables and the
impact of policies and measure on their penetration and performance.
It is the opinion of the Committee that technologies at different stages
of development need different sets of policies and programmes.
Research, development and demonstration are required for new
emerging technologies which are in the demonstration phase like SPV,
hydrogen energy, fuel cell energy, biofuels, etc. for cost reduction and
high performance. On the other hand, commercialisation and private
sector’s involvement are required for technological Mature and proven
sources which have reached the commercialization phase like small
hydro, wind power, solar water heating system, biomass gasifier, etc.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that various renewable energy
resources pertaining to various programmes should be prioritised in
the light of the technological advancement and their potentialities and
allocate the higher budget for their advancement accordingly. Massive
campaign are also required for these types of technologies to increase
public awareness which alone would be helpful in increasing the
demand for renewable energy systems and devices. The Committee
also desire that Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should
persuade all the State Governments to amend their building bye-laws
and municipal laws to make it compulsory to install solar water heating
systems in all the high rise buildings as has been done in the States
of Maharashtra and Karnataka.

Reply of the Government

The Ministry has been laying emphasis on ‘mass awareness on
renewable energy through the launch of different media campaigns.
The 20th August, the birth anniversary of the late Prime Minister,
Shri Rajiv Gandhi has been declared as ‘Renewable Energy Day’
[Akshay Urja Diwas] for the purpose of creating awareness on
renewable energy. A publicity campaign to create awareness on the
benefits of the solar water heating systems is being initiated throughout
the country through electronic and print medias.

As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry’s endeavour will
be to persuade State Governments/local bodies to amend bye-laws for
compulsory use of solar water heating systems, wherever such systems
are considered desirable and cost effective,

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)

26


Recommendation (SI. No. 14, Para No. 3.40)

The Committee note that during the last several years, the Ministry
has not been able to utilize the amount allocated for the Biomass
gasifier programme. This shows the lack of proper attention by the
Government on such an important programme. The Committee are of
the view that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources should
be more specific in identifying the reasons for under achievements in
the physical and financial field and then pursue their case on sound
footing with the Ministry of Finance so that they may not be able to
impose financial cut on the Biomass Gasifier Programme during the
current financial year. The Committee, however, find that the target
fixed for the programme is quite low particularly when the biomass
generation potential is of the order of 19,500 MW and the technology
to harness them is quite mature. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should fix higher targets and allocate more budget
for the Biomass gasifier programme from the next financial year so
that the abundantly available biomass resources may be harnessed
expeditiously in a time-bound manner. To get better results, the
Committee desire that the Government should provide more incentives
to Village Panchayats interested in Biomass Gasifier Programme.

Reply of the Government

The gross potential of bio-energy is estimated at 22,200 MW that
includes: (i) 16,000 MW from agro residues and forestry wastes,
(ii) 3,500 MW surplus power from bagasse co-generation, and (iii) 2700 MW
from urban and industrial wastes apart from 50000-100000 MW from
biomass that can be obtained from plantations on wastelands.

The target for bio-power, during the 10th and 11th Plan periods is
3000 MW (corresponding to 3% of the additional power generation
capacity to be set up during the 10 year period) of which the target
for the 10th Plan is 830 MW. During the first three years of 10th Plan,
398 MW of bio-power i.e., 300 MW from biomass combustion, 68 MW
from bagasse co-generation, 15 MW from biomass gasification, and
30 MW from urban & industrial waste-to-energy has been installed,
which was 3% of the additional power generation capacity set up
during the said period.

The barriers to accelerate the growth of bio-power are (i) raw
material availability in requisite quantity and quality, (ii) plant capacity
limitations on account of nature of raw materials and difficulties
associated with its collection and transportation to the plant site

27


(iii) requirement of fiscal and financial incentives, and (iv) requirement
of preferential tariffs. Until such time as the aforesaid four barriers
can be addressed in a reasonable and meaningful manner and bio-
power can compete with conventional power without incentives/
preferential tariffs, the current aim for bio-power of 3% of the additional
power generation capacity to be set up in the country appears highly
reasonable and satisfactory.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 37 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (SI. No. 2, Para No. 2.18)

The Committee find that the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources/Planning Commission have decided to transfer IREP to State
Governments and discontinue some of the other programmes like SPV
pumping systems for individuals, SPV power plants and Battery
Operated Vehicles (BOVs) due to various reasons. The Committee are
surprised to note that Planning Commission has unilaterally decided
to transfer IREP, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to the States without
consulting the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. This has
been done at the stage when the Centre’s committed liabilities under
IREP are of the order of Rs. 28 crore pertaining to years 2003-04 and
2004-05 and the Scheme had been recast recently raising Central
assistance from 20% to 50%. The Committee feel that the Scheme should
have been thoroughly examined at that point of time instead of taking
piece-meal decisions. Now that the States have represented to the
Planning Commission and the Ministry to continue this scheme in the
same form, the Committee desire that the Scheme should be reviewed
in its entirety to decide all the matters and to ensure that the Scheme
shall achieve its desired goal.

Reply of the Government

The observations of the Committee have been noted and conveyed
to the Planning Commission.

{Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 3.26)

The Committee note that as against the projected target of 80 MW
under the Urban and Industrial Waste Programme during the

29


Tenth Five Year Plan, the Ministry has been able to achieve 23.25 MW
during the first three years of the Plan period with an expenditure of
Rs. 19.67 crore. After analyzing the utilization of funds under this
programme, the Committee find that there are major slippages during
2003-04 and 2004-05. During 2003-04 they could spent only
Rs. 4.34 crore against RE of Rs. 7.04 crore and during 2004-05 they
have spent Rs. 4.42 crore only upto 15.03.2005 against RE of
Rs. 10 crore. The Committee are not satisfied with the justification
given by the Ministry about the poor utilization of fund allocated for
this project. The Committee find that the factors mentioned by the
Ministry like delay in signing various agreements for supply of wastes,
land lease, power purchase obtaining statutory clearances and delay
in project development etc. for delay in implementing of programme
simply show that lack of proper efforts on the part of the Ministry,
With this type of casual approach, it does not seem possible to achieve
the targets set for the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should adopt a multiprong approach to
achieve the financial and physical targets of Tenth Plan. The Committee
desire that single window clearance systems should be developed to
obtain clearances in a time-bound manner. The Committee specifically
desire that the Ministry should finalise the National Master Plan for
development of waste to energy. They also desire that R&D efforts
should be expedited for reduction in cost of power production from
Municipal waste. The Committee would also like time-bound initiatives
to modify financial support scheme which is under review to give a
major fillip to this programme. The Committee may be apprised of
the efforts undertaken by the Ministry, and outcome thereof.

Reply of the Government

A consolidated reply to Recommendation Nos. 10 and 11 is given
under Recommendation No. 11.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-
P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Recommendation (SI. No. 11, Para No. 3.27)

The Committee note that as per database prepared for
299 Class-I cities and 36 Class-II cities, it is estimated that more than
30 million tones of solid waste and 4400 million cubic meters of liquid
waste are generated every year in the urban areas of the country.
There is a potential for generating about 1700 MW of power from
urban/Municipal wastes. The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy

30


Sources has launched the National Programme on Energy Recovery
from Urban and Industrial waste during the year 1995-96. But the
Committee are sorry to note that no significant progress has been
made so far particularly in the field of energy from Municipal solid
Wastes. Only three projects have been commissioned in the field of
power production from Municipal Solid Waste. These projects are
situated at Lucknow (5 MW), Vijayawada (6 MW) and Hyderabad
(6 MW). The Committee had an opportunity to visit one of such
projects situated at Hyderabad. The Committee are impressed and
appreciate the initiative taken by M/s SELCO International in treating
the Municipal Solid Waste of Hyderabad City by installation of 6 MW
capacity MSW based power plant and RDF preparation plant based
on MSW. The Committee also have an information that in the metro
cities of Delhi and Mumbai and some other cities like Vijayawada.
Municipal bodies are willing to establish similar Waste-to-Energy
projects/plants. As an initial step, segregation of wastes has already
started. The Committee desire for similar promising projects from all
the major cities where huge quantity of solid waste is generated. For
this purpose, they should provide the required technologies and
expertise to all the interested promoters in consultation with State
Government authorities and experts. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Government should give all possible subsidies/
incentives to the promoters interested in such projects. The Committee
also note that the state-of-art technologies for energy projects for
Municipal waste in general are not available in the country. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should
take all the initiatives to make the state-of-art technologies for such
projects indigenously available.

Reply of the Government
[Consolidated reply to Recommendations at serial Nos. 10 and 11]

The Ministry has formulated for the accelerated promotion of
projects for Energy Recovery from Urban Solid Waste. Following the
commissioning of RDF-combustion route projects at Hyderabad and
Vijayawada, it is proposed to promote power generation from MSW
through a similar route. The proposed strategy under the new
programme might feature:

— Development of projects through public-private partnership
for specific cities.

— Assistance for fast track project activities that include
identification of project site, assessment of quality and
quantity of waste, preparation of waste collection and

31


transportation plan, finalization of power purchase
agreement, development of a bankable project with:
Feasibility Report and Detailed Project Report; obtaining all
statutory clearances for the project, firming up of means of
projects finance, preparation of bid document, and
supervision during implementation and commissioning.

Provision of central financial assistance for making such
projects financially viable. A higher level of assistance for
the state-of-the-art (to be defined) demonstration Projects.

Financial support for R&D under the R&D policy of the
Ministry.

Review of the draft National Master Plan for the development of
waste to energy has been completed and the final document is under
preparation. A detailed Information Package is also being prepared
for providing necessary information to all stakeholders.

After notification of the proposed scheme, all municipal
corporations, particularly those in major cities having substantial
quantity of MSW, will be encouraged to take advantage of the
incentives being offered by developing and implementing MSW to
Energy projects for their cities.

[Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources OM No. 8/2/2005-

P&C Dated: 12.08.2005]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see Para 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)

New Dew; GURUDAS KAMAT,
February 28, 2006 Chairman,
Phalguna 9, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

32


ANNEXURE I

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2005-2006) HELD ON 28.02.2006 IN

The

+

+e

COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘C’, PHA, NEW DELHI
Committee met from 1500 hours to 1630 hrs.

PRESENT

Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh—In the Chair

MEMBERS

Shri Gauri Shankar Chaturbhuj Bisen
Shri Ajay Chakraborty
Shri Chander Kumar

Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Shri Prashanta Pradhan
Shri Kiren Rijiju

Shri M.K. Subba

Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
Shri Matilal Sarkar

Shri Motilal Vora

Shri Jesu Dasu Seelam

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Surender Singh — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Shiv Kumar _ — Under Secretary

WITNESSES

कक

ae

ae

a

33


As the Chairman was not present, the Committee chose another
member, Shri Vijayendra Pal Singh, M.P. under Rule 258 to act as
Chairman for that sitting. The Chairman welcomed the Members of
the Committee to the sitting.

2. The Committee then took up for consideration for the following
draft Reports:

(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 5th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Power.

(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in
the 6th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources.

3. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports with slight
modifications.

4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise these
Reports and to present/lay the same to the House of Parliament.

5, +« a कक
6. ** ae कक
(The witnesses then withdrew)

7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee was kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

34


ANNEXURE II
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATION CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF

I.

Il.

Iv.

THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
Total No. of Recommendations

Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government

(vide recommendations at SI.Nos. 1, 5,

6, 7, 9, 12, 16 & 17)

Percentage of total

Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's replies

(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 8, 13 & 15)

Percentage of total
Recommendations in respect of which reply
of the Government has not been accepted

by the Committee
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4 & 14)

Percentage of total
Recommendation in respect of which final
reply of the Government are still awaited

(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 10 and 11)

Percentage of total

17

8

47%

17.6%

17.6%

17.6%

35