STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL GRID
THIRTY SEVENTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
37

THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF POWER
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL GRID
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25.05.2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

COE No. 237
Price : Rs. 74.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-2013) ....................................... (iii)
ACRONYMS ................................................................................................. (v)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
I. Introductory..... ........................................................................... 1
II. Synchronous Inter-connection of Southern Grid with
New Grid .................................................................................... 3
III. Strengthening of National Grid ............................................... 5
IV . High Capacity Corridors/Green Energy Corridor ............... 14
V . Grid Management ...................................................................... 21
VI. Grid Discipline ........................................................................... 23
VII. Power Exchanges/T ransaction of Electricity .......................... 37
VIII. Modernization/Technological up-gradation of Grid ........... 39
PART II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee ............ 43
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
1st November, 2012 ................................................................... 57
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19th December, 2012 .................................................................. 60
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
7th May, 2013 .............................................................................. 63

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
*3. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
@ 7. Smt. Mausam Noor
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
(iii)
* Passed away on 1st March, 2013.
@Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.05.2013

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
24. Shri Y.S.Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
#30. Shri K.C. Tyagi
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant
# Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.03.2013.

ACRONYMS
AC - Accelerated Current
AT&C - Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses
BTPS - Badarpur Thermal Power Station
CCGT - Combined Cycle Gas Turbine
CEA - Central Electricity Authority
CERC - Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
CESC - Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation
cKm - Circuit Kilometers
CPP - Captive Power Plant
CTU - Central Transmission Utility
D/C - Direct Current
DMRC - Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DR - Disturbance Recorder
DTL - Delhi Transco Limited
DVC - Damodar Valley Corporation
EHV - Extra High Voltage
ER - Eastern Region
FOR - Forum of Regulators
GW - Giga Watt
HCPTC - High Capacity Po wer Transmission Corridor
HEP - Hydro Electric Power
HVDC - High V oltage Direct Current
Hz. - Hertz
IEGC - Indian Electricity Grid Code
IEX - Indian Energy Exchange
(v)

IPP - Independent Power Producer
ISTS - Inter State Transmission System
J&K - Jammu and Kashmir
kV - Kilovolts
kWh - Kilowatt hour
MMRE - Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MoP - Ministry of Power
MU - Million Unit
MVA - Mega Volt Ampere
MW - Mega Watt
NALCO - National Aluminium Company
NDMC - New Delhi Municipal Council
NER - North Eastern Region
NEW Grid - Northern, North-Eastern, Eastern and Western Grid
NLDC - National Load Despatch Centre
NR - Northern Region
NRLDC - Nor thern Regional Load Despatch Centre
NRPC - Northern Regional Power Committee
PMU - Phasor Measurement Unit
POSOCO - Power System Operation Corporation Limited
PSB - Power Swing Blocking
PSS - Power System Stabilizer
PXIL - Power Exchange of India Limited
RE - Renewable Energy
RES - Renewable Energy Source
RLDC - Regional Load Despatch Centre
RoW - Right of Way
RPC - Regional Power Committee
RPO - Renewable Purchase Obligation
(vi)

RSTCL - Raichur Sholapur Transmission Company Limited
S/C - Single Circuit
SEB - State Electricity Board
SHP - Small Hydro Power
SLDC - State Load Despatch Centre
SR - Southern Region
STU - State Transmission Utility
TPS - Thermal Power Station
UFR - Under Frequency Relay
UHVAC - Ultra High Voltage Alternating Current
UI - Unscheduled Interchange
URTDSM - Unified Real Time Dynamic State Measurement
UT - Union Territory
WAMS - Wide Area Monitoring Systems
WR - Western Region
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
I. Introductory
The exploitable energy resources are not uniformly distributed in
the Country. As a result, some regions do not have adequate natural
resources for setting up power plants to meet power requirements,
whereas, others have abundant natural resources. Since, the generating
power stations development is based on natural resources, therefore, there
is a need to transport bulk power across various regions of the Country
efficiently and economically . This necessitates setting up of the National
Grid which connects various regions of the Country in a continuous
network of transmission lines integrated into one grid so as to transmit
power from resource rich areas to deficit areas as well as to facilitate
scheduled and unscheduled exchange of power.
1.2 In 1989, transmission wings of Central generating companies
were separated to set up Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL)
to give thrust to implementation of transmission system associated with
Central generating stations and Inter-Regional transmission programme
based on perspective planning done by CEA. Till then, the generation
and transmission systems in the country were planned and developed
on the basis of regional self sufficiency and the initial set of inter-regional
links developed under the Centrally sponsored programme for building
inter-state infrastructure of State utilities, was utilized to facilitate exchange
of operational surpluses among the various Regions in a limited manner
because the Regional Grids operated independently and had different
operating frequencies and the power exchanges on these inter-regional
links could take place only in radial mode.
1.3 Since the advent of the current century , the focus of planning
the generation and the transmission system in the country has
shifted from the orientation of regional self-sufficiency to the concept
of optimization of utilization of resources on all-India basis.

2
Generation planning studies carried out by CEA had indicated that
the capacity addition planned on all-India basis is less than planned on
regional basis. Further, a strong all-India integrated national grid
enables harnessing of unevenly distributed generation resources in the
country. Recognizing the need for development of National Grid, thrust
was given to enhance the capacity of inter-regional links in a phased
manner.
1.4 Considering the operational regime of the various Regional
Grids, it was decided around 1990s to establish initially asynchronous
connection between the Regional Grids to enable them to exchange large
regulated quantum of power. Accordingly, a 500 MW asynchronous HVDC
back-to-back link between the Northern Region and the Western Region
at Vindhyachal was established. Subsequently, similar links between
Western Region and Southern Region and between Eastern Region and
Southern Region and between Eastern Region and Northern Region were
established.
1.5 In 1992, the Eastern Region and the North-Eastern Region were
synchronously interconnected through Birpara-Salakati 220kV double
circuit transmission line and subsequently by a 400 kV D/C Bongaigaon
-Malda line. Western Region was interconnected to ER-NER system
synchronously through 400kV Rourkela-Raipur D/C line in 2003 and thus
the Central India system consisting of ER-NER-WR came in to operation.
In 2006 with commissioning of Muzaffarpur-Gorakhpur 400kV D/C line,
the Northern region also got interconnected to this system making an
upper India system having the NR-WR-ER-NER system. In 2007 NR was
also synchronously interconnected with WR through Agra-Gwalior 765kV
S/C line-1 400kV operation. Now, the Government has planned
synchronous interconnection of Southern Grid with North, West, East
and North-Eastern Grid (NEW Grid) through two high capacity lines by
March, 2014.
1.6 The following major benefits have been envisaged by
establishment of a National Grid:—
(i) It would enable optimal setting, development and utilization
of power potential through coal, hydro and other resources,
in the overall interest of the Nation.
(ii) It would enable bulk exchange of electricity from one part
of the country to another part.

3
(iii) It w ould be beneficial in optimization of generation capacity
requirement due to various factors like time diversity,
spinning reserves requirements, improvement of hydro-
thermal mix of connected regions.
(iv) It would extend economies of scale by enabling setting up
of large sized pit-head based power stations and considerably
cheaper cost of transmission of power compared to
transportation of fuel.
(v) It would enable exchange of power amongst the regions for
optimization of generation resources, meeting commercial
obligations and meeting emergencies in other regions.
(vi) Improve economy, reliability and quality of power
supply.
II. Synchronous Inter-connection of Southern Grid with New
Grid
1.7 The development of National Grid has been a gradual process
involving the setting up of five regional grids namely Northern Grid
(NR), Eastern Grid (ER), Western Grid (WR), Southern Grid (SR) and the
North-Eastern Grid (NER) with interconnection between these regional
grids. This process involved setting up of asynchronous interconnections
between the above regional grids initially and then establishing
synchronous interconnections with All-India integrated planning. Four
regional grids viz. Northern Grid (NR), Eastern Grid (ER), Western Grid
(WR) and the North-Eastern Grid (NER), also known as NEW Grid, are
interconnected in synchronous mode, whereas, Southern Region is
presently connected to NEW Grid through HVDC (asynchronous) link
with 4000 MW capacity.
1.8 When asked about the concept of grid interconnection in
synchronous and asynchronous mode, it was elaborated that in
synchronous mode two buses are interconnected by an AC (Alternating
Current) line, while an HVDC interconnection is called an asynchronous
interconnection. When a synchronous interconnection is established, the
two substations and their grids are combined to form one grid and all
substations in the combined grid would have the same frequency and
events like faults, contingencies, voltage conditions etc. in any part of the
grid would have an impact on the entire grid.

4
1.9 In a synchronous interconnection, power flow through the
synchronous link depends upon laws of physics and cannot be controlled.
In case of an asynchronous link, the power is converted from AC to
Direct Current (DC) power and then converted back into AC power again.
Hence, the parameters of individual grids remain as they were before
interconnection.
1.10 Benefit of asynchronous interconnection is that we can connect
two grids having different frequencies through asynchronous link. Also,
we can control the power flow through the link, unlike a synchronous
link. Drawback of asynchronous link is that the conversion of AC to DC
and back to AC would require installation of converters which are cost
intensive. Such a link is cost effective for transmission of power over a
long distance. Further, it is used for point-to-point long distance
transmission of power.
1.11 Synchronization of Southern Region with NEW Grid is under
implementation through two 765 kV lines connecting Sholapur (WR) to
Raichur (SR). One of the circuits is being implemented by a private
company selected through competitive bidding route. The other circuit
is being implemented by PowerGrid. These links will pave the way for
interconnection of all five regional grids in synchronous mode having
same frequency.
1.12 Replying to a query raised by the Committee about the time
period for the completion of these projects, the Secretary, Ministry of
Power, deposed before the Committee:—
“One of the points that came up last time was the interconnection
of Southern region with the rest of the country. We informed last
time that two lines were being developed to connect the Southern
region with the rest of the country. These two lines of 765 KV
between Raichur and Sholapur are being developed. This work is
likely to be completed by January 2014.”
1.13 The cost of one circuit of 765 kV Raichur-Sholapur line, being
implemented by Raichur Sholapur Transmission Company Limited
(RSTCL), at the time of bidding was estimated at Rs. 440 crores. The cost
of second circuit of 765 kV Raichur-Sholapur line being implemented by
POWERGRID has been estimated at Rs. 246.37 crores. In regard to
arrangement of funds for these projects, it was stated that the respective
companies would finance the project through internal resources and debt
from the market.

5
1.14 The status of progress of work of the above projects as
furnished by the Ministry of Power is given below:—
Line Line Tower Stub Tower Stringing Problem being faced
being Length Location Com- erected Com-
imple- pleted (Nos.) pleted
mented (km) (Nos.) (Nos.) (km)
by
RSTCL 208 541 218 9 0 Right of Way problem
at 18 locations in
Afjalpur area and 12
locations at Jewergi
area in Karnataka.
RSTCL is taking action
to resolve the problem.
Power 208 547 75 8 0 -
Grid
1.15 When the Committee asked about the details of Right of Way
(RoW) problems and the remedial action taken by the RSTCL, it was
stated that now, RSTCL has resolved RoW issues at all the 18 locations
in Afjalpur area in Karnataka. As regard 12 locations facing RoW problems
in Jewergi area in Karnataka, issues have already been resolved at 6 locations.
The land owners at other locations have been demanding higher compensation
for their land for which action is being taken by RSTCL. It was further stated
that all projects under competitive bidding are being monitored by the
Government periodically and whenever the intervention of the Government
is requested for by the company it is extended appropriately.
III. Strengthening of National Grid
1.16 All India installed capacity (in MW) of power stations located
in the regions of main land and islands as on 31.03.2013 is as follows:—
Sl. REGION COAL THERMAL TOTAL Nuclear HYDRO R.E.S.@ TOTAL
No. GAS DSL (Renew- (MNRE)
able)
1. Northern 32413.50 4781.26 12.99 37207.75 1620.00 15467.75 5589.25 59884.75
2. Western 49257.01 8988.31 17.48 58262.80 1840.00 7447.50 8986.93 76537.23
3. Southern 25032.50 4962.78 939.32 30934.60 1320.00 11353.03 12251.85 55859.48
4. Eastern 23457.88 190.00 17.20 23665.08 0.00 3981.12 454.91 28101.11
5. N. Eastern 60.00 1187.50 142.74 1390.24 0.00 1242.00 252.68 2884.92
6. Islands 0.00 0.00 70.02 70.02 0.00 0.00 6.10 76.12
7. All India 130220.89 20109.85 1199.75 151530.49 4780.00 39491.40 27541.71 223343.60
Captive Generation Capcity in Industries having demand of 1 MW or above, Grid
interactive(as on 31-03-2011) = 34444.12 MW.
@ Renewable Energy Sources (RES) includes Small Hydro Project(SHP),Biomass Power(BP),
Urban and Industrial waste Power(U&I), Wind Energy and Solar Power.

6
1.17 Capacity addition to the tune of 88,537 MW has been envisaged
for the 12th Plan from conventional source. Besides, a target of
30,000 MW has been set for New and Renewable sources. Being aware
of the fact that National Electricity Policy emphasize for setting up more
and more pithead power plants, the Committee enquired about the
locations of the upcoming coal based thermal projects. In reply to that
it was informed that coal based thermal projects totaling to 97,720 MW
are under construction. Out of this 37,380 MW are located at Pithead,
14,910 MW are at coastal location, and 45,430 MW are at other locations.
1.18 Considering the fact that the transmission of electricity from
one place to another is cheaper than that of transportation of coal, the
very reason that necessitated the need for creation and development of
a National Grid, the Committee asked as to why coal based thermal
plants are still being planned at places other than the pithead or coastal
locations. The Ministry in their written reply have stated as under:—
“It has been inter alia  stipulated in the National Electricity Policy
that:—
(i) Imported coal based thermal power stations, particularly at
coastal locations would be encouraged based on their
economic viability.
(ii) Significant lignite resources in the country are located in
Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Rajasthan and these should be
increasingly utilized for power generation.
(iii) For thermal power, economics of generation and supply of
electricity should be the basis for choice of fuel from among
the options available. It would be economical for new
generating stations to be located either near the fuel sources
e.g. at pithead locations or load centres.
For locating a thermal power station, availability of a large area
of land, availability of large quantity of water for cooling and other
infrastructure facilities like road and rail connectivity for
transportation of equipments and coal are required. Thermal power
projects are being set up in different States depending upon
availability of land, water and other infrastructure facilities. Some
plants near load centres are also considered necessary for energy
security of those States.”

7
1.19 The Secretary, Ministry of Power during the evidence, further
explained the reasons for setting up of thermal power plants at locations
other than pitheads or coastal areas as under:—
“Transporting power is definitely cheaper than transporting coal.
There is no dispute in that. When you are developing a huge system,
you need also to take some technical factors into consideration.
The experts in the power system believe that although you are
trying to incentivise setting up of power plant near pitheads, yet,
there should be a balance in terms of generation capacities coming
up both near the pitheads as well as the load centres. The power
experts feel that if all the generating stations are going to come up
near the pitheads, this would not be in the best interest of the
development of the Grid. So, they attempt to see the balance between
the plants coming up near the pitheads as well as plants coming
up from the load centres. This is how the power planning is done
with the assistance and advice of technical experts.
The additional point is that today, the generation activity in itself
is delicensed. Nobody needs to take licence; he can set up a plant
of his choice subject to getting other clearances. Two things would
operate here — one is the overall requirement of grid security,
stability, etc. and other technical considerations which would expect
you to plan a balanced development of generation plus you already
have a delicensed activity where a person can choose that a place
where he wanted to set up generation.”
1.20 National Grid, which consists of Intra-State, Inter-State and
Inter-Regional transmission network, is expressed in terms of total circuit
kilometres of the transmission lines and the total transmission capacity
of the sub-stations. At present about 2,70,000 circuit kilometres (ckm.)
of transmission lines and about 4,20,000 MVA sub-station capacity is
existing at the voltage level of 220kV and above.
1.21 Inter-Regional capacity of National Grid which was about
14,100 MW at the beginning of the 11th Plan was enhanced to 27,750 MW
at the end of 11th Plan. The figure of 27,750 MW is capacity of inter-
regional transmission links and it only gives an indication of the strength
of bond between regional grids. These inter-regional links are used to
facilitate the exchange of power among various regions.
Details of the inter-regional capacity are as follows:—
• NR to ER — 12130 MW
• NR to WR — 4220 MW

8
• WR to SR — 1520 MW
• WR to ER — 4390 MW
• ER to SR — 3630 MW
• ER to NER — 1260 MW
• Other Inter-Regional links — 600 MW
1.22 It was informed that strengthening of National Grid is being
done to meet the requirement of inter-regional transfer of power from
various generation projects being set-up in the country with beneficiaries
across the regions. Earlier, generation/transmission planning was being
done on regional self-sufficiency basis. However, as the generation
resources in the country are concentrated in a few pockets, with load
centres located at far-off locations, need was felt for bulk transfer of
power across the regions. Accordingly, inter-regional interconnections
were established among the regions in a phased manner depending upon
the requirement of power transfer across the regions.
1.23 The inter-regional transmission capacity is planned to be
enhanced to about 66,000 MW from 27,750 MW by adding 38,400 MW
during the 12th Plan. It was informed that it is in consonance with the
requirement of generation addition during the plan. In addition, intra-
State transmission system is being added/planned by State Transmission
Utilities for implementation to cater to power transfer within the State.
At 220 kV and above level, about 1,07,000 circuit kilometres of transmission
lines, sub-stations of 2,70,000 MVA and HVDC terminals of about 12,750
MW capacity are planned to be added to meet the 12th Plan requirement.
1.24 In regard to the targets of transmission capacity addition during
the 12th Plan, the Secretary, Ministry of Power, during the evidence stated
as under:—
“In the Twelfth Plan, the generation capacity addition is expected
to be about eighty-eight thousand five hundred megawatts. On this
basis, an assessment has been done as to what will be the inter-
regional transfer capacity required and with this estimation, we are
planning to develop inter-regional capacity of thirty eight thousand
four hundred megawatts in the Twelfth Plan. This will be in addition
to the transmission lines that will be built both for inter-region or
intra-state during the Twelfth Plan.”
1.25 The Committee was informed that the fund requirement for
development of transmission system proposed for the 12th Plan is

9
estimated to be of the order of Rs. 2,00,000 crore. When the Committee
desired to know as to how this huge amount of fund will be arranged,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power deposed before the Committee as under:—
“We will get the viability gap funding. The Planning Commission
also agreed to the power sector getting it. Intra-State power
transmission projects will be eligible for viability gap funding. If
you look at Rs. 2,00,000 crore figure that is mentioned there, there
are three components – Central Transmission Utility, that is,
Powergrid, private licencees and State Transmission Utilities. CTU
will not have any difficulty in raising the money and they do not
need viability gap funding. The same will hold good for licencees.
It could be the State Transmission Utilities which could be in need
of viability gap funding, which they will get. There will not be a
problem. For the State Transmission Utility, which constructs intra-
State transmission systems, will be eligible for viability gap
funding.”
1.26 When the Committee asked about the details of the
transmission projects proposed for the 12th Plan, in a written reply the
Ministry have stated as under:—
“ A number of inter-regional transmission links have been planned
to be added during the 12th Plan period. These links have been
planned either as associated with the generation projects or as
system strengthening schemes. Their implementation would depend
upon the progress of associated generating stations. Details of Inter-
Regional Transmission links planned for XII Plan is given below:—
Details of Inter-Regional Transmission links planned
for XII Plan
Inter-Regional Link Transmission
Capacity in MW
12
ER–NR:
Gaya—Varanasi 765kV S/C 2,100
Barh—Gorakhpur 400kV D/C quad 1,600
Sasaram—Fatehpur 765kV S/C—line#2 2,100
ER—NR total 5,800
ER—WR:
Ranchi—WR(Bilaspur)Sipat Pooling P oint 765kV 2,100
S/C via  Dharamjaigarh

10
Ranchi—Dharamjaigarh 765kV S/C 2,100
Jharsuguda—Dharamjaigarh 765kV D/C 4,200
ER—WR total 8,400
ER—NER:
Bongaigaon—Siliguri 400kV D/C Quad to be LIL 1,600
Oed at Alipurduar
ER—NER total 1,600
NR—WR:
Agra—Gwalior 765kV S/C line—1 at 765 kV 1,000
(earlier at 400kV)
Agra—Gwalior 765kV S/C line—2 at 765kV 1,000
(earlier at 400kV)
Gwalior—Jaipur 765kV S/C#1 2,100
Gwalior—Jaipur 765kV S/C#2 2,100
RAPP C&D— Shujalpur 400kV D/C 1,000
Champa—Kurukshetra + 800kV 6000MW HVDC 3,000
bipole line, Ph.-I
NR—WR total 10,200
WR—SR:
Narendra( Kudgi) (GIS) – Kolhapur (new) 765kV 2,200
D/C line (initially charged at 400 kV)
Details of Inter—Regional Transmission links
planned for XII Plan
Raichur—Sholapur 765kVS/C #1 2,100
Raichur—Sholapur 765kV S/C #2 2,100
WR—SR total 6,400
NER/ER—NR/WR:
Bishwanath Chariyali –Agra + 800 kV , 3000 MW 3,000
HVDC bipole.
LILO of + 800kV Bishwanath Chariy ali – Agra 3,000
HVDC Bipole at new pooling station in Alipurduar
and addition of
second 3000 MW HVDC
NER/ER—NR/WR total 6,000
TOTAL ALL INDIA 38,400
12

11
1.27 When the Committee asked about the problems/hindrances
being faced in implementation of transmission projects, the Ministry in
their written reply have stated as under:—
“Transmission projects are cross country and their implementation
is greatly dependent on availability of Right of Way (RoW), apart
from timely availability of forest clearances. While advance actions
have been/are being initiated for submission of forest clearance
proposals and other requisite approvals, RoW resolution is
progressing as the work progresses. Specific problems presently
being faced in various Inter-regional lines are enumerated below:—
765 kV single circuit (S/C) Ranchi – WR Pooling Station Line:
Project involves about 316 hactares (ha) of forest, out of which
clearance for 302 ha of forest area in Chhattisgarh is still
awaited, which is affecting implementation of the project.
2xS/C 765 kV Gwalior-Jaipur Line: Project involves Great
Indian Bustard and Chambal Wild Life Sanctuary. Considering
that approval involves clearance from Hon’ble Supreme Court,
through National Wild Life Board (NWLB), which is a long
drawn process, timely availability of clearance would be
critical for implementation of the link.
Biswanath Chariyali - Agra +/- 800 kV , 3000 MW HVDC Bi-
pole: The link is meant to transfer power from various
generation projects in North Eastern Region to Northern/
Western Region. It is gathered that the associated generation
projects (Lower Subansiri and Kameng Hydro Electric Project
(HEP) are affected due to agitation in Assam against large
hydro project which may ultimately delay the generation
project. The agitation coupled with militancy is also affecting
associated evacuation lines. These are likely to affect
implementation of the inter-regional link.”
1.28 The Committee were informed that one of the major issues
being faced in the laying of transmission line is the Right of Way (RoW).
In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Power before the Committee
deposed:—
“This is a matter [RoW] which is gaining a lot of importance now.
We are finding it more and more difficult to get right of way. To
get over this issue the Power Grid is adopting different strategies.
They are going for higher and higher voltages to see that the right
of way issues are reduced, and we have more transformation

12
capacity per metre of right of way. The Powergrid is going in for
higher voltages like 765 kV AC, HVDC and so on. They are also
looking at innovative tower designs; they are looking at use of
multi-circuit towers and so on to reduce the difficulties of right
of way.”
1.29 List of inter-regional links planned in XII Plan as furnished
by the Ministry having issues and their status is given below:—
Inter-regional
link
(Capacity)
1
Ranchi-WR
Pooiling
Station 765kV
S/c line(2100
MW)
Gwalior-
Jaipur 765kV
2xS/c lines
(4200 MW)
Biswanath
Chariyali -
Agra +/- 800
kV , 3000 MW
HVDC Bi-
pole (3000
MW)
Target Status
23
2013-14 Under
implementation
[Transmission
System for
DVC and
Maithon
Generation
Projects]
2014-15 Under
2015-16 implemen-
tation [one
line in
Orissa-C and
other in
Vindhyachal-
IV and
Rehiand-III
TS]
2015-16 Under
implementation
[Tr. System
for Lower
Subansiri
and Kameng
HEPs]
Remarks
(Issues, if
any)
4
Forest
clearance for
Chhattisgarh
Portion of
line is critical
Line passing
through Wild
Life
Sanctuary
(Clearance
Critical)
Matching
implementati
on of
associated
Generation
Project in
NER
(LowerSubansiri
Actions taken to
resolve the issues
5
Line is recommended
in Forest Advisory
Committee (FAC) and
proposal is put up for
approval of MEF.
Matter is being
followed-up
constantly.
Wild life clearance for
crocodile sanctuary
for Rajasthan Portion
discussed and
recommended by
NBWL in a meeting
held on Dec.12, 2013.
For MP portion it will
be discussed in the
next NBWL meeting.
Matter is being
followed-up
constantly. After wild
life clerance
Power Grid will
move to Supreme
Court for their
permission.
Matter is being
followed-up constantly
to implement
transmission system
matching with the
progress of hydro
generation projects.

13
1.30 In regard to address the problem it was stated that Power
Grid is pursuing with the concerned authorities and the Ministry of
Environment and Forest (through Ministry of Power) to expedite approvals
for forest clearances.
1.31 The Committee pointed out that Eastern Grid Region having
direct transmission connectivity to all other regional grids, has population
of about 24 crore – about 20% of the total population of the Country,
whereas, the power generation capacity in the region is only 26,838 MW–
only about 12% of the total power generation capacity of the Country.
When the Committee desired to know as to how the development of a
National Grid will help in minimizing regional imbalances in terms of
energy availability and to protect the interests of underdeveloped and
economically weaker States, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:—
“ As per Planning Commission, capacity addition target of
88,537 MW is being planned from conventional sources during
12th Five Year Plan on an all-India basis. With this level of capacity
addition the demand for power on all-India basis is likely to be
met by the terminal year of 12th Plan (2016-17). With the National
Grid likely during 12th Plan, planning for generation capacity
addition is done on an all-India basis. As per the tariff policy, all
future requirement of power should be procured competitively by
distribution licencees. The Government has advised various States
to tie up power through Case I bidding (from project developers
or traders) or set up power plants to meet their requirement, based
on their anticipated demand supply scenario.”
1 23 4 5
and Kameng
HEP),
affected due
to agitation
against large
hydro
projects.
Immediate
evacuation
lines also
affected due
militancy.

14
1.32 In regard to grid congestion, when asked whether any
constraint was felt in transmission of electricity due to limited grid
connecting transmission capacity, it was stated that congestion during
2011-12 has been faced mainly in the import of power to Southern Grid
from the rest of the country. As per the Annual Report for 2011-12 by
the Market Monitoring Cell of CERC, in the Power Exchanges, congestion
has been observed in short term on day-to-day basis. No congestion has
been faced for long term access. In the recent past congestion has been
observed for short term/medium term export from the Chhattisgarh area
where a large no. of generators have come upwithout the generators
planning for medium to long term supplies, which has caused the power
transmission problem. It was further stated that this is now being
addressed by construction of new transmission lines to evacuate the power
from the region.
1.33 With the synchronous integration of Southern Grid with the
NEW Grid, the complexities, in ensuring the seamless transmission of
electricity throughout the Country at a desirable frequency, are bound
to increase. When the Committee enquired whether any review of the
total regional grid transfer capability has been done or proposed to cope
up the significant changes in the system, the Ministry in their reply have
stated:—
“CEA has convened three meetings to discuss loadability of
transmission lines, i.e. on 18th August 2012, 14th September 2012
and 26th September 2012. The matter was also discussed in the
eighth meeting of the Forum of Load Despatchers (FoLD) held on
3rd October 2012. POSOCO has submitted a comprehensive report
to CERC on 18th October, 2012 regarding loadability of transmission
lines, which is under consideration of CERC. The loading limits
of individual lines (about 800 important lines) have been worked
out line by line based on CEA planning criteria and CERC
regulations, which is under consideration of CERC.”
IV . High Capacity Corridors/Green Energy Corridor
1.34 For integrated development of transmission system for
transmission of power from generation projects coming-up in resource
rich/coastal States, i.e. Odisha, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh in the private sector, 11 high
capacity power transmission corridors have been planned at an estimated
cost of about Rs. 75,000 crore. Out of this Power Grid is mandated to

15
implement HCPTCs work of about Rs. 66,000 crore. The balance work
is envisaged to be implemented through private participation/tariff based
competitive bidding process. Implementation of these corridors has been
taken up in a phased manner matching with generation projects.
1.35 Explaining it further, the Secretary of Ministry of Power stated
during the evidence as under:—
“There are certain States where generation capacity is to come up
in a big way, States like Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Tamil
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh etc. From these States we need to make
arrangements for evacuation of power. So, 11 high capacity corridors
are being planned. About Rs. 75,000 crore is the estimated
investment in these eleven corridors. Most of these corridor works
is going to be done by Power Grid. And these projects are planned
to progressively come in different years of the 12th Plan. All these
projects except for one have been bid out and they are under
different stages of construction.”
1.36 Status of implementation of HCPTCs, as furnished by the
Ministry of Power is given below:—
Corridor
1
HCPTC-1 (IPPs in
Odisha)
HCPTC-2 (IPPs in
Jharkhand, West
Bengal)
HCPTC-3 (IPPs in
Sikkim)
Schedule
2
Progressively
from March, 2013
to March, 2014
Progressively
from-November,
2013 to-October,
2014
Progressively
from January ,
Status
3
- All awards placed.
- Engineering, survey and
construction in progress
- Private portion of corridor
through Tariff Based Competitive
Bidding (TBCB) awarded to
Sterlite.
- About 50% works awarded.
- In awarded packages
engineering, survey and
construction in progress.
- Award of balance 50% packages
under progress and expected in
2012-13 progressively.
- Private portion of corridor
through Tariff Based Competitive
Bidding (TBCB) awarded to
Sterlite.
- All works awarded.
- Engineering, survey and

16
1 2 3
construction in progress.
- All works awarded.
- Engineering, survey and
construction in progress.
- 70% works awarded.
- In awarded packages,
engineering, survey and
construction in progress.
- Award of balance 30% packages
under progress and expected in
2012-13 progressively.
- Private portion of corridor
through Tariff Based Competitive
Bidding (TBCB) awarded to
Sterlite.
- All works awarded.
- Engineering, survey and
construction in progress.
- All works awarded.
- Engineering, survey and
construction in progress.
- 50% works awarded.
- In awarded packages engineering
and survey recently commenced
- Award of balance 50% packages
under progress and expected to
be awarded in 2012-13
progressively .
On hold due to poor progress of
southern region independent power
producers (IPPs).
- Tendering under progress.
- Awards likely to be placed
progressively from December, 2012.
- Part of private portion of
corridor through Tariff Based
Competitive Bidding (TBCB)
awarded to Power Grid.
- Tendering under progress.
- Awards likely to be placed
2013 to
November, 2013
November, 2013
Progressively
from August,
2013 to June, 2015
August, 2014
Progressively
from April, 2014
to September,
2014
Progressively
from June, 2015
to December, 2015
2016-17
Progressively
from April, 2015
onwards
Progressively
from April, 2015
HCPTC-4 (IPPs
in Chhattisgarh
and Madhya
Pradesh)
HCPTC-5 (IPPs in
Chhattisgarh)
HCPTC-6 (IPPs in
Krishnapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh)
HCPTC-7 (IPPs in
Tuticorin,
Tamil Nadu)
HCPTC-8 (IPPs in
Srikakulam,
(Andhra Pradesh)
HCPTC-9
(Common
Corridor for
transfer of power
SR IPPs to WR/
NR)
HCPTC-10 (IPPs
in Vemagiri,
(Andhra Pradesh)
HCPTC-11 (IPPs
in Nagapattinam,

17
1.37 When the Committee enquired about the steps being taken to
ensure co-ordinate development of cost effective transmission corridors
it was informed that these corridors are being implemented in a phased
manner based on the progress of associated generating plants. For this
regular monitoring of the progress of IPP generators in Joint Coordination
Committee meetings are being carried out. Further, States have been asked
to identify and implement the end links in a time bound manner to
facilitate drawal of power from these corridors.
Green Corridors
1.38 India has huge potential of Renewable Energy (RE) resources
such as wind, solar, hydro etc. Most of the renewable capacity is in the
States of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir. These States
contribute about 80% to 90% of total renewable capacity installations in
the country. Various policy initiatives and fiscal incentives have created
interest in developing Renewable Energy (RE) generation. Regulatory
initiatives have also been taken to promote sale of RE power. Till
recently, the quantum of RE power was small and it was presumed that
connectivity with the nearest grid substation of State Transmission Utility
(STU) would suffice for power evacuation and the RE power is consumed
locally.
1.39 Now emphasis has been given to harness RE power on a large
scale as soon as possible to supplement the capacity addition from
conventional sources as well as for clean development. It is envisaged
to add about 30,000 MW renewable generation capacity during the
12th Plan period. The Renewable Energy (RE) resources are generally
located in remote locations and confined in few States only. Grid
infrastructure is needed to be sufficient to transport the renewable energy
to the load centres. Further, distribution licensees in each State, Captive
Power Plants (CPP) and Open Access Consumers must meet certain per
cent of their annual energy consumption through RE generation as part
of their Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO).
1 2 3
progressively from December,
2012.
- Part of private portion of
corridor through Tariff Based
Competitive Bidding (TBCB)
awarded to Power Grid.
onwards(Tamil Nadu)

18
1.40 The Committee were also informed that in future scenarios,
it is envisaged that home States would not be able to consume entire RE
power within the State beyond their RPO requirements and therefore RE
power has to be transmitted to other States. Therefore, development of
transmission corridors, both intra and inter-State transmission system to
meet the needs of large scale renewable energy are extremely necessary .
Without significant increase in transmission capacity, all the renewable
energy generated cannot be accommodated in the power system. The
transmission system strengthening and other infrastructures required to
facilitate integration of renewable energy sources and smooth transfer of
power from RES (which is environmental friendly) to home States as well
as other States is termed as “Green Energy Corridors”.
1.41 Vindicating the need for the development of Green Energy
Corridor, the Secretary of the Ministry of Power deposed before the
Committee:—
“In the 12th Plan we are likely to have about 30,000 MW more of
renewable energy capacity. These capacities will come up in a few
States. The power from these capacities will have to be brought out
of the State. For this, the Power Grid has made out a comprehensive
plan. This plan is of about Rs. 43,000 crore. This consists of inter/
intra State transmission systems and other related infrastructure
that are required. We are in touch with the concerned Ministries
to find out ways of funding this.”
1.42 When the Committee enquired as to how the Green Corridors
is different from the conventional energy corridors, it was informed that
besides development of transmission facilities for interconnection of
Renewable Energy Resources (RES) into grid as well as onwards transfer
of power, the Green Energy Corridors also involve other infrastructures
to address intermittency and variability features of renewable generation
unlike conventional generation. It includes installation of forecasting tools,
establishment of Renewable Energy Management Centres, energy storage
technology, dynamic compensation etc.
1.43 Recognizing the importance of promotion of renewable
generation and its integration into the grid, POWERGRID on the advice
of CERC/Forum of regulators (FOR) and MNRE has evolved a
comprehensive scheme comprising Intra State as well as Inter-state
transmission strengthening(s) and other related infrastructure to address
challenges associated with large scale renewable integration, for the
envisaged renewable capacity in the 12th Plan. The outcome of the studies

19
is presented in the report entitled “Green Energy Corridors”. The main
features of the Report are given below:—
• Presently, about 25,700MW grid interactive (Wind-17,875 MW,
Solar-1041 MW, SHP-3,422 MW others-3,365, MW) as well
as 754 MW off grid Renewable Energy (RE) generation
capacity is available in the country [As on 31.07.12: Source-
MNRE].
• As per the information provided by the respective State Nodal
Agency (SNA)/STU, envisaged renewable generation capacity
addition during 12th Plan period is about 42 GW [Wind
(30 GW), Solar (9.5 GW) and SHP (2 GW)].
• The capacity addition is mainly concentrated in the renewable
potential rich States viz. Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and small hydro in
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka and J&K.
• RE Generation especially wind is characterized by its
intermittent and variable characteristics. It has been observed
that generally wind generation peaks out in other than peak
demand hours. Solar generation, in the event of cloud cover
and rain can also go down drastically on its generation.
Further, Solar generation is not available after evening hours
to cater to peak demand requirements.
• Renewable energy generating stations are connected with the
grid normally at 33kV , 66kV , 110kV and 132kV level. The
EHV transmission system beyond first connection point is
either at 132kV , 220kV or 400kV depending on the quantum
of power being pooled at EHV Substations. However large
size generating stations are directly connected with the grid
normally at 132kV , 220kV level.
• For large scale grid integration of RE generation, Transmission
system strengthening at Intra as well as Inter-state level is
proposed:
– Intra State Strengthening (STU)- Transmission system
required for absorption of power within same area or
host state

20
– Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) — Transmission
system required for transfer of power from RE rich State
to other States and system strengthening within State for
conveyance of ISTS power
• Implementation Strategy for proposed transmission
strengthening:
(a) Intra State Strengthening
– Implemented by respective STUs.
– Support may be provided by some expert agency having
extensive experience in design, tendering, implementation
etc. for common design, standards and speedy
implementation.
(b) ISTS strengthening
– Implementation of ISTS, by agency having sufficient
experience in development of high end technologies in
Transmission System with sound project management
skills
• Proposed Measures to address intermittency and variability
of generation:
Following measures are proposed to take care of intermittency and
variability of grid connected RE generation:—
a. Strong Grid interconnections
b. Flexible generation, Ancillary Services, Reserves etc. for
supply-balancing
c. Demand Side management, Demand Response and
Storage for load balancing
d. Forecasting of Renewable generation and Forecasting of
Demand
e. Establishment of Renewable Energy Management Centers
(REMC) equipped with advanced forecasting tools along
with reliable communication infrastructure

21
f. Deployment of Synchrophasor technology, i.e. PMUs/
WAMS on pooling stations and interconnection with
centralized control centre through Fiber Optic
Communication for real time information, monitoring and
control
V . Grid Management
1.44 The Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the Central Government
may make region-wise demarcation of the country and from time-to-time
to make such modifications therein as it may consider necessary for the
efficient, economical and integrated transmission and supply of electricity,
and in particular to facilitate voluntary inter-connections and coordination
of facilities for the inter-State, regional and inter-regional generation and
transmission of electricity .
1.45 In this connection the Electricity Act, 2003 requires Central
Government to establish a Centre for each region to be known as the
Regional Load Despatch Centre having territorial jurisdiction as
determined by the Central Government in accordance with this Act. It
also requires the Central Government to establish a centre at the national
level, to be known as National Load Despatch Centre for optimal
scheduling and despatch of electricity among the Regional Load Despatch
Centres. At the State level, the Act requires establishment of State Load
Despatch Centre by the State Government for the purposes of exercising
the powers and discharging the functions under this Part.
1.46 In compliance of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Country has
been divided geographically in five regions Northern, Eastern, Western,
North-Eastern and Southern each having a Regional Load Despatch Centre
(RLDC), which is the apex body, as per the Electricity Act, 2003, to ensure
integrated operation of the power system in the concerned region. The
National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC), constituted as per Ministry of
Power (MOP) notification in 2005, supervises the RLDCs to ensure
integrated operation of the national power system. NLDC and RLDCs
are managed and operated by Power System Operation Corporation Ltd.
(POSOCO), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Power Grid Corporation
of India Limited (PGCIL).
1.47 Every State of the Country has a State Load Despatch Centre
(SLDC), which is the apex body to ensure integrated operation of the
power system in the State. SLDCs are owned, operated and managed by
the respective State Transmission Utility (STU) or the State Electricity
Board (SEB) as the case may be.

22
1.48 On being asked about the measures being taken to reinforce
SLDCs for ensuring functional autonomy like taking up the State related
issues at FOR meeting etc., the Committee were informed that institutional
strengthening including deployment of appropriate manpower for efficient
functioning of SLDC are within the purview of respective State
Governments. Amendments to the Electricity Act 2003 are being brought
to facilitate the States and matter is being taken-up with Appellate Tribunal
for Electricity (APTEL). However given the federal structure in the country
and electricity being a concurrent subject, this is not an easy task.
Accordingly, the matter of ring fencing the State load dispatch centers
is being taken up with the States. Institution building must go through
many processes which have to be taken up in a step by step manner so
as to ensure a smooth transition and avoid any major issues.
1.49 Elaborating the complexity in coordination among Regional
Load Despatch Centre and State Load Despatch Centres, the Secretary,
Ministry of Power deposed before the Committee as under:—
“We are in a federal set-up and we are operating from Delhi.
There is a State Load Despatch Centre and a lot of powers are with the
States. The Regional Load Despatch Centre does not have any control
on the SLDC. They can only provide directions to SLDC and if SLDC
does not obey, they file a petition in the CERC. What we have been doing
in the CERC is to see that CERC expedites the decisions on this. After
the recent grid disturbances, the CERC has decided to fine those people
who are responsible for overdrawal and that process is on.”
1.50 The Secretary , Ministry of Power have further added:—
“Today, the RLDC has no powers. The RLDC will tell the SLDC.
One thing is that powers are less. RLDC cannot directly act against
them. What can be done is one thing which we are looking into.
Now CERC also has powers to fine them and so on. You might
recall that in one of the earlier meetings of this Committee, we
were also quite concerned with fines being imposed and not being
paid.
This is a matter which had come up….. We are examining this
issue as to how the RLDCs can be given more teeth. We are also
looking into the scheme of how the Electricity Act can be amended
to ensure that the penalties for over-drawl are increased, penalties
are recovered in a faster way and the actual punishment to the
offender is done very quickly.”
1.51 In the context of autonomy in the grid operations, the
Committee enquired as to how SLDCs can be made more efficient and

23
independent in discharge of their duties. Replying the question the
Secretary, Ministry of Power stated:—
“Making the SLDC independent would be the work of the State
Government. So, we have taken up the matter with them. There
are some administrative issues in making the SLDCs independent.
There are definitely some resistance from the States from the point
of view of administration and organisational issues. In the meantime,
the personnel in the SLDC are being trained. We have trained nearly
700 people. The people who man the SLDCs are not really very
well trained or conversant with the latest techniques in operations
that should be used. So, we have started training them. In the last
few months, about 700 people have been trained. This will improve
the capabilities of these people who man SLDCs.”
1.52 He further added:—
“Coming for training or getting this certification is in any way not
going to benefit those employees in terms of their pay or allowances.
So, there is not too much of interest to come to these training
programmes. What we thought is that we will offer them a one-
time incentive of Rs. 20,000 to participate in this training programme.
That is what we have started and people who participate in this
programme will get Rs. 20,000 as incentive. This is to attract the
people to get trained. We actually would like the State Governments
or the State Transmission Utilities should sponsor people, who work
in the SLDCs, to offer them some kind of an incentive so that these
people can go and work in an SLDC. That has not happened. If
Maharashtra has done that, I think it is a welcome step. We would
like other State Governments to do that. From our side, to encourage
people to come for training, we are offering them some incentive
so that they can be better qualified.”
VI. Grid Discipline
1.53 The Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) is a regulation made
by the Central Commission in exercise of powers under clause (h) of sub-
section (1) of Section 79 read with clause (g) of sub-section (2) of Section
178 of the Electricity Act 2003. The IEGC also lays down the rules,
guidelines and standards to be followed by various persons and
participants in the system to plan, develop, maintain and operate the
power system, in the most secure, reliable, economic and efficient manner,
while facilitating healthy competition in the generation and supply of
electricity.

24
1.54 Managing seamless transmission of electricity from one corner
to another in a vast country like ours in no way an easy task. There are
numerous advantages of having a synchronously interconnected National
Grid, at the same a vast interconnected transmission network makes it
more vulnerable for collapse and large scaled blackouts as it happened
on 30th and 31st July, 2012.
1.55 As per information furnished by the Ministry of Power,
approximately 36,000 MW of load was lost and power supply in Northern
region was not available for around 13 hours on 30th July 2012 and on
31st July 2012, approximately 48,000 MW of load was lost and power
supply was not available for about 5 hours, 8 hours and 2 hours in
Northern, Eastern and North-Eastern regions, respectively.
1.56 Due to high load and failure of monsoon, Northern Region
utilities were drawing a large quantum of power from neighbouring
Western and Eastern Grids. Due to the rains in Western Region, demand
was less and it was under-drawing leading to a much skewed load
generation balance among the regions. A large quantum of power was
flowing from the Western Grid to the Northern Grid and thus, this was
affecting the reliability and stability of the interconnected grids.
1.57 The Enquiry Committee constituted by the Ministry of Power
after the grid disturbances on 30th and 31st July 2012 has found that
reasons for the events on 30th and 31st July 2012 are not attributable to
any single factor. Rather, it is a combination of several factors. The major
factors identified by the Enquiry Committee for Grid Disturbances are
as follows:—
(i) Weak inter-regional corridors due to multiple outages: The
system was weakened by multiple outages of transmission
lines in the NR-WR interface and the ER network near the
ER-WR interface.
(ii) High loading on 400 kV Bina-Gwalior-Agra link: The
overdrawl by NR utilities, utilizing Unscheduled Interchange
(UI), contributed to high loading on this tie line. Although
real power flow in this line was relatively lower than on
30th July, 2012, the reactive power flow in the line was higher,
resulting in lower voltage at Bina end.
(iii) Inadequate response by SLDCs to RLDCs’ instructions to
reduce overdrawl by the NR utilities and underdrawl by the
WR utilities.

25
(iv) Loss of 400 kV Bina-Gwalior link: Similar to the initiation of
the disturbance on 30th July, 2012, tripping of 400 kV Bina-
Gwalior line on zone-3 protection of distance relay, due to
load encroachment, caused the NR system to separate from
the WR system. On this day also the Disturbance Recorder
(DR) records do not show occurrence of any fault in the
system.
1.58 The Enquiry Committee constituted on grid disturbances on
30th and 31st July 2012 have given many recommendations for ensuring
the smooth functioning of the Grid. Recommendations of the Committee
have been summarized and are given below:—
(i) An extensive review and audit of the Protection Systems
should be carried out to avoid their undesirable operation.
(ii) Frequency control through generation reserves/ancillary
services should be adopted, as presently employed UI
mechanism is sometimes endangering the grid security. The
present UI mechanism needs a review in view of its impact
on recent disturbances.
(iii) Primary response from generators and operation of defense
mechanisms, like under frequency and df/dt based load
shedding and Special Protection Schemes, should be ensured
in accordance with provisions of the grid code so that grid
can be saved in case of contingencies.
(iv) A review of Total Transfer Capability (TTC) procedure should
be carried out, so that it can also be revised under any
significant change in system conditions, such as forced outage.
This will also allow congestion charges to be applied to relieve
the real time congestion.
(v) Coordinated outage planning of transmission elements need
to be carried out so that depletion of transmission system
due to simultaneous outages of several transmission elements
could be avoided.
(vi) In order to avoid frequent outages/opening of lines under
over voltages and also providing voltage support under steady
state and dynamic conditions, installation of adequate static
and dynamic reactive power compensators should be planned.

26
(vii) P enal provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 need to be
reviewed to ensure better compliance of instructions of
Load Despatch Centres and directions of Central Commission.
(viii) Available assets, providing system security support such as
HVDC, Thyristor Controlled Series Compensation (TCSC),
Static Var Compensator (SVC) controls, should be optimally
utilized, so that they provide necessary support in case of
contingencies.
(ix) Synchrophasor based Wide Area Monitoring Systems (WAMS)
should be widely employed across the network to improve
the visibility, real time monitoring, protection and control of
the system.
(x) Load Despatch Centres should be equipped with Dynamic
Security Assessment and faster State Estimation tools.
(xi) There is need to plan islanding schemes to ensure supply to
essential services and faster recovery in case of grid
disruptions.
(xii) There is need to grant more autonomy to all the Load Dispatch
Centres so that they can take and implement decisions relating
to operation and security of the grid.
(xiii) To av oid congestion in intra-State transmission
system, planning and investment at State level need to be
improved.
(xiv) Proper telemetry and communication should be ensured to
Load Despatch Centres from various transmission elements
and generating stations. No new transmission element/
generation should be commissioned without the requisite
telemetry facilities.
(xv) Start up time of generating stations need to be shortened to
facilitate faster recovery in case of grid disruptions.
(xvi) There is a need to review transmission planning criteria in
view of the growing complexity of the system.
(xvii) System study groups must be strengthened in various power
sector organizations.

27
(xviii) It was also felt that a separate task force may be formed,
involving experts from academics, power utilities and system
operators, to carry out a detailed analysis of the present grid
conditions and anticipated scenarios which might lead to any
such disturbances in future. The committee may identify
medium and long term corrective measures as well as
technological solutions to improve the health of the grid.
1.59 When the Committee asked about the penal action taken
against the erring persons/authorities responsible for the grid collapse,
the Ministry in their reply stated that CERC in response to the petition
and interlocutory applications filed by Northern Region Load Despatch
Centre (NRLDC), in its order dated 17.8.2012 has directed the staff of
the Commission to process the case for initiation of action under Section
142 of the Act against the officers in charge of STUs/SLDCs of the States
of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Rajasthan, Punjab and Jammu
and Kashmir for imposition of penalty for non-compliance with NRLDC
directions and the provisions of the Act and the Grid Code.
1.60 When the Committee desired to know about the measures
being taken to ensure that the incidences of blackouts are not repeated
in future, the Secretary of Ministry of Power deposed before the
Committee:—
“We are ensuring that more and more links are available between
the regions to see that the capacity to transfer power between regions
is increased. We are also ensuring that the sudden outage that
takes place because of pollution affecting the insulating system
does not repeat. We are changing the insulating system. A lot of
it has already been done. And it is progressively being done. We
are also ensuring that when planned outages take place, they are
discussed in the Regional Power Committee and they are taken in
a coordinated manner. Like I mentioned, inter-regional capacity
being increased to 38,000 MW, would also ensure that between
regions there will be more links which will be available.
1.61 The Enquiry Committee on grid disturbances have
recommended “There is a need to review protection schemes. This
Committee concurs with recommendation of previous enquiry Committees
that a thorough third party protection audit need to be carried out in
time bound manner. This exercise should be repeated periodically and
monitored by RPCs”.

28
1.62 The Protection scheme involves protection equipments like
relays, instrument transformers and circuit breakers installed in the sub-
stations. These protection systems isolate a faulty line by disconnecting
it (tripping it) from the rest of the system which can continue to function
normally. It typically concerns long length high voltage individual lines
and are hence important for secure grid operation. The Ministry informed
that in view of the recommendation of the Enquiry Committee on Grid
Disturbances, the Regional Power Committees (RPCs) in association with
Central Transmission Utility (CTU) and State Transmission Utilities (STUs)
is conducting the audit of identified important Sub-stations belonging to
various entities such as POWERGRID, State/Private Transmission Utilities
and Generation Utilities in all the States/UTs of the country . This audit
is being monitored on regional basis by the Regional Power Committees
of the five regions covering the entire country.
1.63 The status of audit conducted by Regional Power Committee
of each region, as furnished by the Ministry is given below:—
“Northern Region (NR): The audit of all 132 important substations
in the Northern Region has been completed on 15th November,
2012. The audit has identified deficiencies such as lack of adequate
bus bar protection, DRs, EL, etc.. Also there is a need to replace
static type relays with Numerical Relays. Audit report has been
circulated to all concerned for further follow-up action.
Southern Region (SR): Protection Audit has been completed in all
194 important substations of the States in the region by 22nd
December, 2012. Audit report has been circulated to all States for
follow up action for replacement of faulty equipment.
Eastern Region (ER): Audit of 30 out of 40 important Sub-stations
has been completed in the concerned states. The balance 10 will
be completed by end Feb., 2013. The Audit report will thereafter
be circulated to the States concerned for follow up action for
replacement of faulty equipment.
North Eastern Region (NER): In NER, audit of 135 important
substations has to be conducted in the States of the North Eastern
Region. In case of Tripura, all the 11 important Sub-stations have
been audited. In the other States, the audit will be completed by
end February 2013.
Western Region (WR): The audit of all important sub-stations in
the Western Region is underway. In Gujarat, the audit was completed

29
by a third party earlier in 2010 itself and all deficiencies rectified.
In Maharashtra, audit is being regularly done through audit
engineers drawn from circles which are different from the circle
which is being audited. Presently, the audit has been completed
in 82 out of 118 important substations. Balance would be completed
by end February, 2013. Audit has been started in MP . In case of
Chhattisgarh, Goa and UTs, the process of audit is being finalized.”
1.64 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for delay
in undertaking third party audit by RPC in the Eastern and Western
Regions, it was informed that decision to undertake third party audit is
taken by the respective RPCs in their meetings. Accordingly, protection
audits were taken up in Eastern and Western Regions after meetings of
the Eastern Regional Power Committee and Western Regional Power
Committee held.
1.65 In regard to defense mechanism, the Secretary , Ministry of
Power, during the evidence deposed before the Committee as under:—
“We have a lot of defence mechanism and protection mechanisms
which should have operated and prevented this kind of a grid
collapse. If you see frequency as the most important thing and if
the frequency is falling, then the defence mechanism that is actually
provided in the electrical system should have operated and should
have ensured that load has been shed which should have brought
up the frequency. This did not work..... We have got inspected
80 per cent of all the defence mechanisms which are in place in
the northern region and we have filed a report with the CERC. This
report will show as to which particular station and defence
mechanism was not in service or had been bypassed and action
will be taken against them. So, this is one thing that has not been
taken seriously. ......In fact, this is a matter for complacency. Nothing
happened in ten years. I think everybody was complacent. If you
look at many other Departments and many other spheres of life,
the last thing that is paid attention is protection mechanism. That
also happened here. Normally , protection mechanisms should be
in service and they should be audited regularly . We must see to
it that they are in position. That did not happen. We have got them
audited. Since the major part of the difficulty was in the northern
region, we got the northern region audited. 80 per cent has been
done and it is with the CERC. Now, we will get the concerned
utilities to see that these protection systems are put in place and
not put out of service and so on. This is going to be a very big

30
thing for us to see that if tomorrow, even if there is a overdrawal,
this kind of failure of grid will not take place.”
1.66 The Under Frequency Relays and df/dt relays are installed in
distribution substations of State Utilities for automatic tripping of
distribution lines connected to a load centre which forms part of the
distribution network. In reply to a specific query of the Committee
regarding findings of the protection audit done by Power Grid in Northern
Region, it was stated as under:—
“POWER GRID conducted an audit of all these relays in 175
substations of the Northern Region in Aug., 2012. As per audit, 36
substations did not have the UFRs and df/dt relays, in 99 substations
the relays did not operate on the date of disturbance as per log
book maintained by the sub-station itself. The relays operated in
only 40 sub-stations on date of disturbance. Following the Audit,
petition had been filed by NRLDC with CERC in September, 2012
on which CERC has ordered on 20.12.2012 directing the Commission
staff to serve show cause notices to the States on this account for
violation of the Grid Code.
Apart from above, NRPC has also advised the States of the Northern
Region to provide status report on functioning of UFRs and df/dt
relays by December, 2012. As per report of NRPC, various States
in the Northern Region have reported in December, 2012, following
status:—
• In Delhi and Himachal Pradesh, all UFRs are functional.
• In UP , defective relays are being replaced by procurement in
next three to four months.
• In Punjab, Rajasthan and Haryana also, steps are being taken
to procure and replace defective relays.
• The States of Uttarakhand and J&K is being complied.”
1.67 On being asked about the measures taken for grid disciplines,
the Ministry also stated that the following measures are being taken with
a view to enforce grid discipline:—
(a) Constituents violating the grid discipline are penalized as
per the CERC regulations on Unscheduled Inter-change as
amended from time to time.

31
(b) In case the violation continues the designated feeders
may be opened to curb the overdrawl as per the CERC
direction.
(c) CERC can also issue notice to persistent grid defaulters.
1.68 When the Committee asked about the reasons of ineffectiveness
of Unscheduled Interchange (UI) mechanism in enforcing grid discipline,
the Secretary, Ministry of Power, stated during evidence:—
“We have also seen as to why overdrawal is resorted to. A lot of
States are using the UI mechanism as another source of supply
whereas it is not intended to be a source of supply. It is expected
to be an adjustment mechanism. But the rates that have been fixed
for UI seem to encourage drawal at particular points of time. What
has been done is, the tightening of the frequency band did not give
that kind of incentive that people have for overdrawal today. The
kind of disincentive that they have for excess drawal will start
operating at lower frequencies. For instance, if I am going to tighten
the frequency from 49.5 to 49.7, the charges that will be applicable
because of overdrawal will start operating from 49.7 instead of
49.5. This, we expect would be commercial unviable for the many
distribution companies to go ahead and overdraw. If you look at
the entire thing as to why did all this happen, we see a combination
of factors. Many of these have been happening earlier also. It is
not that overdrawal is a new thing. All of them probably came
together on one day and this is what caused this. If you look at
why all this is happening, it is simply because of lack of discipline.
There is a grid code. Everybody knows that he should or should
not do this. Despite this, overdrawal takes place. So, the attempt
to ensure that commercially it becomes difficult for them to
overdraw is one point. The second thing that is being done is that
the extra charges that we can levy on overdrawal is also being
done. Thirdly, there is only one mechanism where a person who
does not follow the grid code or who does not obey the schedules,
he can only be brought before the CERC for punishment or penalty.
We are pursuing with them to see that that is done at the earliest.
We are also trying to look at the Act to see if there is anything
that we can do to make this tighter and more stringent.”
1.69 On finding the present UI mechanism ineffective in posing
deterrence in overdrawl, the Committee enquired about the steps to make

32
overdrawl of power commercially unviable by effecting necessary changes.
The Ministry replied in a note as under:—
“POSOCO/NLDC had filed a petition for amendment to CERC
(UI Charges and related matters) Regulations, 2009 (208/MP/2012)
on 10th Sept., 2012. The directions sought from CERC were as
follows:—
– Frequency band tightening so that system operates close to
50 Hz. (50 Hz +/- 0.1 Hz). UI Price vector to be declared with
0.01 Hz. step size.
– Impose limits on UI injection/withdrawl and make it
inadvertent interchange only .
– Introduction of locational bias in UI settlement rate.
Hon’ble Commission vide order dated 5th Dec., 2012, directed staff
of the Commission to consider the petition as proposal by NLDC
and initiate amendment process.”
1.70 It was informed that operational frequency band has been
tightened to 49.7 – 50.2 Hz through revised IEGC and UI Regulations
which have been implemented as from 17th Sept. 2012 after dismissal
of Writ Petitions filed by Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO) by Chennai High Court. Another
petition had been filed by POSOCO on 10th September, 2012 with CERC
for further tightening of frequency band to 49.9 — 50.1 Hz. Following
close follow-up, the CERC has directed the Commission Staff vide its
order dated 29.11.12 to consider the POSOCO petition and prepare a
proposal for further action. When the Committee desired to know the
possibility of doing away with the UI mechanism as the monetary penalty
provisions have been proved inefficacious in curbing the problem of
overdrawl, it was stated as below:—
“CERC in its order dated 30.07.2012 had directed NRLDC to identify
feeders in each of the State control areas, which can be opened/
disconnected in case of any danger to the grid. NRLDC was also
directed to take necessary steps to open the identified feeders to
the constituent States in order to reduce the overdrawal and restore
the grid to the safe operating frequency band, in the event of non-
compliance of NRLDC direction regarding overdrawal by the
constituent State. Thus, the action like opening/disconnection of
feeders is also envisaged to stop overdrawal by the States.”

33
1.71 When the Committee enquired about the proposal for use of
new technology for preventing the problem of overdrawl by power utilities
and to ensure the safe and smooth functioning of the grid, it was informed
by the Ministry as under:—
“POWER GRID is in the process of developing a Grid Security Expert
System (GSES) which involves laying of optical fibre network for
reliable communication and control of under-frequency and df/dt
relay based load shedding, etc. This system will cater to substations
of 132 kV level and above.To ensure safe and smooth functioning
of the grid, POWER GRID has initiated first of its kind nation-wide
large scale Wide Area Measurement System (WAMS) and Phasor
Measurement Units (PMU) Project namely Unified Real Time
Dynamic State Measurement (URTDSM) Project for implementation
in Indian Power Sector. Under this project, equipment will be
installed at 400kV and important 220kV sub-stations, generating
stations and control centres. The first Phase of the Project will be
completed during 2014-2015 and second Phase will be completed
one year thereafter. The PMU data shall be utilized for better grid
management and improving power system operation using
advanced analytical functions which will be developed
subsequently.”
1.72 The Committee further asked about installing of some
system to minimize the impact of grid failure if at all it happens and
shielding of important cities such as national capital from that. The
Ministry informed that the Ministry that Islanding Scheme has been
introduced to ensure power supply to essential services in the event of
grid failure.
1.73 Islanding Scheme is designed to isolate a part of the
interconnected system from the rest of the grid in case of a contingency.
The island so created comprises of the load and matching generation
such that it is able to operate independently and survive a contingent/
disturbance situation.
1.74 When the Committee asked about the details and progress
made in regard to implementation of Islanding Scheme in Delhi, the
following information was furnished by the Ministry of Power:—
“In order to design/review the islanding scheme for Delhi a study
group was constituted by CEA. This study group comprised
representatives from Delhi SLDC, DTL, NRLDC, POWERGRID
(CTU), NTPC, NRPC, CEA and an expert from IIT.

34
Experts from Tata Power and CESC were also consulted who have
past experience of successful formation of islanding scheme in their
system. The islanding scheme prepared by DTL in consultation
with CEA, POWERGRID and NRPC, is based on the deliberations
in the meetings of the study group. The scheme is under approval
of NRPC/CEA. Delhi being the Capital city of the country, the
importance of maintaining the uninterrupted power supply to
essential services etc..
There is already an existing scheme as per which two islands were
envisaged in Delhi system. The Pragati and GT island forms at
47.8 Hz. alongwith the VVIP load of NDMC area. BTPS forms
separate island with Okhla, Gazipur, Mehrauli and Vasant Kunj
load. These islands have not been successful in the past and also
do not meet the total essential load requirement of Delhi. Therefore,
existing islanding scheme has been reviewed.
The proposed islanding scheme for Delhi has been developed with
following objectives in mind:—
(i) to isolate Delhi’s power system from the regional grid when
grid disturbance is imminent;
(ii) after isolation, continue to meet at least emergency loads of
essential services etc.. Present quantum of essential load
spread across various distribution companies of Delhi is about
930 MW; and
(iii) to extend start up supply to generating stations in adjoining
area to facilitate early restoration.”
1.75 It was further stated that the islanding scheme envisages that
fall of frequency to 47.9 Hz will be taken as indication that grid disturbance
is imminent and islanding will be initiated. Ideally one island is preferred
but due to peculiar network considerations of Delhi and limitation
imposed by Rithala CCGT, there is no option but to create four (4) islands,
capable of meeting about 3400 MW of load during peak conditions, as
listed below:—
(i) Dadri-Jajjhar- Pragati (part) Island (Peak load 2315 MW)
(ii) Baw ana CCGT Island (Peak load 600 MW)
(iii) BTPS-Pragati (part) Island (Peak load 500 MW)
(iv) Rithala CCGT Island (Peak load 20 MW)

35
1.76 Further, the scheme is based on frequency measurement. This
measurement will be done at nine (9) substations/switchyards where
switching is to be done. These locations are Dadri, Mandola, Bamnauli,
Jhatikara, Mundka, Bawana, Maharani Bagh, Jhajjar and BTPS. Two
frequency sensing relays (Numerical type) of different make will be
installed at each substation/switchyard. These relays will be installed at
different buses. If both the relays record the frequency of 47.9 Hz or
below, then only identified circuits at that substation/switchyard will be
opened and the simultaneously send trip signal through optical fibre to
the adjoining connected substations falling within the same island. In
order to control frequency in the islands from load side, further load
shedding will be carried out with a time delay of 2 sec. through frequency
sensing relays, if frequency dips to 47.7 Hz. This load shedding will be
over and above that carried out under the defense mechanism finalized
by NRPC. Efforts to control frequency from generation side will also
have to be made. For this purpose, one generating station in each island
will have to be operated in frequency control mode.
1.77 Also, during the islanded operation, Delhi SLDC will have
overall responsibility of operation of the islanded systems. All the
generating companies, distribution licensees, DTL and POWER GRID sub-
stations which are part of the islands, will comply with advice of Delhi
SLDC who will be the single agency responsible for the islands. The
latter will be in regular communication with NRLDC. The connectivity
of Delhi with rest of the system is far more complex than Tata system
of Mumbai and CESC system of Kolkata, which have only few connections
with rest of the system and meet considerable demand from embedded
resources. Further, power injection to Delhi system is at different voltage
levels comprising of 765kV , 400kV , 220kV and 66kV . During islanding
condition, the isolation at different voltages is required at different
locations at the same time and managing such complex dynamic situation
involving lot of switching operations is a challenge.
1.78 The Committee were also apprised that the following
additional measures will be taken to increase probability of success of
Delhi islanding scheme:—
• Deployment of Numerical Relays.
• Development of intelligent system for load shedding while
forming islands.
• Development of facility for centralized manual load
disconnection and reconnection.

36
• Development of centralised system for decision making
regarding islanding.
• DMRC to adopt SCOTT connections at drawl point.
• Dynamic simulation of islanded operation so as identify
additional steps, if any, which need to be taken for enhancing
success rate of islanding.
• Augmentation of generation at load centres of Delhi.
• Regular preventive maintenance and mock testing.
• Periodic review of islanding scheme.
• Dual supply to Delhi Airport and other essential services.
• Training of system operators at Delhi SLDC.
• Development of procedure by Delhi SLDC for system
operation during islanded conditions.
• Augmentation of adequate and trained manpower at DTL
substations and Delhi SLDC.
• Proper setting of PSS, Pole slip, PSB, back up impedance
protection at generating stations.”
1.79 When the Committee asked about the progress of the
implementation of the Islanding Scheme in other cities/regions, the
Ministry in their written reply have stated as below:—
“Northern Region: Narora Atomic Power Station (NAPS) and
Rajasthan Atomic Power Station (RAPS) islanding schemes are
already functional. Islanding scheme for Delhi has been finalised
by DTL in October 2012 and the same is under implementation.
Haryana and Rajasthan are also understood to have taken up
preparation of islanding schemes in the respective States. UP has
sought assistance of POWERGRID in preparation of islanding
schemes around Parichha, Unchahar, Tanda and Roza thermal power
stations. Punjab has also sought assistance from POWERGRID to
prepare islanding schemes for Ludhiana, Gobindgarh, Bathinda and
Ropar Thermal Power Station (TPS).
Western Region: Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Gas Turbine Power Station
(GTPS) Uran islanding schemes are already functional. Islanding

37
schemes for State capitals viz. Bhopal and Raipur, which were
functional earlier, are planned to be restored and those for other
cities are under study. All Captive Power Plants (CPPs) are planned
for islanding at a slightly higher frequency than 48.8 Hz so that
these stations are available for extending startup power.
Eastern Region: Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation (CESC) and
many CPPs like Bokaro Steel, NALCO, etc. already have islanding
schemes. Three islanding schemes viz. Bakreshwar with West Bengal
load, Farakka with Lalmatia load and Bandel TPS with
Adisaptagram load, are under consideration/study .
Southern Region: Islanding schemes for Hyderabad and Chennai
are already functional. 14 islanding schemes in the States of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala around power stations
located in these States have been taken up for study by the respective
State Transmission Utilities (STUs).
North-Eastern Region: An islanding scheme around Namrup TPS
in Assam is already functional. Eight new islanding schemes have
been taken up for study/examination.”
VII. Transaction of Electricity
1.80 The Electricity Act, 2003, recognizes trading as an independent
activity and accordingly prescribes issue of trading licences by the CERC
for inter-state trading. This paved the way for Open Access and Power
trading. Accordingly, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC) issued guidelines for grant of permission for setting up operation
of power exchanges within an overall regulatory framework. Since
generation and consumption of Power is not evenly distributed in India,
the concept of Power trading enables surplus generation from one region
to flow to another region which is deficit in power or within the same
region.
1.81 At present, there are two power exchanges in the Country,
Indian Energy Exchange (IEX) and Power Exchange India Ltd. (PXIL).
These power exchanges are helpful in short and medium term electricity
transactions.
1.82 As per the Report of CERC on Short-term Transaction in India,
during the month of December 2012, of the total electricity generation,
8250.56 MUs (10.79%) were transacted through short-term, comprising
of 4455.79 MUs (5.82%) through Bilateral (through traders and term-

38
ahead contracts on Power Exchanges and directly between distribution
companies), followed by 2,314.61MUs (3.03%) through day ahead collective
transactions on Power Exchanges (IEX and PXIL) and 1,480.16MUs (1.93%)
through UI. Of the total short-term transactions, Bilateral constitute 54.01%
(40.84% through traders and term-ahead contracts on Power Exchanges
and 13.17% directly between distribution companies) followed by 28.05%
through day ahead collective transactions on Power Exchanges and 17.94%
through UI. There were 40 trading licensees as on 31.12.2012, of which
only 21 have engaged in trading during December 2012. Top 5 trading
licenses had a share of 69.74% in the total volume traded by all the
licensees.
1.83 The CERC Report has also noted that average weighted price
of electricity transacted through traders during the month of December,
2012 was Rs. 4.39/kWh, whereas the average weighted price of electricity
transacted through power exchanges i.e. IEX and PXIL was Rs. 3.90 and
3.08 (per kWh) respectively.
1.84 The CERC Report has further concluded that in the month of
December 2012, congestion occurred in both the power exchanges
(“congestion” means a situation where the demand for transmission
capacity exceeds the available transfer capability). During the month, the
volume of electricity that could not be cleared in the power exchanges
due to congestion was 17.43% and 156.59% of the actual cleared volume
in IEX and PXIL, respectively. In terms of time, congestion occurred was
99.97% and 98.59% in IEX and PXIL, respectively.
1.85 When the Committee enquired about the efforts being made
by the Government to make short term transaction capacity between power
exchanges and bilateral contracts more transparent, it was stated as
under:—
“The following information is available on National Load Despatch
Center (NLDC) and Regional Load Despatch Center (RLDCs)
websites for all types of transactions for all stakeholders in
accordance with the provisions of the CERC Regulations:—
• Available Transfer Capacity (ATC) — 3 months ahead
• Past and current transactions
• Injection and drawl schedules
• Frequency trend
• Urgent market information – unit tripping, load crash,
contingencies

39
• 52 week ISTS pooled losses
• Procedures”
1.86 When the Committee asked about the congestion in Power
Exchange Transactions, it was informed by the Ministry that there have
been instances of congestion in Power Exchange transactions, which are
essentially short-term in nature. These congestions are caused due to lack
of adequate availability of margins in the transmission network after
accommodating long term requirements.
VIII. Modernization/Technological up-gradation of Grid
1.87 Dimensions of Indian power system are growing manifolds
and their complexity is increasing in all fronts. With the proposed
synchronous operation of Southern Regional grid with NEW grid, a single
grid of more than 250 GW capacity shall be operated in coming years.
Maintaining grid safety , security and reliability of such geographical
spread grid is a great challenge in the new regime of open electricity
market. This necessitates application of modern tools for monitoring on
real time basis to give confidence to the system planner as well as operators
to bring efficiency in system operation.
1.88 Further, large scale integration of renewable generation has
been envisaged in coming years mainly in the form of wind and solar
generations. They have their own intermittency and variability
characteristics. The ability of the system operators to take decisions is
dependent on their “situational awareness” derived from the data/
information available with them in real time. All the above require better
visibility of grid system and fast update of operating scenario integrated
with intelligent computation to capture dynamic behavior of power system
towards safe, secure and reliable operation on real time basis.
1.89 When the Committee desired to know about the proposals in
regard to modernization/technological upgradation of the National Grid
by the introduction of latest technologies as adopted by the developed
nations, it their written reply the Ministry of Power furnished the following
information:—
“With the ever expanding transmission network in the country ,
complexities of grid operation are also increasing. Keeping this in
mind, the facilities at all the five Regional Load Despatch Centers
(RLDCs) and National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC) are being
upgraded continuously through deployment of latest technology.

40
POWERGRID has taken the initiative for implementation of Smart
Grid Technology in the country and has implemented Phasor
Measurement Units (PMUs) using wide area measurement systems
(WAMS) in Northern Region Grid, for the first time in India. Unified
Real Time Dynamic State Measurement (URTDSM) project for
installation of PMUs, Phasor Data Concentrators (PDCs) etc. has
been formulated. The first test lab for PMU and PDC testing in
India is being established at Bhiwadi in Northern Region.
POWERGRID is now working on higher transmission voltages of
±800kV HVDC and 1200kV UHVAC.
Implementation of ±800kV , 6000 MW HVDC Bi-pole of length
around 2000 km from North Eastern Region (Biswanath Chariyali
in Assam) to Northern Region (Agra in Uttar Pradesh) is under
construction. This line shall facilitate high quantum of power transfer
and it shall be amongst the longest ±800kV HVDC multi-terminal
line in the world.
To meet the long-term bulk power transfer requirement, an
overlaying super grid with 1200kV UHVAC system has been
envisaged. The 1200kV Ultra High Voltage AC (UHVAC) technology,
the highest voltage level in the world, is being developed in
collaboration with 35 Indian manufacturers. This is one of the unique
R&D projects in public-private partnership model. The pilot 1200kV
lines are successfully test charged at 1200kV UHVAC National Test
Station at Bina, Madhya Pradesh.”
1.90 Smart Grid is confluence of Information, Communications and
Electrical/Digital technologies. Smart Grid, apart from facilitating real
time monitoring and control of power system will help in reduction of
AT&C losses, peak load management/demand response, integration of
renewable energy, power quality management, outage management etc..
Smart Grid will act as a backbone infrastructure to enable new business
models like smart city, electric vehicles, smart communities apart from
more resilient and efficient energy system and tariff structures.
1.91 In regard to countries already using the Smart Grid Technology
successfully, it was stated that worldwide many utilities in North America,
Europe, China, Russia and Brazil have started using/developing the Smart
Grid technology using WAMS to harness potential benefits of this new
technology in operating large electrical grids. In 2006, China’s Wide Area
Monitoring Systems (WAMS) for its six grids had 300 PMUs installed
mainly at 500kV and 330kV substations and power plants. Presently China
has installed more than 1000 PMUs in their Grid. By 2012, China plans

41
to have PMUs at all 500kV substations and all power plants of 300 MW
and above. In U.S. there are ten (10) synchrophasor projects underway
involving 57 utilities and grid operators across the country and installing
about 850 networked PMUs. By 2013, the devices will be operating in
nearly all regions of the country. Further, other countries like South Africa,
Brazil, Russia, and some European countries have deployed/planning to
deploy a large no. of PMUs in their system.
1.92 The Committee were informed that PowerGrid has taken
initiative for implementation of Smart Grid Technology in the Country .
In this connection, the company has implemented Smart Grid Pilot Project
using Wide Area Measurement Systems (WAMS) in Northern Region
Grid for the first time in India. When the Committee asked about the
experience of Pilot Project in Northern Region Grid, the Ministry informed
as under:—
“Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU) Pilot Project in Northern Region
has helped a lot for understanding the new technology and system
operation in real time, protection co-ordination, disturbance analysis
etc.. Case study is available to demonstrate better transmission
system utilization with reliability for evacuation of Karcham-
Wangtoo hydro generation along with Baspa and Jhakri Hydro
generation during the monsoon season in 2011 with the help of
PMU based measurements. Delay in Special Protection Scheme (SPS)
settings was identified and then rectified. PMU also helped in
detection of oscillations on 765kV Tehri-Meerut line (Charged at
400kV). Based on PMU data tuning of Power System Stabilizers
(PSS) was done to avoid such oscillations. During foggy winter
nights, large number of auto-reclosure operation took place and its
detection in real time by system operator helped a lot in effective
real time monitoring and control of the grid. PMU technology is
a kind of meta tool that will create new tools in future.”
1.93 When the Committee desired to know about the planning of
the Government to implement the Smart Grid Technology throughout
the country, it was stated as under:—
“Keeping in view the potential of Wide Area Measurement Systems
(WAMS) technology for measurement of dynamic behavior of
integrated power system which is need of the hour for Indian grid,
a comprehensive “Unified Real Time Dynamic State Measurement
(URTDSM) “scheme is formulated for Wide Area Monitoring on
real time basis. It involves installation of about 1740 PMUs along
with other intelligent devices in control centres. This shall also
facilitate to estimate the transmission capability in a more realistic

42
way which shall bring efficiency in operation as well as economy
in cost of power supply. The scheme will be implemented in two
stages. In the stage-I, Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) will be
placed at those locations where fiber optic communication link is
either available or would be made available. In stage-II, PMUs would
be installed at balance locations along with communications links.
Implementation of URTDSM scheme is under progress.”

43
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Synchronous Inter-connection of Southern Region Grid with NEW Grid
2.1 The Committee note that the whole country is divided into
five regional grids namely, Northern Region, Western Region, Eastern
Region, North Eastern Region and Southern Region. The first four
regional grids are collectively called NEW (Northern, Eastern, North
Eastern and Western Region) Grid. At present all the regional grids,
except Southern Region, are synchronously interconnected with each
other and run at one frequency. However, the Southern Region Grid
is connected asynchronously to NEW Grid through HVDC and has
different frequency. The Committee further note that Synchronization
of Southern Region with NEW Grid is under implementation through
two 765 kV lines connecting Solapur (WR) to Raichur (SR). One of the
circuits is being implemented by a private company Raichur Sholapur
Transmission Company Limited (RSTCL), selected through competitive
bidding route. The other circuit is being implemented by PowerGrid.
These links will pave the way for interconnection of all five regional
grids in synchronous mode having same frequency. The work on these
lines is expected to be completed by January, 2014. During the
examination by the Committee it came out that one of the link being
implemented by RSTCL has been facing Right of Way (RoW) problems
at 18 locations in Afjalpur area and at 12 locations at Jewergi area in
Karnataka. Though, later it was informed that RSTCL has resolved
issues at all 18 locations in Afjalpur area and at 6 locations at Jewergi
area. But still there are 6 locations at Jewergi area where the RoW issue
is yet to be resolved. Further, the scrutiny of the Committee have
revealed that in respect of project being implemented by RSTCL only
9 towers have been erected out of 541 towers proposed for the entire
link having a length of 208 km., while, the work of PowerGrid is even
slower as only 8 towers have been erected. The Committee express
their concern over the slow progress of the project which will enable
the interconnection of all the grids of the Country for running at same
frequency and making the National Grid fully functional. The
interconnection of the Southern Grid with NEW grid will benefit the
power deficit Southern Region by facilitating it to draw more power
from other regions. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend the

44
Government to ensure that RSTCL resolve the remaining RoW issues
at earliest. It should also be ensured that the other construction work
related to the project be expedited by both the organization i.e. RSTCL
and PowerGrid lest this important project get delayed.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Strengthening of National Grid
2.2 The Committee note that the exploitable energy resources
are not uniformly distributed in the Country. Some States have
abundant natural resource while some are deprived of the adequate
resources to set up power plants. This reason has necessitated the shift
in focus of planning the generation and the transmission system in the
Country from the orientation of regional self-sufficiency to the concept
of optimization of utilization of resources on All-India basis. The
Committee further note that the Government has accordingly planned
a National Grid by interconnecting of all the existing five regional
grids. It has been stated that through establishment of National Grid,
optimal setting, development and utilization of power potential through
coal, hydro and other resources has been envisaged in the overall interest
of the Nation. It is also expected that National Grid would enable
exchange of power amongst the regions for optimization of generation
resources – transmission of surplus power to deficit region, dealing
commercial obligations and meeting emergencies in other regions.
During the examination of the subject it came out that at present the
Eastern Grid is the only grid which has direct transmission links with
the rest of four regional grids. Theoretically, this region, due to favorable
transmission interconnection should have been in a better position in
terms of the availability of electricity. Ironically, in reality the States
of this region have energy deficit as high as 30%. The situation indicates
that a National Grid perse is not a solution for the regional imbalances
in the country in terms of availability of electricity. Rather, if not
regulated by a fair policy, it could become an instrument for further
aggravating the regional imbalance as economically sound States/
utilities will be able to grab the electricity meant for the less developed
States by bidding at higher rates. In North-Eastern Region, where there
is immense potential for hydro power, a high capacity transmission
line to facilitate the evacuation of electricity from the region to northern
region is underway, whereas the region itself reels under power
shortages. Eastern Region, where about 20% population of the country
resides, have only 12% of the total power generation capacity.

45
Furthermore, on the basis of a misconception that the region does not
have much demand, a part of that little generated power is being
transmitted to other regions. The Committee are not averse to the idea
of evacuation of electricity from the regions having power potential
to deficit regions, but they have strong objection in regard to depriving
the people of that region of their right for having fair amount of
electricity. The inclusive growth of the country is the duty of the Centre.
The Committee believe that by creating a National Grid, the
Government has done only half part of the task, remaining should be
accomplished by formulation of a policy which can effectively address
existing regional imbalances in regard to the availability of electricity
in the different States/Regions of the country. The Committee also
recommend that the Government should allocate more electricity from
the central pool to the economically weaker Regions/States having acute
shortages so that they can also be able to contribute in overall
development of the Nation.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
2.3 The Committee note that the Country has about 2,23,000 MW
installed power generation capacity. Further, for the 12th Plan period,
a target of generation capacity addition to the tune of, 88,537 MW has
been envisaged from the conventional sources and 30,000 MW from
the Renewable Energy sources. Thus, the total generation capacity at
the end of the 12th Plan would be about 3,40,000 MW. Against this
backdrop the Committee also note, that the country’s present total
inter-regional links to facilitate the exchange of power among various
regions is only 27,750 MW, which in view of the Committee is not
adequate considering the present installed capacity and the planned
addition. The Government has stated that they are planning to enhance
this to 66,000 MW by adding transfer capacity of 38,400 MW during
the 12th Plan. They have also stated that about 1,07,000 circuit kilometers
of transmission lines, sub-stations of 2,70,000 MV A and HVDC terminals
of about 12,750 MW capacity at 220 kV and above level are planned
to be added in the existing capacity of about 2,70,000 circuit kilometers
of transmission lines and about 4,20,000 MV A sub-station capacity at
the voltage level of 220kV and above. The Committee feel that the
massive addition in generation capacity envisaged for the 12th Plan
and the proposed synchronous operation of All-India National Grid
warrants proportionate augmentation of transmission links as well as
increase in number of sub-stations and their capabilities. For the
efficacious functioning of the National Grid, it is important that the

46
proposed increase in transfer and transmission capabilities actually
takes place in consonance with the growth of generation sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government besides,
augmenting the transmission capabilities to match the proposed
generation capacity, should simultaneously enhance and strengthen
the relevant infrastructure of National Grid also for its smooth
functioning.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
2.4 The Committee note that it has been envisaged by
establishment of a National Grid to extend economies of scale by
enabling setting up of large sized pit-head based power station and
considering cheaper cost of transmission of power compared to
transportation of fuel. Even National Electricity Policy stipulates that
imported coal based thermal power stations, particularly at coastal
locations should be encouraged based on their economies. Further, it
would be economical for new generating stations to be located either
near the fuel sources e.g. at pit head locations or load centers. In this
connection the Committee are surprised to note that out of total
97,720 MW coal based thermal projects which are under construction,
37,380 MW projects are located at Pithead, 14,910 MW projects are
located at coastal location, and 45,430 MW are at other locations. In
regard to reasons for setting up projects at locations other than coastal
or pit heads it has been stated that for locating a thermal power station,
availability of a large area of land, availability of large quantity of
water for cooling and other infrastructure facilities like road and rail
connectivity for transportation of equipments and coal are required.
Thermal power projects are being set up in different States depending
upon availability of land, water and other infrastructure facilities. Some
plants near load centres are also considered necessary for energy security
of those States. Further, it was stated that power generation being a
delicensed activity, a person can choose a place wherever desires to
set up generation project. Though, the Committee do understand that
there are several factors which decisively matter be considered for
setting up of power plants, and hence all the power plants cannot be
set up at pit heads or coastal areas. However, the fact that surprises
the Committee is that almost half of the coal based power projects are
coming up at places other than pit heads or coastal areas. The factors
like sufficient availability of land, water, and road connectivity and
other essential infrastructures can be explored near and around the
fuel sources. This will not only cut the cost of fuel but will also be

47
a vital factor for the relevance and importance of transmission network.
The Committee feel that this defeats the very purpose of developing
a National Grid for transmission of electricity from one corner to another
of the country saving cost of transportation of coal for the power stations.
Generation of power at the pit head or coastal areas (for imported coal
based plant) and transmission of electricity to load centre is certainly
more cost effective. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Government should encourage setting up of coal based thermal
power projects at pit heads or coastal areas for projects dependent on
imported coal as the case may be by facilitating and incentivizing
them as ultimately the consumer will have to bear the increased cost
of electricity due to irrational planning of power generation sites.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
2.5 The Committee note that fund requirement for the
development of transmission system proposed for the 12th Plan is
estimated to be order of Rs. 2,00,000 crore. In regard to arrangement
for this huge fund the Ministry of Power has stated that Intra-State
power transmission projects will be eligible for viability gap funding.
They have also stated that the figure of Rs. 2,00,000 crore has three
components – Central Transmission Utility, that is, PowerGrid, private
licencees and State Transmission Utilities. CTU will not have any
difficulty in raising the money and they do not need viability gap
funding. The same will hold good for licencees. It will be the State
Transmission Utilities which may require viability gap funding. The
Ministry have stated that there will not be any problem in arrangements
of funds for the transmission projects planned for the 12th Plan.
Considering the importance that these projects hold for the overall
development of the nation, it would not be prudent to become lax in
regard to the in arrangement of the required fund. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should not become
complacent in arrangement of the required fund.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
2.6 The Committee note that with the synchronous integration
of Southern Grid with the NEW Grid, the complexities are bound to
increase in ensuring the seamless transmission of electricity throughout
the country at a desirable frequency. In regard to review of the present
regional grid transfer capability in view of the synchronous integration
of the Southern Grid with NEW Grid, the Ministry has stated that
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) has convened three meetings during

48
August-September, 2012 to discuss this matter. The matter was also
discussed in the Eighth meeting of the Forum of Load Despatchers
(FOLD) held in October 2012. POSOCO has submitted a comprehensive
report to CERC in October, 2012 regarding loadability of transmission
lines, which is under consideration of CERC. The Committee are happy
to note that the Government has started some review of the transmission
network, nonetheless, they believe that integration of all the grids for
operating at one frequency and massive growth proposed in
transmission network will only make the job more challenging. Thus
it becomes imperative to reassess the transmission network system
and transfer capabilities thoroughly by a team of experts on a larger
scale. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the outcomes of the
Report of POSOCO whenever approved by CERC should be
implemented with sincerity and expeditious manner. The Committee
also expect that they will be apprised about the outcome of the POSOCO
Report as approved by the CERC at time of Action Taken Report.
Simultaneously, the Government should further plan a thorough review
of the transmission networks on a larger scale keeping in view the
future developments, necessities and complexities by involving experts
not only of the Country but also from abroad having expertise in this
field.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
High Capacity Corridors
2.7 The Committee note that there are certain States viz. Odisha,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh etc. where
massive generation capacity has been planned. To evacuate this large
amount of electricity, 11 High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors
(HCPTCs) at an estimated cost of Rs. 75,000 crore have been planned.
They further note that most of this Corridor work will be done by the
PowerGrid and same is proposed to be implemented through private
participation/tariff based competitive bidding process. Implementation
of these corridors has been taken up in a phased manner matching
with generation projects. The Committee feel that the high capacity
corridors have greater importance for the power sector as these lines
are meant for evacuation of the large quantum of electricity from the
generation stations of Independent Power Producers (IPPs) to load
centres across the States and Regions. The High Capacity Transmission
lines are futuristic technology of transmission sector as they have
numerous benefits such as low AT&C losses due to high voltage, cost

49
effectiveness, reduced need of RoW etc. The Committee believe that
the project will yield dual benefit, firstly, evacuation of huge amount
of electricity will be helpful in bridging the gap between demand and
supply of power caused by ever growing energy need of the Country,
secondly, it will boost the confidence of private sector for more active
participation in power generation field due to assurance of proper
evacuation of electricity generated. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to ensure that these projects are
implemented as scheduled by providing all necessary assistance and
effective intervention in resolution of the problems being faced or
anticipated. The Committee also recommend that the transmission
projects specially HCPTCs should be accorded environment and forest
clearance more liberally and in a time bound manner as the laying of
transmission lines have negligible impact on forest/environment and
there is no change in land use patterns. As, the HCPTCs project has
huge fund requirements, the Committee, also desire the Government
to ensure that paucity of fund does not become a reason for delay in
implementation of these corridors.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
Green Energy Corridor
2.8 The Committee note that the renewable energy (RE) resources
are generally located in remote locations and confined in few states
like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir which contribute
about 80% to 90% of total renewable capacity installations in the country.
Presently, the renewable energy generation capacity in the Country is
about 26,000 MW. Till recently, the quantum of Renewable Energy was
small and it was being consumed locally. It was presumed that
connectivity with the nearest grid substation of State Transmission
Utility (STU) would suffice for evacuation of Renewable Energy. Now,
the emphasis has been given to harness Renewable Energy on a large
scale to supplement the capacity addition from conventional sources
and for clean development as well. In this connection it is envisaged
to add about 30,000 MW renewable energy generation capacity during
the 12th Plan period. The Committee have been informed that for
recognizing the importance of promotion of renewable generation and
its integration into the grid, a comprehensive plan called Green Energy
Corridors has been made by the PowerGrid costing about Rs. “ 43,000
crore. The Secretary, Ministry of Power informed the Committee that

50
concerned Ministries are in touch to find out ways of funding this
project. As Renewable Energy sources have intermittency and variability
features which make it challenging for their grid inter connection, the
Committee are heartened to note that a corridor dedicated for the
evacuation of renewable energy and its integration with main grid is
being planned. The Committee also believe that in future energy
producing States would not be able to consume entire Renewable
Energy produced within the State beyond their Renewable Purchase
Obligation (RPO) requirements, so it has to be transmitted to other
States. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Green Energy Corridor
is in consonance with the growth in the field of renewable energy in
the recent years and their massive future projections. The Committee
recommend that the Green Energy Corridor should be given utmost
priority in terms of according various clearances, arrangement of
funding and other technical support whenever needed. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy should chalk out the modalities for early
implementation of time completing this project. The Committee believe
that providing monetary incentives in this project would go a long way
in ensuring proper funding in Green Energy Corridor.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
Grid Management
2.9 The Committee note that Regional Load Despatch Centres
(RLDCs) are the apex bodies, as per the Electricity Act, 2003, to ensure
integrated operation of the power system in their concerned region.
RLDCs are responsible for carrying out real time operation of grid
control and despatch of electricity within the region in accordance with
the Grid Standards and Grid Code. Whereas, the State Load Despatch
Centres (SLDCs) have to perform functions similar to RLDCs except
the area of jurisdiction, which in case of SLDCs is the State. The
Committee further note that there is one National Load Despatch Centre
(NLDC) for overall supervision of scheduling and despatch of electricity
across various regions. The Committee feel that for economic, secure
and uninterrupted functioning of National Grid, effective coordinating
system among NLDC, RLDCs and SLDCs is of paramount importance.
During the examination of the subject, the Committee found that the
coordination between RLDC and SLDCs is not as desired. RLDCs do
not have adequate power to control erring SLDCs, who are under great
control of the respective State Governments, except for giving directions.

51
If any SLDC does not obey these directions, RLDC files a petition in
the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) who can fine
them if found at fault. The Committee during the examination of the
subject ‘Functioning of CERC’ found that in most of the cases even
the fine imposed by the CERC have not been realized. As whole of
the Country’s transmission system will now be synchronized soon, any
dereliction/under-performance of SLDCs will have cascading effects
and its impact could extend upto entire Country. The Committee,
therefore, believe that in view of the growing complexities due to
expansion of National Grid it is crucial that there is an effective control
mechanism for better coordination between RLDCs and SLDCs for
enforcing strict grid discipline. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Government should bring out necessary
amendments in The Electricity Act, 2003 for giving much needed clout
to RLDCs/CERC to deter the erring SLDCs and ensure stricter grid
discipline.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
2.10 The Committee observe that the SLDCs still do not enjoy
the due autonomy and are under influence of State Governments which
hampers their efficacious and neutral discharge of the assigned duties
provided under the Electricity Act, 2003. This often leads to lack of
their coordination with RLDCs. The Committee are of the view that
for better coordination between RLDC and SLDC, providing functional
autonomy to SLDCs is important so that they can be made neutral and
more efficacious in discharge of their duties. The Committee, therefore,
also recommend that under proposed amendments in the Act SLDCs
should be granted more functional autonomy to play a role of integral
component of a National Grid rather of a representative of a particular
State.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
2.11 The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Ministry for
giving training to 700 employees of various SLDCs to converge them
with the latest techniques of grid operations. It is envisaged that the
training will improve the capabilities and efficiency of the personnel
who man SLDCs. The Committee also endorse the planning of the
Ministry to offer one-time incentive of Rs. 20,000 to participate in this
training programme to attract more and more personnel of SLDCs to
get trained. The Committee feel that though these efforts are
praiseworthy, lot more needed to be done in regard to modernizing

52
and reforming the SLDCs. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government that apart from carrying on and intensifying the said
training programme, the State Governments and State Transmission
Utilities should be persuaded to sponsor SLDCs personnel for the
training and able to provide incentives on successful completion of the
same.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
Grid Discipline
2.12 The Committee note that the Country witnessed two massive
grid failure on 30th and 31st July, 2012, the second failure being bigger
and more severe in impact. The Committee were informed that
approximately 36,000 MW of load was lost and power supply in
Northern region was not available for around 13 hours on 30th July
2012 and 31st July 2012, approximately 48,000 MW of load was lost and
power supply was not available for about 5 hours, 8 hours and 2 hours
in Northern, Eastern and North-Eastern regions, respectively. The
Ministry of Power constituted an Enquiry Committee to analyse the
causes of these disturbances and to suggest measures to avoid recurrence
of such disturbance in future. The Enquiry Committee brought out
that no single factor was responsible for grid disturbances but several
factors such as weak inter-regional corridors, loss of 400 KV Bina-
Gwalior-Agra link, inadequate response by SLDCs to RLDCs’
instructions etc. led to the collapse of the power systems on both the
days. The Committee are aghast by the findings of the Enquiry
Committee as it has pointed out several lapses and deficits in defense
mechanism. The Electricity Act, 2003 provides for various grid safety
measures to be taken with a view to ensure the well functioning and
safety of the grid which have not been adhered to by the authorities.
This Committee are of the view that the decade long absence of any
major grid disturbance has set in complacency and lackadaisical
approach in regard to regular examination and revamping of
transmission systems in the Country. Due to inattention for a long
period, the transmission and grid system in the Country could not
match the pace of massive capacity addition in the recent years and
ultimately collapsed. The Committee feel that for fulfillment of the
vision ‘Electricity for All’, there is an urgent need not only for quantum
increase in generation capacity but also for refurbishment and
strengthening of the transmission network of the Country to match the
increase in generation capacity for smooth and reliable transmission

53
of electricity from one corner to another. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend the Government to show utmost urgency in
implementation of all the recommendations of the Enquiry Committee
in their letter and spirit and in time bound manner to ensure non-
repetition of such blackouts in future.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
2.13 The Committee note that the Under Frequency Relays and
df/dt relays are installed in distribution substations of State Utilities
for automatic tripping of distribution lines connected to a load centre
which forms part of the distribution network. PowerGrid conducted
an audit of all these relays in 175 substations of the Northern Region
in August, 2012. As per audit, 36 substations did not have the UFRs
and df/dt relays, in 99 substations the relays did not operate on the
date of disturbance i.e. 30th and 31st July, 2012 as per log book
maintained by the substation itself. The relays operated in only 40
substations on date of disturbance. The Committee are indignant to
note the negligence in regard to upkeep of safety devices which are
critical for prevention of grid breakdown of a large scale. Had these
devices been working, it was very much possible that the blackouts
could have been averted. The absence/malfunctioning of such a large
number of devices have lead the Committee to believe that the safety
audits of the transmission/grid network is a rare affair otherwise the
faults would have been detected and rectified earlier. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that provisions should be made for safety
audit at a regular intervals and their findings should be implemented
in a time bound manner to ensure safe, reliable and efficient
transmission network in the Country. Also there should be
unambiguous division of roles and responsibilities in ensuring the
installation and upkeep of safety devices/measures so that
accountability can be fixed in case of any mis-happenings.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
2.14 The Committee during the examination of the subject
‘Functioning of CERC’ had pointed out that Unscheduled Interchange
(UI) charges for the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative value
of Rs. 74,181 crore. The figure itself speaks volume about the misuse
of the mechanism. The Committee had also noted that the frequency
had dipped to as low as 48.7 Hz. The Committee infer that UI
mechanism, actually legitimize the power overdrawl by utilities by
paying a little price for it, therefore, instead of enforcing grid discipline,

54
have encouraged the overdrawl of power by the utilities who are ready
to pay, leaving the safety of the grid at stake. The Committee are against
the idea of generation of revenue through UI mechanism at the cost
of grid safety and reliability. The Committee find that UI mechanism
has miserably failed to enforce grid discipline and deter overdrawl of
electricity by Discoms rather it encourage Discoms to use UI mechanism
as an alternative of short term electricity trading. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that there is a need for formulation of
a regulation which can replace UI mechanism and ensure stricter
enforcement of grid discipline by deterring the Discoms to overdraw
after a certain frequency. The Committee further recommend that the
Government, besides exploring the possibility of adopting
disconnection clause in extreme cases, should also incorporate harsh
penal provisions for repeated offenders of overdrawl in the said
regulation.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
2.15 The Committee note that with the proposed synchronous
interconnection of Southern Region with NEW grid, a single grid of
about 2,50,000 MW capacity shall be operated in coming years thereby
maintaining grid safety, security and reliability of such geographical
spread would be a great challenge. The Committee, therefore, strongly
believe that in that scenario any grid malfunctioning, as happened in
July, 2012, would have the cascading effect making it more severe by
affecting one and all regions. In this scenario, the Committee feel
shielding of important cities from blackout in case of grid failure
becomes absolutely necessary. The Committee have been informed that
Islanding Scheme for various parts of the Country including Delhi is
under consideration. The Committee recommend that the proposal of
Islanding Schemes for Delhi, other important cities/parts of the Country,
as proposed by the Government, should be finalized expeditiously
and be implemented within a fixed timeframe.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
Transaction of Electricity
2.16 The Committee note that Power Exchanges are the platform
for short and medium term transaction of electricity. At present there
are two power exchanges in the Country, and more exchanges are being
planned. The Committee further note that of the total electricity
generation, 10.79% were transacted through short term trading. The

55
Committee also note that average weighted price of electricity transacted
during the month of December, 2012 through traders, Indian Energy
Exchange and Power Exchange of India Limited was Rs. 4.39/kWh,
Rs. 3.90k/kWh and Rs. 3.08/kWh respectively. It was also observed that
on several occasions congestion in both the Exchanges was felt due to
limitation in transmission transfer capabilities. The Power exchanges
were constituted in order to provide inclusive, transparent and nation-
wide competitive platform for better price discovery of electricity. The
objective of Power Exchanges is to optimize the available generation
capacity at national level, facilitating both, generators and the purchasers
of the electricity. As it can be seen that the average weighted price of
electricity transacted through exchanges are relatively low than that of
through traders. The Committee believe that power exchanges facilitate
implementation of the Open Access in transmission and meeting short
term and medium term electricity demands of the power utilities which
cannot be predicted in advance. The Committee also find that though
more than four years have been elapsed since the inception of power
exchanges, yet there are several issues that remain to be addressed.
The volume of electricity transacted through these exchanges is not
much; moreover, most of the transactions are being done through only
one exchange. The Committee feel that the reason for the less volume
could be the congestion due to the limitations in transmission
capabilities. The Committee also find that the top five trading licensees
had a share of about 70% in the total volume traded by all the licensees
indicating that most of the trading players are not getting participation
in these exchanges for whatever reasons. The Committee feel that
domination of few players in the power exchanges would defeat the
very purpose of creating these platforms. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to take some remedial measures to ensure
that the power exchanges, existing as well as proposed, should work
in a fair and transparent manner and allow the inclusive and active
participation of all trading players. Needless to emphasize that the
problem of congestion which obstacle the transaction of electricity
through these exchanges should be dealt expeditiously by suitable
measures.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
Smart Grid Technology
2.17 The Committee note that the power systems in the Country
have grown manifold and their complexities are increasing. With the

56
proposed synchronous interconnection of Southern Region with NEW
Grid, there will be a single grid of about 2,50,000 MW capacity operating
at one frequency. The Committee feel that maintaining grid safety,
security and reliability of such geographical spread is of great challenge.
Moreover, the proposed grid interconnection of Renewable Energy,
having intermittent and variability features will certainly necessitate
technological changes and upgradation of the grid. Against this
backdrop, the Committee have been informed that PowerGrid has taken
initiative for implementation of Smart Grid Technology in the Country
and has implemented Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) using Wide
Area Measurement Systems (WAMS) in Northern Region Grid for the
first time. It is envisaged that the Smart Grid Technology will help
in substantially bringing down the AT&C losses, improvement in
quality of power supply, effective management of peak demand and
supply response and grid integration of Renewable Energy. The
Committee feel that the Smart Grid Technology, though expensive, is
an advanced technology which is being used by many developed
countries successfully. They, therefore, recommend the Government to
go ahead and expedite the implementation of this technology
throughout the Country. The Government should also ensure that lack
of funds does not hinder the implementation of this ambitious project.
The Committee expect that the Government will provide details about
the proposals and progress made in implementation of Smart Grid
Technology in the Country in their action taken reply.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
7 May, 2013 Chairman,
17 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

57
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13) HELD ON 1ST NOVEMBER, 2012 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘53’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
4. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
5. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
6. Shri A.Raja
7. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
10. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
11. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
12. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
14. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
15. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
16. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari

58
17. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
18. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
19. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power
1. Shri P . Uma Shankar — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa — Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry — Addl. Secretary
4. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
5. Shri I.C.P . Keshari — Joint Secretary
6. Shri G. Sai Prasad — Joint Secretary
7. Shri B.N. Sharma — Joint Secretary
8. Smt. Rita Acharya — Joint Secretary
9. Shri Rakesh Jain — Joint Secretary and F.A.
10. Shri Manoranjan Kumar — Economic Advisor
Central Electricity Authority
1.  Shri A.S. Bakshi — Chairperson
Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies
1. Shri R.N. Nayak — CMD, Powergrid
2. Shri G. Sai Prasad — CMD, NHPC
3. Shri Rajeev Sharma — CMD, REC
4. Shri Satnam Singh — CMD, PFC
5. Shri R.P . Singh — CMD, SJVNL
6. Shri R.S.T. Sai — CMD, THDC
7. Shri P .C. Pankaj — CMD, NEEPCO
8. Shri R.N. Sen — Chairman, DVC
9. Shri A.B. Agrawal — Chairman, BBMB
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power to the sitting
of the Committee and apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1)

59
and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry made a power-
point presentation on Development of National Grid.
4. The Committee inter-alia discussed with the representatives of
the Ministry of Power the following important points:—
(i) Need for a National Grid – to enable harnessing of resources
to their optimum potential, improve economy, reliability and
quality of power supply and to bridge the gap between
demand and supply in deficit area.
(ii) Dev elopment of National Grid – transmission capacity
addition during 11th Plan and plans to enhance transmission
capacity to 66,000 MW by the end of 12th Plan.
(iii) Grid Failure – factors responsible for the grid failure on
30th and 31st July, 2012, recommendations given by the
independent technical Committee and action taken/proposed
by the Government thereon ensuring that Grid failure is not
repeated.
(iv) Role of CERC in Grid discipline.
(v) Introduction of latest technology to ensure the smooth
functioning of the Grid by strictly adhering to more precise
grid frequency and to effectively check the malpractice of
overdrawl by enforcing Grid discipline.
(vi) Need for policy in regard to development of more pit head
power plants to save transportation cost and fine-tuning of
the policy with a view to make the National Grid beneficial
to all areas including backward States/Regions.
(vii) Implementation of Islanding scheme for Delhi/other States.
The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the
subject and the representatives of the Ministry responded to the same.
The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by them.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13) HELD ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2012 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal
3. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
4. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
5. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
6. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
9. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
10. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
11. Shri Bhishma Shabnkar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
13. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director

61
WITNESSES
Ministry of Power
1. Shri P . Uma Shankar — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa — Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry — Addl. Secretary
4. Shri B.N. Sharma — Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
6. Shri I.C.P . Keshari — Joint Secretary
7. Shri G. Sai Prasad — Joint Secretary
8. Shri Rakesh Jain — Joint Secretary and F.A.
9. Smt. Rita Acharya — Joint Secretary
10. Shri Manoranjan Kumar — Economic Advisor
Central Electricity Authority
1. Shri A.S. Bakshi — Chairperson
PSUS, Autonomous Bodies, Statutory Bodies, etc.
1. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury — CMD, NTPC
2. Shri R.N. Nayak — CMD, Powergrid
3. Shri G. Sai Prasad — CMD, NHPC
4. Shri Rajeev Sharma — CMD, REC
5. Shri Satnam Singh — CMD, PFC
6. Shri R.P . Singh — CMD, SJVNL
7. Shri R.S.T. Sai — CMD, THDC
8. Shri P .C. Pankaj — CMD, NEEPCO
9. Shri R.N. Sen — Chairman, DVC
10. Shri A.B. Agrawal — Chairman, BBMB
11. Shri S.K. Soonee — CEO, POSCO
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power to the sitting
of the Committee and apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1)

62
and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee.
4. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the Secretary ,
Power briefly spelt out various facets of the subjects. He also replied to
the aspects raised by the Members during the earlier sitting of the
Committee held on 01st November, 2012.
5. The Committee, thereafter, inter-alia  discussed with the
representatives of the Ministry of Power the following important points:—
(i) Norms for wheeling of electricity from one State to another.
(ii) Achiev ement during 11th Plan in development of Inter-State,
Intra-State and Inter-Regional transmission system and
proposal for 12th Plan.
(iii) Fund requirement for strengthening of transmission system
and Development of National Grid.
(iv) Findings of the Technical Committee on grid disturbances in
June, 2012 – Action taken/proposed by the Government on
the recommendations of the Committee.
(v) Allocation of Electricity produced by Central Sector to various
States – deficiency of electricity in Eastern Region States.
(vi) Development of more pit head power plants – their benefits
and limitations.
(vii) Islanding of important cities to avert any blackouts in the
event of grid malfunctioning.
(viii) Need for physical and technological upgradation of power
stations and load centres.
(ix) Roadmap for implementation of Smart Grid Technology in
Transmission in the Country.
6. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to
the subject and the representatives of the Ministry responded to the same.
The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish
written replies to the queries which could not be responded to by them.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned .

63
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012—13) HELD ON 07TH MAY, 2013 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
4. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
5. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
10. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
11. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
12. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
13. Shri K.C. Tyagi

64
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration of the following draft Reports:—
(i) Thirty-Sixth Report on ‘International Cooperation in New
and Renewable Energy Sector’ relating to Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy.
(ii) Thirty-Seventh Report on Development of National Grid
relating to the Ministry of Power.
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with slight
modifications.
5. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the
officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. *** *** *** *** ***
7. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports taking into consideration the factual verification
by the concerned Ministries and present the same to both the Houses
of Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”