22
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Small and Mini Hydel Projects’]
TWENTY SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 ( Saka)


TWENTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Small and Mini Hydel Projects’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2011
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  14.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


C.O.E. No. 216
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 25
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 26
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 31
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
1st December, 2011 ................................................................. 34
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
16th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................ 36
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-2012)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P .C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
(iii)

24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Executive Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 22nd Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 16th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on the subject ‘Small and Mini Hydel Projects’
relating to the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
2. The 16th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 18th March, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14th June,
2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 1st December, 2011.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 16th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2011 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Small
and Mini Hydel Projects’.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18th March,
2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The
Report contained 12 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total-09
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 1 and 5
Total-02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government is still awaited:
Serial No. 2
Total-01
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report
and the final replies in respect of the Recommendations included in
Chapter V of the Report may be furnished to the Committee within
three months of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Exploitation of Small/Mini Hydel Potential
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. The Committee had pointed out that only 19 per cent of the
identified potential of Small Hydel power (upto 25 MW capacity) in
the country has been exploited i.e against the estimated potential of
15384 MW of Small Hydel power. As on 31st December 2010, only
2939 MW capacity has been set up and projects of about 927 MW are
in various stages of implementation. The Committee were also not
satisfied with the performance in the States with maximum potential
viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu
and Kashmir where mere 711.67 MW capacity has been installed against
the available potential of about 6500 MW in these States. The
Committee had recommended the Ministry to come out with a concrete
plan of action to exploit the huge untapped potential at faster pace,
especially in the States with maximum potential and also to work on
reducing the reported gestation period of 4-5 years in order to ensure
increased pace of implementation of the SHP Projects.
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy have stated:
“The total installed capacity of small hydro projects, as on 31st
May, 2011 is 3082 MW and projects of about 1192 MW are in
various stages of implementation. The subject of small hydro
between 3 to 25 MW was transferred from Ministry of Power to
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in November, 1999.
At that time, the total installed capacity of small hydro projects
(up to 25 MW) was only 1275 MW. There has been an increase of
about 150% in the installed capacity in the last 10 years. A
continuous and steady growth can be seen in the SHP sector.
During the 9th Plan a capacity of 269 MW was added. This has
increased to 536 MW during the 10th Plan and it is expected that
it would reach 1400 MW during the 11th Plan. The average capacity
addition of 55 MW per year during the 9th Plan has increased to
280 MW per year during the 11th Plan.

3
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has started work
for preparing a Plan of Action to accelerate pace of exploitation of
small hydro in the country. In this direction, the Ministry has
stepped up its efforts to closely interact with the States and
emphasized on establishing a method of regular project-wise
monitoring. It is strongly. felt that project wise monitoring and
regular interaction with the States and SHP developers is the only
way to reduce implementation time of the projects. Apart from
regular interaction with the States with high small hydro potential
(Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K, Karnataka and Arunachal
Pradesh), the Ministry has also interacted with the States with
moderate potential to set up SHP projects (Punjab, Maharashtra,
Chattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh etc.).
Information regarding allotment of potential sites to the private
sector, their implementation schedules and their Plan for next five
years or so has been collected. The Ministry will try to review
progress in these States on a quarterly basis.
The Ministry is now in the process of preparing its 12th Five Year
Plan. A separate sub-group has been constituted with members
drawn from all major potential States to draw the 12th Plan and
Action Plan for faster exploitation of SHP potential in the country.
Separate sub-groups have also been constituted to look into the
issues of transmission/evacuation infrastructure for renewable
energy based power projects and environmental aspects including
land and forest clearance issues. The sub-group on environmental
aspects would also suggest prudent practices to be adopted for
faster statutory clearances for renewable energy based power
projects. This would help in reducing the gestation period and
ensure increased pace of implementation of the SHP projects.
The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and
Kashmir and Uttarakhand have highest potential for development
of small hydro. All the four States have policy to invite private
sector to set up SHP projects. While major development of small
hydro in Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand is coming through
private sector projects, there is at present limited participation of
private sector in Arunachal Pradesh and J&K and SHP projects are
also being developed by the public sector”.
8. Scrutiny of the Ministry’s reply shows that the total installed
capacity of small hydro projects, as on 31st May, 2011 is 3082 MW
and projects of about 1192 MW are in various stages of
implementation i.e. about 27 per cent of the identified potential in

4
the country has been exploited so far. The Committee feel that huge
potential is still left untapped for which the Ministry has to make
vigorous efforts to tap the huge untapped potential of small hydel
power. The MNRE in their action taken reply have stated that work
has started for preparing a Plan of Action to accelerate pace of
exploitation of small hydro in the country and also stepped up its
efforts to closely interact with the States and emphasized on
establishing a method of regular project-wise monitoring. Although
the Ministry has stated project wise monitoring and regular
interaction with the States and SHP developers to reduce
implementation time of the projects, yet they have been unable to
prescribe any time schedule for setting up of SHP . The Committee
trust that the Ministry would adhere to their action plan and
strengthen their monitoring and coordination mechanism for faster
and effective implementation of the small hydro projects as there is
huge gap between the capacity achieved and available potential. The
Committee also take note of the efforts made by the Ministry to
constitute separate sub-group to draw the 12th Plan for faster
exploitation of SHP potential in the country and another separate
sub-group to look into the issues of transmission/evacuation
infrastructure for renewable energy based power projects and
environmental aspects including land and forest clearance issues.
The Committee believe that with the efforts of the Government,
though belated, the problems like allotment of sites, approaching
path in forest areas, local issues, etc which stands in the way for
faster development of small hydro projects would be resolved and
consequently increase the pace of implementation of the SHP
Projects. While acknowledging the efforts and measures initiated by
the Ministry on the recommendations of the Committee for faster
exploitation of huge untapped potential of Small Hydel power, the
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made, especially
the recommendations of the sub-groups and follow up action thereon.
The Committee also would like the Ministry to follow up their action
plan meticulously, so that their efforts are converted into results and
present rate of capacity addition in SHP is increased manifold to
realize the potential. Needless to emphasize that the Ministry would
have ambitious specific plans for SHP sector for the 12th Five Year
Plan (2012-17) in place well in time and all out efforts would be
made to achieve the targets.
B. Exploration of SHP potential sites
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
9. The Committee had pointed out the need to review the SHP
potential statistics for which the last survey to identify the potential
availability in hydro sector (above 3 MW) in the country was conducted

5
by the Central Electricity Authority during 1978 to 1987. The Committee
felt that with the growing need, advancements in technology, experience
gained in SHP sector and other related factors, there is dire need to
review the SHP potential statistics. The Committee had recommended
that the Ministry should take initiative for a fresh look on the potential
availability of SHP projects in the country in coordination with the
Ministry of Power.
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have inter-alia
informed as under:
“The Need to reassess the small hydro potential in the country
has been felt in the Ministry for quite some time. The present
information available about potential of small hydro in the country
is primarily based on the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) study
conducted during 1988 to 1997. The report published by CEA in
1997 on Small hydro power potential in India covered state wise
potential of SHP up to 15 MW. The assessment of SHP potential
(mainly up to 3 MW) in 13 Himalayan States was carried out by
Alternate Hydro Energy Center (AHEC), IIT Roorkee as part of a
UNDP-GEF project. Further, AHEC has also helped many other
States in assessing the SHP potential. For the last 4-5 years, private
developers are also identifying sites in States and are termed as
self identified sites. There is change in potential at some of the
sites after detailed investigation by the private developers. At
present, a list of over 5700 sites is available with an estimated
potential of about 15,300 MW. AHEC has been helping the Ministry
in compiling this information.
Assessment of small hydro potential requires time and financial
resources. In past, all State Electricity Boards or state irrigation/
water resources departments used to have separate investigation
wings and identification of potential hydro sites was a regular
activity. However, with time and reorganization of SEBs, these
investigation wings have been dismantled in most of the states. In
MNRE, some efforts were made to assess potential of Beas Basin
of Himachal Pradesh and a part of Nagaland using GIS
technologies and Hydrological Modeling. This required digital
topographic maps, long term rain fall data, current land use details,
soil, forest cover data etc. Reliability and availability of these data
is a major limitation for carrying out assessment of hydro potential
through modeling methods. Often field investigation methods
supported with maps and discharge and other data is considered
the best option.

6
As recommended by the Committee and in view of the facts
mentioned above, the Ministry has set up a working group under
the Chairmanship of Adviser (SHP), MNRE and drawing members
from the Central Electricity Authority , Ministry of Power, Central
Water Commission and States like Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya. The terms of
Reference of the Working Group are as follows:
1. Review the existing information available with the MNRE/
AHEC/CEA/States on potential of small hydro on rivers,
existing facilities like dams, canal falls, barrages, etc.
2. Broad parameters and the extent of details required for
collection of State-wise information on potential of SHP .
3. Suggest strategy to validate the exiting information on
potential sites.
4. Recommend approach and methodology to assess State-wise
small hydro potential in the country.
The first meeting of the working group was held on 18th May
2011 wherein existing information about potential and strategy for
undertaking the task for re-assessing the potential was discussed.
The working group is of the opinion that involvement of
State Government and the agency responsible for small hydro
development in the State would be extremely critical and necessary
in assessing the potential. AHEC, IIT Roorkee has been asked to
prepare a roadmap for undertaking this task”.
11. The Ministry have stated that the present information
available about potential of small hydro in the country is primarily
based on the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) study conducted
during 1988 to 1997, which is about a decade and half old. Regarding
the assessment of small hydro potential, the Ministry have stated
that in the past, all State Electricity Boards or State irrigation/water
resources departments used to have separate investigation wings and
identification of potential hydro sites was a regular activity. However,
with time and reorganization of SEBs, these investigation wings have
been dismantled in most of the States. In this connection, the
Committee would like to reiterate that the MNRE being the nodal
Ministry should play the role of a catalyst to the State Governments
in formation of a separate investigation wings for identification of
hydro potential sites of the States. The Committee also note the
efforts made by the MNRE to assess potential of Beas Basin of
Himachal Pradesh and a part of Nagaland using GIS technologies

7
and Hydrological Modeling and the setting up of a working group
under the Chairmanship of Adviser (SHP), MNRE in connection with
the initiatives taken in this area. The Committee hope that the
Government will give due priority to the working of this Group
and more efforts on the pattern of Himachal Pradesh and Nagaland
will be undertaken to identify more and more potential. If necessary
agencies like AHEC may be engaged to carry out the job in a
comprehensive manner. The Committee also desire that both the
initiatives and monitoring may be strengthened by the Ministry so
that not only the available potential is known but also conducive
atmosphere is created for its utmost exploitation. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
C. Micro Hydel Projects and Water Mills
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
12. The Committee had noted that the installation of micro hydel
projects upto 100 KW capacity and watermills of smaller capacities of
the range of 1-5 KW meet the power requirements of remote areas,
particularly hilly and mountain areas in a decentralized manner. The
Committee had also noted the provision of Central Financial Assistance
(CFA) ranging from Rs. 35,000/- to Rs. 1,10,000/- per watermill and
Rs. 40,000/- to Rs. 1,00,000/- per KW per micro hydel project. The
Committee appreciated the steps taken by the Ministry to promote
production of scientifically improved designs of the watermills with
better efficiency, longer life and diversified uses. The Committee had
recommended that the cost of installation of improved designs of
watermills and CFA provided be managed in a pragmatic manner
keeping in mind the affordability of the end-users and that the
production of the improved version of watermills in a large scale may
also be linked with their maintenance so that the spare parts and
technical/mechanical services are easily available at reasonable cost.
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The present scheme of providing Central Financial Assistance
(CFA) for watermills and micro hydel projects has been very much
appreciated by the States and beneficiaries. However, as mentioned
by the Committee the quantum of beneficiary contribution still
limits large scale promotion/deployment of watermills and micro
hydel projects. The affordability of the end user is extremely limited
and hence they are unable to take advantage of the CFA available
under the scheme. Since the watermill equipment suppliers are
now well established and the designs are now quite proven,

8
availability of spare parts from these manufacturers is not an issue.
Proper training to the beneficiary and local youth is ensured for
operation and maintenance of watermills. Availability of spare parts
at reasonable prices of indigenous machines is not a problem.
The watermill and micro hydel scheme will be reviewed for the
12th Plan and the recommendations of the Committee would be
certainly addressed in the revised Scheme. It is also proposed to
get the effectiveness of the scheme evaluated through an
independent agency shortly. This study would also give suitable
suggestions for improving the scheme”.
14. The Committee note that the present scheme of providing
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for watermills and micro hydel
projects has been very much appreciated by the States and
beneficiaries. On the contrary, the Committee find that the quantum
of beneficiary contribution still limits large scale promotion/
deployment of watermills and micro hydel projects and that the
affordability of the end user is extremely limited and are unable to
take advantage of the CFA available under the scheme. This state of
affairs will severely undermine the utility of the scheme and it will
fail to achieve its objective if the end-user is not in a position to
contribute his/her share. In the opinion of the Committee, the issue
needs a revisit to make the scheme accessible to end-user by
remodeling it suitably so that CFA component does not remain
unused or unspent. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate
their earlier recommendation that the cost of installation of improved
designs of watermills and CFA be managed in a pragmatic manner
keeping in mind the affordability of the end-users. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
D. Promotion of Watermills
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
15. Keeping in view the mechanical and electrical uses of the
watermills and its socio-economic value in enhancement of the
economic activities and betterment of the opportunities of livelihood
for the people of remote and un-accessible areas where grid connectivity
is not feasible, the Committee had recommended that the promotional
programme of watermills in a large scale be spread and implemented
in potential areas on the pattern of Uttarakhand by involving local
bodies, associations and arranging suitable training programmes at the
Centres like AHEC and IITs.

9
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry has already received a suggestion from the members
of sub-group on small hydro involved in the preparation of
12th Plan that the Ministry should also support livelihood activities
with watermills/micro hydel projects. It is also suggested that the
scope of this scheme should be enlarged by involving more
organizations/NGOs and stake holders. The programme of
watermills, as suggested by the Committee is proposed to be
enlarged on the pattern of Uttarakhand during the 12th Plan. The
Ministry would also continue with providing suitable training
programmes as part of this programme”.
17. The Committee are happy to note that the members of sub-
group on small hydro involved in the preparation of 12th Plan have
acknowledged the significance of watermills and also suggested the
Ministry to support livelihood activities with watermills/micro hydel
projects and to enlarge the scope of this scheme by involving more
organizations/NGOs and stakeholders. The Committee while
acknowledging the initiatives of the Ministry, re-emphasize the
significance of watermills in enhancement of the economic activities
and betterment of the opportunities of livelihood for the people of
remote and un-accessible areas where grid connectivity is not feasible.
Hence, the Committee would like to emphasize that the promotional
programme of watermills in a large scale be spread in potential
areas. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in
this connection.
E. Issues relating to development of SHP Projects
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
18. The Committee had noted that the issues and obstacles faced
by the private developers include time taken in obtaining various
clearance at the State level, transfer of land, environment and forest
clearances, availability of reliable hydrological data, timely creation of
suitable power evacuation facilities, deposit of fee for compensatory
afforestation etc. Since the State Governments have their own
mechanism to address these administrative issues, the Committee had
felt that consistent and sincere efforts of the Ministry in assisting and
mobilizing the State Governments would lessen the time taken in
obtaining various clearances culminating into faster implementation of
the projects. The Committee, had therefore, recommended the Ministry
to persuade, encourage and motivate the States and private developers
to complete the process of survey, data collection and other clearances
in a minimum time period so as to curtail avoidable delays in
implementation of the SHP Projects.

10
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry has been analyzing issues which are hampering faster
development of small hydro projects in the States. State-wise
meetings were held to understand and streamline various
procedures to minimize implementation time of SHP projects. The
Ministry has also taken into consideration their 12th Plan activities
and targets while formulating MNRE 12th Plan. As the ground
work has already been done in most of the States, it is expected
that this would have positive implications in implementation of
SHP projects in the coming years.”
20. The Committee are happy to note the initiatives taken by the
Government in this context viz. analyzing issues that hampers faster
development of small hydro projects, holding of State-wise meetings
to understand and streamline various procedures to minimize
implementation time of SHP projects. With the ground work already
done by the Government in most of the States, the Committee believe
the Ministry address the issues in the right perspective so as to
boost faster development of SHP projects. While acknowledging the
efforts of the Ministry, the Committee would also like to reiterate
their recommendation that Ministry should persuade, encourage and
motivate the States and private developers to boost the development
of SHP Projects in the country.
F. Electrification/illumination border villages of Arunachal Pradesh
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
21. Under the Electrification/illumination of the border villages of
Arunachal Pradesh, the Committee had noted that as on
30th November, 2010, out of 1058 villages under MNRE programme,
523 villages have been illuminated by SPV systems and 203 villages
have been electrified through SHP Projects. The Committee had been
assured that illumination of rest of the 332 villages will be completed
through SHP Projects by December, 2011. The Committee had
recommended the Ministry to accelerate the pace of implementation
by evolving proper coordination mechanism with the State Government
so that targets are converted into result.
22. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation of Arunachal
Pradesh project. Following year-wise targets were fixed:—
By 31st December, 2009 : 580 villages
By 31st December, 2010 : 150 villages
By 31st December, 2011 : 328 villages
1058 villages

11
The project has already achieved illumination/electrification of 736
border villages through SPV home lighting systems and SHP
projects, with in scheduled time period. Out of 157 small/micro
hydel projects, 47 projects have been completed electrifying
213 villages. The progress in balance110 projects is closely monitored
through regular meetings with the implementing agencies. Teams
from AHEC, IIT Roorkee regularly visits the project sites for
monitoring and resolving any technical matters. A team of MNRE
and State Government officials have recently visited manufacturers
to monitor their schedule for supply of equipment. It is expected
that most of the projects would be completed in 2012.”
23. Scrutiny of the data reveals that out of 1058 villages to be
electrified by December 2011 under MNRE Programme, 949 villages
were illuminated by June, 2011. The Ministry had earlier assured
the Committee that all the villages to be illuminated under the
programme will be completed by December, 2011. They have,
however, now submitted that most of the projects would be
completed in 2012. However, taking note of the progress made in
this regard, the Committee hope that the Ministry will make a
concrete efforts and complete the remaining task at the earliest.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
11th Five Year Plan performance
The Committee observe that against the target of capacity addition
of 1400 MW for 11th Plan, as on 31st October, 2010, only 873.78 MW
i.e. 62 per cent of the targeted capacity has been achieved. To achieve
the remaining target of 526.215 MW capacity in less than one and half
years, the Ministry have informed that they are reviewing the progress
periodically through meetings with the States and correspondence with
the SHP developers. Though the physical achievement during the first
three years have been at par with the targets set by the Ministry, the
Committee find that the achievement during the penultimate year of
the 11th Plan is not up to the mark as only 114.835 capacity against
the target of 300 MW (forming only 38 per cent of the target) has
been achieved in the first seven months of 2010-11 leaving a daunting
task ahead to achieve about 38 per cent of the total target of the
11th Plan in less than one and half years. The details of the financial
allocation vis-a-vis expenditure made during the Plan, as provided by
the MNRE, clearly show that the Ministry has been able to meet the
financial requirements quite conveniently. Moreover, the assessment of
the Ministry that the total budget requirement for the SHP programme
during the 11th Plan would be about Rs. 550 crore against the allocation
of Rs. 700 crore itself indicate that there is no dearth of funds for the
SHP programme. However, keeping in view the performance shown
so far during the current Plan period, the Committee feel that the task
ahead for the Government may not be impossible, but is certainly
challenging and the Ministry do not have any other option but to
tighten their monitoring and coordination mechanism in order to get
the desired results from the developers and the States. No doubt, a
cohesive, well coordinated and dynamic management would be
required to achieve the objectives. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that single window system may be encouraged in States
for all the clearances including DPR, techno- economic, local land and/
or forest clearances and monitoring. This will not only help the
Government in accelerating the pace of implementation of the
programme but also ensure the full achievement of the targets of
11th Plan and subsequent plans as well.

13
Reply of the Government
The target of 300 MW for 2010-11 has been achieved and a capacity
of 307 MW was added from SHP projects during the year. During the
first four years of the 11th Plan, 1066 MW capacity has been added
against a target of 1050 MW. Year wise details are given below. In the
5th year of 11th Plan, about 350 MW is expected to be achieved. The
target of 1400 MW for the 11th Plan is expected to be achieved in full.
SHP Target and achievement during the 11th Plan
Period Physical Financial
Target Achievement Allocation (RE) Expenditure
(MW) (MW) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
11th Plan 1400 700.00
2007-08 200 204.75 50.00 49.95
2008-09 250 248.93 82.50 82.49
2009-10 300 305.27 107.00 106.94
2010-11 300 307.21 152.00 151.99
Total in first 1050 1066.16 391.50 391.37
4 years of
11th Plan
2011-12 350 40 140 24.65
 (as on 30.5.11) (as on 30.5.11)
Similarly, the Ministry has been able to make full utilization of
funds provided for the programme on year to year basis.
The issue of following single window system for providing various
clearances including techno-economic clearance, forest clearance etc.
has been discussed at length with the States. While some States do
have the system of single window/empowered committee etc., this
has not been very effective and the developers have to obtain clearances
from different departments. The Ministry would continue to impress
upon States for such a system and provide time bound clearances.
The issue of streamlining process of giving clearances by the States is
being deliberated by the sub-group set up by MNRE on ‘Environment
Aspects’ to suggest best practices.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51) 2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]

14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
While examining the data relating to sanction vis-a-vis disbursement
of loans by IREDA to SHP projects during 11th Plan period, the
committee are astonished to note the huge mismatch between the
capacity commissioned and amount disbursed in the implementation
of the small hydro projects. In the year 2008-09, Rs. 147.55 crore were
disbursed for capacity commissioning of 52.1 MW while in the year
2009-10, Rs. 229.03 crore were disbursed for capacity commissioning of
15 MW. Similarly, Rs. 170.57 crore disbursed till 31st December 2010
and only 5 MW could be commissioned during 2010-11. There seems
to be great mismatch between the capacity attained and money released
as there cannot be any justification whatsoever of such a huge disparity
and unevenness with regard to the expenditure incurred vis-a-vis
capacity addition. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the causes should be analysed and reasons found out for this anomaly
and simultaneously efforts, both technological as well as administrative,
should be made to ensure that expenditure per MW capacity addition
remains similar to the extent possible.
Reply of the Government
The observation of Committee that there is a huge mismatch
between capacity commissioned and amounts disbursed by IREDA for
SHP projects in a year needs to be seen in the context of
implementation period of SHP projects being normally in the range of
4-5 years and loan disbursements being made in several installments
spread over the implementation period. There is no direct relationship
between the capacity commissioned in a particular year and the loan
amounts disbursed during that year. The loan disbursed in a particular
year is for projects under implementation or for loans sanctioned for
new projects during that year. The loans for projects getting
commissioned in a particular year normally get disbursed in previous
years and there is always some spill-over of loan disbursements for
the same project from year to year. This is explained in greater detail
in the help of subsequent paras.
Status of Sanction vis-a-vis disbursement of loans by IREDA to
SHP projects during 11th Plan period as on 31.3.2011 is as under:
Small Hydro 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 Total
12 3 4 56
1 . New Loan amounts Sanctioned 226.23 343.40 337.45 484.51 1371.59
during the year (Rs. in cr.) (483.45)* (984.51)*

15
2. Disbursements (Rs. in cr.) made 119.39 147.55 229.03 289.87 785.84
during the year (including the (340.46)*
 disbursements made against the
projects loan sanctioned in the
earlier years)
Projects Commissioned
3. Capacity (MW) commissioned 8.75 59.65 35 27.4 130.8
during the year (including the
capacity of the projects whose
loans were sanctioned in the
earlier years)
4. Loan disbursements made during 0.15 63.90 52.98 25.31 142.34
the year corresponding to
commissioned projects
5. Corresponding Cost of Completion 48.53 354.04 275.36 189.40 867.33
of projects mentioned at Sl. No. : 3
above (Rs. in cr.)
6. Avg. cost of Completion of 5.60 6.12 8.32 6.97 6.63
project per MW (Rs. in cr./MW)
Projects Under implementation
7. Total capacity of projects Under 67.70 50.90 60.10 114.05 292.75
Implementation (MW)
8. Corresponding Disbursement 119.24 83.65 176.05 264.56 643.50
made for projects under
implementation mentioned at
sl. no. : 6 above (Rs. in cr.)
*The sanction and disbursement figures in bracket includes projects above 25 MW capacity .
Further, it may be seen that the capacity attained on commissioning
and the corresponding cost of completion in value terms is as under:
Year Cost of Completion (Rs. crore/MW)
2007-08 5.60
2008-09 6.12
2009-10 8.32
2010-11 6.97
12 3 4 56

16
The expenditure per MW of capacity addition remains similar with
minor variations because of site specific nature of Hydro Power Projects
with respect to different parameters of water conductor systems, terrain
and location of the projects, geological surprises and other uncertainties
including variations in price of cement and steel from state to state
and from time to time.
The project wise and year wise details of cost of project completion
and incurred project cost per MW capacity addition for four years
(updated as 31.3.2011) of Xlth plan period referred by Standing
Committee is given as Annexure-I for more clarity on the subject matter.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 Para No. 2.6)
The watermills may be used by the individuals in remote areas
due to their limited capacity, yet the Committee feel that the mechanical
and electrical uses of the watermills and their socio-economic value
make a significant tool in enhancement of the economic activities and
betterment of the opportunities of livelihood for the people of remote
and un-accessible areas where grid connectivity is not feasible. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the promotional programme of
watermills in a large scale be spread and implemented in potential
areas on the pattern of Uttarakhand by involving local bodies,
associations and arranging suitable training programmes at the Centres
like AHEC and IITs.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has already received a suggestion from the members
of sub- group on small hydro involved in the preparation of 12th Plan
that the Ministry should also support livelihood activities with
watermills/micro hydel projects. It is also suggested that the scope of
this scheme should be enlarged by involving more organizations/NGOs
and stake holders. The programme of watermills, as suggested by the
Committee is proposed to be enlarged on the pattern of Uttarakhand
during the 12th Plan. The Ministry would also continue with providing
suitable training programmes as part of this programme.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

17
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 2.7)
Financial Assistance
The Committee find that to develop the SHP sector, the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy have been providing financial support/
subsidy for the activities related with Research & Development, capacity
building, Resource Assessment, Detailed survey & investigation, DPR
preparation and perspective plan for States, capital subsidy to state
sector projects, subsidy for commercial projects, Renovation &
modernization of old SHP projects (State Sector) and watermills/micro
hydel projects. The Committee are given to understand that the financial
assistance is given as grant-in-aid to both State Governments as well
as private sector. The Committee also note that some of the Central
financial institutions viz., IREDA, PFC, REC and large number of banks
are also providing loan for SHP projects and IREDA in particular has
a pivotal role in development of small hydro projects in terms of
financing. The Committee are aware that the cost for setting up SHP
projects ranges from Rs. 6.5 crore to Rs. 7.5 crore per MW and the
Government is providing sufficient financial assistance in the North
Eastern States, other States and Private Entrepreneurs etc. to boost the
sector. Considering the huge gap in the potential and the achieved
installed capacity, present level of targets in this regard for achievement
are not very enthusiastic. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
all out efforts should be made to woo the entrepreneurs especially
from local areas highlighting the subsidy component, the other entailed
benefits, and resultant welfare of the local people.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee
to boost the sector involving private entrepreneurs and inform them
about the incentives and facilities available for setting up SHP projects.
The SHP incentive scheme is placed on website of the Ministry with
complete details. The Scheme is also circulated to all state agencies,
SHP Developers Associations, consultants, technical institutions and
developers. AHEC, IIT Roorkee while conducting various training
programmes also informs, in detail, the features of MNRE SHP
incentive schemes. The scheme is also sent through e-mail to various
developers. It may also be mentioned that all State Government policies
for SHP development specifically mentions about MNRE incentive
scheme and the incentives available from Central and State Government
to set up SHP projects. Efforts of the Ministry to publicize the scheme
would further continue so that its advantage can be extended to more
and more entrepreneurs.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]

18
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
Arrangements of Finances to promote SHP sector
The Committee note that a sizeable amount of the costs of SHP is
being given as grant-in-aid by the Ministry to the State Governments
as well as to the private sector. Despite this, funds are required to
complete the projects. The Committee note that IREDA, PFC, REC and
large number of Banks provide loans to SHP projects as per their own
parameters and procedures. IREDA being the only specialized PSU
under the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy which provide
funds for promotion and development of new and renewable sources
of energy, has major responsibility in the development of SHP projects.
However, during the last four years (upto 31.12.2010), IREDA could
disburse only Rs. 666.54 crore against the sanctioned amount of
Rs. 1927.73 crore  i.e. only 35 per cent of the sanctioned amount. No
figures are available with regard to the loan sanctioned and disbursed
by PFC, REC and other Banks. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that power sector financial institutions like IREDA, PFC, RECs etc.
should initiate sincere efforts in ensuring that no SHP project is
withheld for want of finance. Besides, there should be element of
healthy competition within central agencies for promoting the sector
by arranging necessary funds. The Committee also recommend the
Ministry to be more proactive and act as a facilitator between the
financial institutions and the implementing agencies.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned in the reply to the recommendation no. 4, apart
from IREDA, PFC and REC, a large number of banks are providing
loan for SHP projects. In fact, IREDA provides loan to only very limited
SHP projects and a large part is being financed by the banks. Since
SHP projects are economically viable of their own, the developers
normally face no difficulty in securing loan from the commercial banks.
The developers also have their own financial credibility with banks
based on their other business transactions, which helps them to secure
loans for SHP projects. Availability of resources through financial
institutions is not a constraint.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para No. 2.9)
Policies and Issues
The Committee note that the policy for Small Hydro Power and
private sector participation therein, is governed by the Electricity Act,
2003, the National Electricity Policy, 2005 and Tariff Policy, 2006

19
announced by the Government of India. 23 State Governments have
so far announced policy for private sector participation for the
development of SHP projects. Also, the State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions (SERCs) have been deciding tariff in their respective
States. While examining the data provided by the Ministry, the
Committee find that an aggregate capacity of 1268 MW have been set
up so far by private sector through 249 projects in 15 States. The
Committee are astonished to observe that there is no mention of the
State of Arunachal Pradesh, one of the greatest potential States in
SHP , in the list and that in Jammu & Kashmir, which has the third
largest potential ( i.e. 1417.80 MW), only two projects of 17.5 MW have
been developed by the private sector. The situation is not encouraging
in other potential States too. The Committee also find that the States
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and
Uttarakhand, which are the States with maximum SHP potential (about
42 per cent of the total SHP potential in the country), are among those
States which have already announced policy for private sector
participation for development of SHP projects. The Committee feel
that in the wake of the State policy on private participation and CERC/
SERC guidelines on tariff, the Government should play a catalytic role
in increasing the involvement of private sector in the development of
SHP sector in different States, particularly the high potential States.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
come out with a concrete plan of action in this regard and inform the
Committee about the steps taken to promote and encourage private
sector participation in SHP projects in various States.
Reply of the Government
The status of private sector participation in various States has been
mentioned in the action taken reply to the Recommendation Sl. No. 1.
It may be mentioned that the State of Arunachal Pradesh has huge
potential of hydro power. A number of central sector, state sector and
private sector large size hydro projects are being set up in the State.
The focus of the State is on large size projects. Since the State is quite
dispersed and the transmission network is extremely weak there are
difficulties in setting up grid connected small hydro projects. However,
they have allotted 40 small hydro projects aggregating to 602 MW to
the private sector. All these projects are in the investigation stage and
detailed survey and DPRs are being prepared by the private sector.
In Jammu & Kashmir, 12 SHP projects aggregating to 67 MW were
allotted in 2004-05. Of these, two projects aggregating to 17.5 MW
have been commissioned. The developers had faced some difficulty in

20
obtaining clearances and signing PPAs. There were also issues regarding
procedure of allotment of sites which necessitate modifications in the
policy. MNRE has been regularly following up with the State
Government to announce modified SHP policy. The modified policy
has been drafted by the State Government and is in final stage of
approval.
In-depth interactions are being held with the States as part of
preparation of the 12th Plan which would result into identification of
specific steps and remedial measures required for faster development
of small hydro and renewable energy based power projects.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that that SHP developers do face objections
from the local community on the issues relating to land, employment
of local people and contribution towards local area development. Other
obstacles faced by the private developers reportedly include time taken
in obtaining various clearance at the State level, transfer of land,
environment and forest clearances, availability of reliable hydrological
data, timely creation of suitable power evacuation facilities, deposit of
fee for compensatory afforestation etc. The Committee feel that the
obstacles highlighted by the Ministry are basically administrative in
nature and are not unforeseen. Since the State Governments have their
own mechanism to address these administrative issues, the Committee
feel that consistent and sincere efforts of the Ministry in assisting and
mobilizing the State Governments would lessen the time taken in
obtaining various clearances culminating into faster implementation of
the projects. More so as the SHP Projects do not encounter major and
sensitive issues like population displacement, re-habilitation,
construction of dam, submergence etc. which generally take longer
time to address. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to
persuade, encourage and motivate the States and private developers
to complete the process of survey, date collection and other clearances
like technical and economic, forest and environment clearances in a
minimum time period so as to curtail avoidable delays in
implementation of the SHP Projects.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been analyzing issues which are hampering faster
development of small hydro projects in the States. State-wise meetings
were held to understand and streamline various procedures to minimize

21
implementation time of SHP Projects. The Ministry has also taken into
consideration their 12th Plan activities and targets while formulating
MNRE 12th Plan. As the ground work has already been done in most
of the States, it is expected that this would have positive implications
in implementation of SHP Projects in the coming years.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
Electrification/illumination border villages of Arunachal Pradesh
The Committee find that the Prime Minister during his visit to
Arunachal Pradesh on 31st January-1st February 2008 had announced
a package of Rs. 550 crore for illumination/electrification of 1483 un-
electrified villages along the State border through solar power and
small hydro power. The Committee note that out of 1483 un-electrified
villages, 425 villages are proposed to be electrified by the Government
of Arunachal Pradesh and the balance of 1058 villages were to be
electrified through small/micro hydel projects and solar photovoltaic
systems with an estimated cost of Rs. 275.58 crore by the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy in consultation with the State Government.
The Committee find that as on 30th November, 2010, out of
1058 villages under MNRE programme, 523 villages have been
illuminated by SPV Systems and 203 villages have been electrified
through SHP Projects. The Committee have been assured that
illumination of rest of the 332 villages will be completed through SHP
Projects by December, 2011. On financial aspect, the Committee have
been informed that out of total amount of Rs. 550 crore allocated for
the scheme, the full amount of Rs. 274.42 crore have already been
released to Government of Arunachal Pradesh for their part of the
Scheme. A balance of Rs. 275.58 crore were to be utilized by the MNRE,
against which they have released Rs. 108.21 crore (about 39.26 per
cent) so far. The Ministry considers the budget provision for the project
adequate to achieve the target. The Committee observe that the scheme
was announced way back in the beginning of the year 2008 and the
performance shown by the Ministry so far indicate that it would not
be easy for them to complete illumination of the balance of 332 villages
through SHP Projects and to achieve the full target by the end of the
year 2011. Though excessive rain, long distances and connectivity have

22
been highlighted as the main hurdles faced by the developers, the
Committee feel that the reported hurdles are not uncommon in a State
like Arunachal Pradesh and could be tackled by proper planning,
monitoring and concerted efforts on the part of the Government. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to accelerate the pace
of implementation by evolving proper coordination mechanism with
the State Government so that targets are converted into result.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation of Arunachal
Pradesh Project. Following year-wise targets were fixed:
By 31st December, 2009 : 580 villages
By 31st December, 2010 : 150 villages
By 31st December, 2011 : 328 villages
1058 villages
The project has already achieved illumination/electrification of
736 border villages through SPV home lighting systems and SHP
Projects, within scheduled time period. Out of 157 small/micro hydel
projects, 47 projects have been completed electrifying 213 villages. The
progress in balance 110 projects is closely monitored through regular
meetings with the implementing agencies. Teams from AHEC, IIT,
Roorkee regularly visits the project sites for monitoring and resolving
any technical matters. A team of MNRE and State Government officials
have recently visited manufacturers to monitor their schedule for supply
of equipment. it is expected that most of the projects would be
completed in 2012.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
(i) Technical Institutions for development of Small Hydro Power
The Committee note that Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC)
at IIT, Roorkee has been providing professional support in the field of
small hydro power development covering planning, detailed project
reports, detailed engineering designs and construction drawings,

23
technical specialization of turn key execution/equipment supply,
renovation and modernization of SHP Stations, and techno-economic
appraisal. Besides imparting training to the field engineers and
technologists through short-term training course, the Committee have
been informed that AHEC offers Master of Technology (M.Tech)
programme in ‘Alternate Hydro Energy Systems’ and advanced training
to operators and engineering staff of different types of small hydro
electric plants. The Committee have been informed that standards,
manuals and guidelines for various aspects of small hydro power
development are being prepared by AHEC through consultative process
with the sponsorship of MNRE and a project to set up a small hydro
hydraulic turbine R&D laboratory at AHEC with an objective of creating
international level facilities for testing, design and R&D in the area of
hydraulic turbines, hydro mechanical equipments, control and
instrumentation of small hydro electric power plants have been
sanctioned. While taking note of the role AHEC has played so far in
their plans of technological advancement for the development of the
sector, the Committee feel that much could have been done earlier for
the development of small hydro technology in the country. Other
centers like NITs at Hamirpur and Srinagar and technical institutions
elsewhere in the country have also very little to show as their
achievement. The Committee would therefore recommend that AHEC,
IIT, Roorkee should work as a premier institution in the development
of small hydro technology in the country paving the way for economic
and efficient development of the technology and be a torch bearer for
other technological institutes. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry should strengthen the AHEC and provide all support in
encouraging it to boost the research and development activities in the
small hydro sector.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee to further strengthen AHEC
and provide all support in encouraging it to boost the research and
development activities in the Small Hydro Sector is noted. In fact the
Ministry is fully involving and consulting AHEC in almost all technical
matters. They have been specifically involved in designing, monitoring
and providing technical inputs to the small and micro hydel project
setup in the border village illumination/electrification project in
Arunachal Pradesh. AHEC has also prepared a master plan for the
Ladakh Region which has resulted into the ‘Ladakh Renewable Energy
Initiative’ Project. AHEC is taking help of other technical institutions
viz. MANIT, Bhopal, NIT Hamirpur etc. in the work of performance
testing of SHP Projects. This is also resulting into capacity building
and strengthening of other institutions. In the work relating to

24
preparation of standards/guidelines/manuals for small hydro, all
leading technical institutions, hydrology, electrical and mechanical
experts are providing their inputs. AHEC has emerged as a lead
technical institution in the field of small hydro and the Ministry would
continue to strengthen it for R&D and other related aspects. The
Ministry assures the Committee that AHEC will be provided adequate
funds for conducting research and development projects.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]

25
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
–Nil–

26
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Small/Mini Hydel Potential
The Committee note that the estimated potential for power
generation in the country from small hydel projects (upto 25 MW
capacity) is 15384 MW from 5718 identified sites, whereas, as on
31st December 2010, 2939 MW capacity has been set up in various
parts of the country and projects of about 927 MW are in various
stages of implementation. The Committee are surprised to find that
only 19 per cent of the identified potential in the country has been
exploited so far. The Government’s approach has not been very
aggressive in this arena as is evident from the fact that very moderate
targets were set for the 9th, 10th and 11th Five Year Plans. Even though
the targets set have been achieved in 9th and 10th Plans and are
likely to be achieved in 11th Plan, the fact remains that huge potential
is still left untapped in most of the potential States making the task
of the Ministry challenging in the coming years. Even if the projected
figure of 8500 MW of cumulative capacity of SHP projects by the end
of the year 2021-22 is at all to be believed, the total installed capacity
would be about 55 per cent of the identified potential. This percentage
may come down substantially as more potential sites may be identified
by the year 2021-22 i.e. the completion year of the 13th Plan. Scrutiny
of the State-wise data reveals that the performance in the States with
maximum potential has been far from satisfactory. About 6500 MW
potential is available in the four States only viz. about 1400 MW in
Arunachal Pradesh, 1600 MW in Uttrakhand, 2300 MW in Himachal
Pradesh and 1500 MW in Jammu and Kashmir. However, merely
711.67 MW capacity has so far been installed and 413.47 MW capacity
projects are at various stages of implementation in these States. Another
disquieting fact is that the installed capacity is a meager 78.84 MW
against the total potential capacity of 1328.68 MW available in the
State of Arunachal Pradesh, which makes around 6 per cent of the
available potential. This sorry state of affairs is not at all acceptable to

27
the Committee more so when the state is getting special funds under
the Prime Minister Border Village Illumination Scheme. The Committee
also take note of the targets of 2000 MW and 3000 MW fixed for the
12th Plan and 13th Plan respectively. While acknowledging the efforts
made by the Ministry in mitigating the problems like allotment of
sites, approaching path in forest areas, local nuances, etc., the
Committee feel that this is high time for the Ministry to work on
reducing the reported gestation period of 4-5 years in order to ensure
increased pace of implementation of the SHP Projects. Against this
backdrop, the Committee recommend the Ministry to come out with
a concrete plan of action to exploit the huge untapped potential at
faster pace, especially in the States with maximum potential.
Reply of the Government
The total installed capacity of small hydro projects, as on
31st May, 2011 is 3082 MW and projects of about 1192 MW are in
various stages of implementation. The subject of small hydro between
3 to 25 MW was transferred from Ministry of Power to the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy in November, 1999. At that time, the
total installed capacity of small hydro projects (up to 25 MW) was
only 1275 MW. There has been an increase of about 150% in the
installed capacity in the last 10 years. A continuous and steady growth
can be seen in the SHP sector. During the 9th Plan a capacity of
269 MW was added. This has increased to 536 MW during the
10th Plan and it is expected that it would reach 1400 MW during the
11th Plan. The average capacity addition of 55 MW per year during
the 9th Plan has increased to 280 MW per year during the 11th Plan.
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has started work
for preparing a Plan of Action to accelerate pace of exploitation of
small hydro in the country. In this direction, the Ministry has stepped
up its efforts to closely interact with the States and emphasized on
establishing a method of regular project-wise monitoring. It is strongly
felt that project-wise monitoring and regular interaction with the States
and SHP developers is the only way to reduce implementation time of
the projects. Apart from regular interaction with the States with high
small hydro potential (Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K, Karnataka
and Arunachal Pradesh), the Ministry has also interacted with the
States with moderate potential to set up SHP projects (Punjab,
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Sikkim, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh etc.). Information regarding allotment of potential sites to the
private sector, their implementation schedules and their Plan for next
five years or so has been collected. The Ministry will try to review
progress in these States on a quarterly basis.

28
The Ministry is now in the process of preparing its 12th Five Year
Plan. A separate sub-group has been constituted with members drawn
from all major potential States to draw the 12th Plan and Action Plan
for faster exploitation of SHP potential in the country. Separate
sub-groups have also been constituted to look into the issues of
transmission/evacuation infrastructure for renewable energy based
power projects and environmental aspects including land and forest
clearance issues. The sub-group on environmental aspects would also
suggest prudent practices to be adopted for faster statutory clearances
for renewable energy based power projects. This would help in
reducing the gestation period and ensure increased pace of
implementation of the SHP projects.
The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir and Uttarakhand have highest potential for development of
small hydro. All the four States have policy to invite private sector to
set up SHP projects. While major development of small hydro in
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand is coming through private sector
projects, there is at present limited participation of private sector in
Arunachal Pradesh and J&K and SHP projects are also being developed
by the public sector. State wise status is as follows:
Himachal Pradesh:  The State has a potential of about 2200 MW
and so far small hydro projects of about 390 MW have been set
up. The State has further allotted projects aggregating to about
1500 MW to the private sector. It is expected that about 1000 MW
projects will be completed by the end of 12th Plan.
Uttarakhand: The State has a potential of about 1600 MW and so
far small hydro projects of about 135 MW have been set up. The
State has so allotted 36 projects aggregating to about 370 MW to
the private sector. They had further allotted 56 projects of about
960 MW. However, the allotments have been cancelled. The issue
of allotment of new sites is expected to be resolved soon but is
currently sub-judicious. Further, Uttaranchal Jal Vidyut Nigam is
also implementing 10 small hydro projects of 60 MW. It is expected
that about 500 MW projects will be completed by the end of
12th Plan.
Arunachal Pradesh:  The State has a potential of about 1300 MW
and so far small hydro projects of about 78 MW have been set up.
The State has so far allotted 40 projects aggregating to about
600 MW to the private sector. These projects are mostly in the
detailed survey and DPR preparation stage. Department of Hydro

29
Power Development is also implementing 40 small hydro projects
of 42 MW. The focus of the State is to get large size hydro projects
through private sector. It is expected that about 400 MW projects
will be completed by the end of 12th Plan.
Jammu and Kashmir: The State has a potential of about 1400 MW
and so far small hydro projects of about 130 MW have been set
up. The State has so far allotted 12 projects aggregating to about
67 MW to the private sector. While two projects have been
commissioned, 10 projects are under implementation. The State is
in the process of revising its policy very shortly . Following this
they plan to allot new sites to the private sector. It is expected
that once the revised policy is announced, participation from private
sector will improve. About 150 MW capacity is expected to be
added by the end of 12th Plan.
The State of Karnataka has allotted 300 projects of about 2000 MW,
Chhattisgarh has allotted 70 projects aggregating to 685 MW,
Maharashtra has allotted 41 projects of 135 MW and the State of Odisha
has allotted 29 SHP projects of 369 MW to the private sector. A capacity
of about 1000 MW can be expected in next 5-7 years from these States.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
Micro Hydel Projects and Water Mills
The Committee find that there is ample scope of installation of
micro hydel projects upto 100 KW capacity and watermills of smaller
capacities of the range of 1-5 KW to meet the power requirements of
remote areas, particularly hilly and mountain areas in a decentralized
manner. The MNRE have informed that they are extending Central
Financial Assistance (CFA) ranging from Rs. 35,000/- to Rs. 1,10,000/-
per watermill and Rs. 40,000/- to Rs. 1,00,000/- per KW per micro
hydel project. It is also informed that a budget of Rs. 15 crore has
been provided for supporting watermills and micro hydel projects
during the 11th Plan period. The Committee do appreciate the steps
taken by the Ministry to promote production of scientifically improved
designs of the watermills with better efficiency, longer life and

30
diversified uses. At the same time, the Committee suggest that the
cost of installation of improved designs of watermills and CFA be
managed in a pragmatic manner keeping in mind the affordability of
the endusers. Besides, the production of the improved version of
watermills in a large scale may also be linked with their maintenance
so that the spare parts and technical/mechanical services are easily
available at reasonable cost.
Reply of the Government
The present scheme of providing Central Financial Assistance (CFA)
for watermills and micro hydel projects has been very much appreciated
by the States and beneficiaries. However, as mentioned by the
Committee the quantum of beneficiary contribution still limits large
scale promotion/deployment of watermills and micro hydel projects.
The affordability of the enduser is extremely limited and hence they
are unable to take advantage of the CFA available under the scheme.
Since the watermill equipment suppliers are now well established and
the designs are now quite proven, availability of spare parts from
these manufacturers is not an issue. Proper training to the beneficiary
and local youth is ensured for operation and maintenance of water
mills. Availability of spare parts at reasonable prices of indigenous
machines is not a problem.
The watermill and micro hydel scheme will be reviewed for the
12th Plan and the recommendations of the Committee would be
certainly addressed in the revised Scheme. It is also proposed to get
the effectiveness of the scheme evaluated through an independent
agency shortly. This study would also give suitable suggestions for
improving the scheme.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

31
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee fund that the last survey to identify the potential
availability in hydro sector (above 3 MW) in the country was conducted
by the Central Electricity Authority during 1978 to 1987. The MNRE
might have revised the data slightly by adding a few more SHP
potential sites identified over the years, especially of micro/mini
capacity, but the Committee are not very sure whether the MNRE
have conducted any independent survey to update the availability of
SHP potential sites in the country. Though there are about 5,700
identified potential sites in the country out of which more than 4,500
sites are still available for exploitation, the Committee feel that with
the growing need, advancements in technology , experience gained in
SHP sector and other related factors, there is dire need to review the
SHP potential statistics, which is about two and half decade old. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
initiative for a fresh look on the potential availability of SHP projects
in the country in coordination with the Ministry of Power. This will
help the Ministry in reframing their targets/programmes for the future
plans viz. 12th and 13th Five Year Plans. This would also help the
Government in revising/reviewing the existing policy for development
of SHPs.
Reply of the Government
The Need to reassess the small hydro potential in the country has
been felt in the Ministry for quite some time. The present information
available about potential of small hydro in the country is primarily
based on the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) study conducted
during 1988 to 1997. The report published by CEA in 1997 on Small
hydro power potential in India covered state wise potential of SHP up
to 15 MW. The assessment of SHP potential (mainly up to 3 MW) in
13 Himalayan States was carried out by Alternate Hydro Energy Center
(AHEC), IIT Roorkee as part of a UNDP- GEF project. Further, AHEC
has also helped many other States in assessingtheSHP potential. For
the last 4-5 years,private developers are also identifying sites in States
and are termed as self identified sites. There is change in potential at

32
some of the sites after detailed investigation by the private developers.
At present, a list of over 5700 sites is available with an estimated
potential of about 15,300 MW. AHEC has been helping the Ministry in
compiling this information.
Assessment of small hydro potential requires time and financial
resources. In past, all State Electricity Boards or state irrigation/water
resources departments used to have separate investigation wings and
identification of potential hydro sites was a regular activity. However,
with time and reorganization of SEBs, these investigation wings have
been dismantled in most of the States. In MNRE, some efforts were
made to assess potential of Beas Basin of Himachal Pradesh and a
part of Nagaland using GIS technologies and Hydrological Modelling.
This required digital topographic maps, long term rain fall data, current
land use details, soil, forest cover data etc. Reliability and availability
of these data is a major limitation for carrying out assessment of hydro
potential through modelling methods. Often field investigation methods
supported with maps and discharge and other data is considered the
best option.
As recommended by the Committee and in view of the facts
mentioned above, the Ministry has set up a working group under the
Chairmanship of Adviser (SHP), MNRE and drawing members from
the Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power, Central Water
Commission and States like Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya. The terms of Reference of the Working
Group are as follows:
1. Review the existing information available with the MNRE/
AHEC/CEA/States on potential of small hydro on rivers,
existing facilities like dams, canal falls, barrages, etc.
2. Broad parameters and the extent of details required for
collection of State-wise information on potential of SHP .
3. Suggest strategy to validate the exiting information on
potential sites.
4. Recommend approach and methodology to assess State-wise
small hydro potential in the country.
The first meeting of the working group was held on 18th May
2011 wherein existing information about potential and strategy for
undertaking the task for re-assessing the potential was discussed. The
working group is of the opinion that involvement of State Government
and the agency responsible for small hydro development in the State

33
would be extremely critical and necessary in assessing the potential.
AHEC, IIT Roorkee has been asked to prepare a roadmap for
undertaking this task.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
O.M. No. 20(51)2010-SHP dated 14.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2011 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

34
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 1ST DECEMBER, 2011 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Baliram Jadhav
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
10. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
11. Shri Mohammad Shafi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
*** *** ***
*** *** ***
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure
and conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.

35
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members of the
Committee to the sitting of the Committee *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports
on (i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
15th Report on “Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects”
and (ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
16th Report on “Small and Mini Hydel Projects”. The Committee
adopted both the Reports without any modification. The Committee
also authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament.
8. *** *** ***
9. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

36
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
SIXTEENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 12
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total: 09
Percentage 75%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 1 and 5
Total: 02
Percentage 17%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 2
Total: 01
Percentage 08%