STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Development of National Grid]
FORTY FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
44

FORTY FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Seventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Development
of National Grid]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

COE No. 248
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) ....................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply........................................................ 36
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
the reply of Government has not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ..... 37
C
HAPTER V Recommendation/Observation in respect of which
final reply of the Government is still awaited ........... 41
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
11th December, 2013 ...................................................... 42
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
37th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................... 44

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
10. Shri A. Raja
11. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
16. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
17. Shri Jagadanand Singh
18. Smt. Pratibha Singh
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
20. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
24. Shri Y.S.Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 44th Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 37th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of National Grid’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Power.
2. The 37th Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
on 25th May, 2013. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
6th August, 2013 and was laid same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha.
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 18th October, 2013.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th December, 2013.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 37th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Development of National Grid.
2. The Thirty-Seventh Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha on 25th May, 2013. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha
on 6th August, 2013 and was laid same day on the Table of Rajya Sabha.
The Report contained 17 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
and 17
Total-16
Chapter-II
(ii) Observ ation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply
of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial No. 2
Total-01
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Strengthening of National Grid
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee had noted that the exploitable energy resources
are not uniformly distributed in the country. Some States have abundant
natural resources while some are deprived of the adequate resources to
set up power plants. This reason has necessitated the shift in focus of
planning the generation and the transmission system in the country from
the orientation of regional self-sufficiency to the concept of optimization
of utilization of resources on All-India basis. The Committee had further
noted that the Government has accordingly planned a National Grid by
interconnecting of all the existing five regional grids. It had been stated
that through establishment of National Grid, optimal setting, development
and utilization of power potential through coal, hydro and other resources
has been envisaged in the overall interest of the Nation. It is also expected
that National Grid would enable exchange of power amongst the regions
for optimization of generation resources—transmission of surplus power
to deficit region, dealing commercial obligations and meeting emergencies
in other regions. During the examination of the subject it had come out
that at present the Eastern Grid is the only grid which has direct
transmission links with the rest of four regional grids. Theoretically, this
region, due to favourable transmission interconnection should have been
in a better position in terms of the availability of electricity . Ironically,
in reality the States of this region have energy deficit as high as 30%.
The situation indicates that a National Grid per-se is not a solution for
the regional imbalances in the country in terms of availability of electricity.
Rather, if not regulated by a fair policy , it could become an instrument

3
for further aggravating the regional imbalance as economically sound
States/utilities will be able to grab the electricity meant for the less
developed States by bidding at higher rates. In North-Eastern Region,
where there is immense potential for hydro power, a high capacity
transmission line to facilitate the evacuation of electricity from the region
to northern region is underway, whereas the region itself reels under
power shortages. Eastern Region, where about 20% population of the
country resides, have only 12% of the total power generation capacity .
Furthermore, on the basis of a misconception that the region does not
have much demand, a part of that little generated power is being
transmitted to other regions. The Committee were not averse to the idea
of evacuation of electricity from the regions having power potential to
deficit regions, but they had strong objection in regard to depriving the
people of that region of their right for having fair amount of electricity.
The inclusive growth of the country is the duty of the centre. The
Committee believed that by creating a National Grid, the Government
has done only half part of the task, remaining should be accomplished
by formulation of a policy which can effectively address existing regional
imbalances in regard to the availability of electricity in the different States/
Regions of the country. The Committee had also recommended the
Government to allocate more electricity from the central pool to the
economically weaker Regions/States having acute shortages so that they
can also be able to contribute in overall development of the nation.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“Regarding deficit in Eastern and North-Eastern Regions, it is to
state that, there is overall shortage of power in the country. The
shortage varies from State to State and season to season as well
as time of the day depending on demand and supply of power.
During the current year (April, 2013 to July, 2013), the overall energy
and peak shortage in the country was 5.5% and 6.3% respectively.
Except Bihar, other States in Eastern region have energy and peak
shortages less than 3.8%, which are below the overall shortages in
the country. In North-Eastern Region the percentage peak shortage
(in %) in all the States is less than the deficit (in %) in national
average. However, energy deficit (in %) in Assam, Meghalaya and
Tripura are more than the national average. Further, power
availability to any State comprises power from its own State Sector
generating Stations, power allocation from Central Sector Generating
Stations (CGSs) and power purchase from private/State/Central
sector generating stations or other States through bilateral contracts
or through Power Exchanges on short-term/medium-term basis.
Regarding increase in power availability by setting up more
generating units, the pace of generation capacity addition in the

4
country has increased considerably. Generation capacity addition
achieved during 11th Five Year plan was 54,964 MW which was
about 2.5 times the capacity addition achieved during the 10th Plan
period. Generation capacity addition achieved during the year 2012-
13 was 20,622.8 MW which is the highest ever capacity addition
in a single year in any five year plan period. Capacity addition of
88,537 MW has been planned from conventional sources for the
12th Five Year Plan. With this level of capacity addition, demand
for power on all-India basis is likely to be met by the terminal year
of 12th Five Year Plan (2016-17).
In addition to setting up power plants itself, States may meet their
power requirement through purchase of power through competitive
bidding. Government has advised States to tie up for procurement
of power through competitive bidding to meet their requirement,
based on their anticipated demand-supply scenario. However,
generation is a de-licensed activity and any party , including any
utility can set up a generating plant at any location. States need
to provide conducive policies and environment for setting up of
power plants by Independent Power Producers (IPPs) or public
sector generators. As per policy guidelines future requirement of
power should be procured competitively by Distribution licensees,
after a fixed timeline set by the Government. The State Utilities are
responsible for calling bids to set up power plants, which is a
transparent market based mechanism.
For transmitting power from surplus region to deficit region, inter-
State transmission lines are planned and implemented. It is the
responsibility of power deficit States to assess and plan for import
of power and seek inter-regional/inter-State transmission access from
the CTUs/RLDCs under the provisions of Open Access laid down
in the Electricity Act, 2003 and relevant regulations notified by
CERC. In the present scenario, the integrated grid facilitates State
utilities in getting power available in market at reasonable rates
from any corner of the country. Thus, National Grid along with
development of power market would facilitate in alleviating the
regional imbalance, if any, of power availability.
As regards allocating more power from central pool to the deficit
regions, power from Central Sector Generating Stations (CGSs) in
a Region is allocated to the constituent States/UTs of the Region
in accordance with “Central Formula for allocation of power” in
two parts. 85% power is allocated as firm allocation (including
home State share). The allocation of this 85% firm power among
the States is made not only on the basis of power consumption in

5
the States during last five years but also on plan assistance to them
during that period. The plan assistance in turn is allocated in greater
proportion to the poor/under-developed States, despite low per
capita consumption of electricity. The requisition from different
States is also considered while allocation of firm power is done
from CGSs. Thus, the firm allocation is done considering the
willingness of the States to take power as well as the economic
condition of the State.
The allocation of remaining 15% unallocated power of CGSs, kept
at the disposal of Central Government, is revised from time to
time, generally keeping in view factors like emergent and seasonal
nature of the requirement, relative power shortages, utilization of
existing generation and other power sources, operational and
payment performance of the States/UTs of the region.
It may be noted that the Bongaigaon (Assam, NER) – Siliguri (West
Bengal, ER) 400kV D/c line created primarily for export of power
from NER to ER is now utilised by NER for importing power from
ER for about 60% of time. Similarly, prior to 2009, Eastern Region
was generally considered a surplus region and power was flowing
from the Eastern Region to Western and Northern Regions.
However, after 2009, with generation capacity addition in the
Western Region and Northern Region and load growth in the
Eastern Region, the power flow direction has reversed and now
power is flowing from the Western Region to the Eastern Region.
Thus, the inter-regional transmission systems built over a period
of time have facilitated meeting of the demand in the Eastern Region.
For example, the Ranchi (Jharkhand, ER) – Sipat (WR) 400kV line,
primarily planned for export of power from ER to WR is now
mainly utilised for import of power by ER from WR. In North-
Eastern Region, in order to address the power deficiencies, two
nos. of thermal/gas generating stations are being developed, viz.
Pallatana Power Project with 726 MW capacity by ONGC Tripura
Power Company Private Limited (OTPC) in Tripura and Bongaigaon
Power Project with 750 MW capacity by NTPC Ltd. in Assam. To
increase the thermal share of NER States, entire power of the above
two projects has been allocated to NER States only”.
8. The Committee, considering the great disparity in terms of
availability of electricity in the various regions of the country, had
recommended the Government by formulating an effective policy to
allocate more electricity from the central pool to the economically
weaker Regions/States address existing regional imbalances in regard
to the availability of electricity in the country. The Ministry in their

6
reply have inter alia  stated that Bongaigaon (Assam, NER) – Siliguri
(West Bengal, ER) 400 kV D/c line created primarily for export of power
from NER to ER is now utilized by NER for importing power from
ER for about 60% of time. Similarly, Ranchi (Jharkhand, ER) – Sipat
(WR) 400 kV line, primarily planned for export of power from ER to
WR is now mainly utilized for import of power by ER from WR. The
Committee are heartened to note that the utilization of National Grid
in its true spirit, i.e. two way flow of electricity, is now slowly but
surely becoming a reality. However, the reply of the Ministry is silent
on the recommendation of the Committee to allocate more electricity
to needy States from Central electricity pool. Rather, they have just
stated the factual position in regard to the allocation of power from
the Central electricity pool. A National Grid can help in transmission
of surplus power from one corner of the country to another having
power deficit. However, the Committee are of the firm opinion that
the real motive behind the development of a National Grid should not
be limited just to transmission of power from one region to another
but to minimize the disparity among the States in terms of access of
electricity and its consumption. They do understand that States
themselves have to arrange for setting up power plants of required
generation capacity. The Committee also note that the States are in the
process of enhancing generation capabilities. Nonetheless, the purpose
of having a Central Electricity Pool is to provide assistance to the States
whose generation capacities, for whatever reasons, are not sufficient
to match the electricity demands. This is precisely what the Committee
recommended in their original Report. They desired to increase the
share of needy States to meet their electricity requirements till the
time they are able to develop the required generation capacity. The
Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation
and await specific action taken by the Government in this regard.
Green Energy Corridor
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
9. The Committee had noted that the renewable energy resources
are generally located in remote locations and confined in few States like
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir which contribute about 80%
to 90% of total renewable capacity installations in the country. Presently,
the renewable energy generation capacity in the country is about 26,000
MW. Till recently, the quantum of Renewable Energy was small and it
was being consumed locally . It was presumed that connectivity with the
nearest grid substation of State Transmission Utility (STU) would suffice
for evacuation of Renewable Energy. Now, the emphasis has been given

7
to harness Renewable Energy on a large scale to supplement the capacity
addition from conventional sources and for clean development as well.
In this connection it is envisaged to add about 30,000 MW renewable
energy generation capacity during the 12th Plan period. The Committee
had been informed that for recognizing the importance of promotion of
renewable generation and its integration into the grid, a comprehensive
plan called Green Energy Corridors has been made by the Power Grid
costing about Rs. 43,000 crore. The Secretary , Ministry of Power informed
the Committee that concerned Ministries were in touch to find out ways
of funding this project. As Renewable Energy sources have intermittency
and variability features which make it challenging for their grid inter-
connection, the Committee were heartened to note that a corridor
dedicated for the evacuation of renewable energy and its integration with
main grid is being planned. The Committee were also of the view that
in future energy producing States would not be able to consume entire
Renewable Energy produced within the State beyond their Renewable
Purchase Obligation (RPO) requirements, so it has to be transmitted to
other States. The Committee, therefore, felt that the Green Energy Corridor
is in consonance with the growth in the field of renewable energy in the
recent years and their massive future projections. The Committee had
recommended that the Green Energy Corridor should be given utmost
priority in terms of according various clearances, arrangement of funding
and other technical support whenever needed. The Committee had also
recommended that the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy should chalk out the modalities for early
implementation of time completing this project. The Committee believed
that providing monetary incentives in this project would go a long way
in ensuring proper funding in Green Energy Corridor.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“During the visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India to Germany,
a joint declaration of intent was signed between India and Germany
for cooperation in the field of integration of renewable energy
sources in India. The joint declaration consists of two parts,
providing assistance by Germany viz, financial part by driving soft
loan, about 1 billion euro from KFW, for development of priority
“Green Energy Corridors” as well as sharing of technical expertise
in the above field.
In order to facilitate implementation of Green Energy Corridors,
a series of discussions were held by Planning Commission, Ministry
of Power, MNRE, Ministry of Finance, CEA, State Utilities and
Powergrid for possible means of financing including concessional

8
finance from various funding agencies as well as grant (40%) from
National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF).
In this context, concessional finance from KFW (about 1 billion
Euro) is being considered in the Ministry in consultation with MNRE
and DEA. A proposal from MNRE has already been submitted to
DEA for external assistance of 1 billion Euro from KFW.
In this direction, the scheme to be considered for concessional
finance covering Intra-State as well as Inter-State transmission
systems are in the process of finalization.
In addition, to address volatility of renewable generation, other
control infrastructure like Forecasting of renewable generation,
Flexible generation, Demand side and Demand response
management and energy storage solutions, Real time measurement/
monitoring through Synchrophasor technology, establishment of
Renewable Energy Management Centres (REMC) etc. are also
identified as part of Green Energy Corridor report.
As per the above Joint declaration of Intent, proposal for seeking
technical assistance from GIZ, Germany, in the domain of
forecasting, balancing, market design and network management,
setting up of Renewable Energy Management Center (REMC) etc.
is also being explored.”
11. The Committee are glad to note that Germany has shown
interest in providing soft loan of about 1 billion euro from KFW for
development of Green Energy Corridors as well as sharing of technical
expertise in the field. The Committee believe that this collaboration
will further boost the renewable energy sector in the Country. The
Ministry has further stated that in order to facilitate implementation
of Green Energy Corridors, a series of discussion were held by Planning
Commission, Ministry of Power, Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy (MNRE), Ministry of Finance, Central Electricity Authority
(CEA), State Utilities and PowerGrid for possible means of financing
including concessional finance from various funding agencies as well
as grant (40%) from National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF). However, the
Ministry have not furnished the details of the outcome of these
discussions. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome
of the exercise done for the funding of the National Green Energy
Corridors in the Country.

9
C. Grid Management
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
12. The Committee had noted that Regional Load Despatch Centres
(RLDCs) are the apex bodies, as per the Electricity Act, 2003, to ensure
integrated operation of the power system in their concerned region. RLDCs
are responsible for carrying out real time operation of grid control and
despatch of electricity within the region in accordance with the Grid
Standards and Grid Code. Whereas, the State Load Despatch Centres
(SLDCs) have to perform functions similar to RLDCs except the area of
jurisdiction, which in case of SLDCs is the State. The Committee had
further noted that there is one National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC)
for overall supervision of scheduling and despatch of electricity across
various regions. The Committee feel that for economic, secure and
uninterrupted functioning of National Grid, effective coordinating system
among NLDC, RLDCs and SLDCs is of paramount importance. During
the examination of the subject, the Committee found that the coordination
between RLDC and SLDCs is not as desired. RLDCs do not have adequate
power to control erring SLDCs, who are under great control of the
respective State Governments, except for giving directions. If any SLDC
does not obey these directions, RLDC files a petition in the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) who can fine them if found
at fault. The Committee during the examination of the subject ‘Functioning
of CERC’ had found that in most of the cases even the fine imposed by
the CERC has not been realized. As whole of the Country’s transmission
system will now be synchronized soon, any dereliction/under-performance
of SLDCs will have cascading effects and its impact could extend upto
entire Country. The Committee, therefore, were of the opinion that in
view of the growing complexities due to expansion of National Grid it
is crucial that there is an effective control mechanism for better
coordination between RLDCs and SLDCs for enforcing strict grid
discipline. The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended that
the Government should bring out necessary amendments in the Electricity
Act, 2003 for giving much needed clout to RLDCs/CERC to deter the
erring SLDCs and ensure stricter grid discipline.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“ As per the existing provisions of the Act, SLDCs have to comply
with directions of RLDCs. In case of non-compliance CERC may
take action. In the past, CERC has imposed penalties on SLDCs
several times on this count.

10
Ministry of Power has constituted a committee under Chairmanship
of Chairperson, CEA to examine and recommend amendments in
this regard to the Electricity Act, 2003 in April 2012.
In the proposed amendment of Electricity Act, 2003,the penal
provisions have been made more stringent to ensure compliance
of RLDC directions and CERC regulations/orders. The amendments
are under consideration in the Ministry of Power.”
14. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee to give
clout to RLDCs/CERC to deter the erring SLDCs to ensure stricter grid
discipline, the Ministry has stated that they have constituted a
Committee under Chairmanship of Chairperson, CEA to examine and
recommend amendments in this regard to the Electricity Act, 2003. In
the proposed amendment of Electricity Act, 2003, the penal provisions
have been made more stringent to ensure compliance of RLDC
directions and CERC regulations/orders. The amendments are under
consideration in the Ministry of Power. The Committee would like the
Government to expedite process of amending the Electricity Act, 2003.
They would also like to be apprised of the conclusive action taken in
this regard.
D. Grid Discipline
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
15. The Committee during the examination of the subject
‘Functioning of CERC’ had pointed out that Unscheduled Interchange
(UI) charges for the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative value of
Rs. 74,181 crore. The figure itself speaks volume about the misuse of the
mechanism. The Committee had also noted that the frequency had dipped
to as low as 48.7 Hz. The Committee, therefore, inferred that UI
mechanism, actually legitimize the power overdrawl by utilities by paying
a little price for it, therefore, instead of enforcing grid discipline, have
encouraged the overdrawl of power by the utilities who are ready to pay,
leaving the safety of the grid at stake. The Committee are against the
idea of generation of revenue through UI mechanism at the cost of grid
safety and reliability. The Committee had concluded that UI mechanism
has miserably failed to enforce grid discipline and deter overdrawl of
electricity by Discoms rather it encourage Discoms to use UI mechanism
as an alternative of short term electricity trading. The Committee, therefore,
had strongly recommended formulating a regulation which can replace
UI mechanism and ensure stricter enforcement of grid discipline by
deterring the Discoms to overdraw after a certain frequency . The
Committee had further recommended that the Government, besides

11
exploring the possibility of adopting disconnection clause in extreme
cases, should also incorporate harsh penal provisions for repeated
offenders of overdrawl in the said regulation.
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated:—
“UI pricing mechanism was introduced to serve the twin objectives
of specifying settlement rate for deviations from schedules in normal
operating range and ensuring ‘grid discipline’. It’s intention was
to ensure maximization of generation at optimal cost for grid
participants without intervention/direction of system operator.
Priority of Grid security is the highest in the operation of the grid,
and therefore, the generators/sellers and the beneficiaries/the buyers
should use other avenues like bilateral trading or the trading
platforms of power exchanges by availing open access for meeting
short term, medium term or long term arrangements or agreements.
UI mechanism should not be used as a real time market.
However, there have been instances when this mechanism has not
been utilized in the intended manner notwithstanding the fact that
the UI mechanism has proved a very useful tool for grid discipline.
Before, implementation of UI mechanism, the grid was experiencing
wide fluctuations of frequency excursions from 52.5 Hz. – 48.8 Hz.
for a considerable period of time. After this mechanism there was
tremendous improvement in grid discipline. Presently, frequency
remains between 49.7-50.2 Hz. for more than 85% of the time. This
has become possible due to UI mechanism.
In CERC regulations, besides the higher UI rate and additional UI
charges for overdrawl beyond the stipulated quantum and frequency
range, there are provisions to take action under the Act.
The matter related to replacement/amendment in UI mechanism is
under CERC consideration.”
17. The Ministry in regard to the recommendation of the
Committee to replace the UI mechanism to ensure stricter enforcement
of grid, has replied that the matter is under CERC consideration. The
Ministry has further stated that there have been instances when UI
mechanism has not been utilized in the intended manner
notwithstanding the fact it has proved a very useful tool for grid
discipline. Before, implementation of UI mechanism, the grid was
experiencing wide fluctuations of frequency excursions from 52.5 Hz.—
48.8 Hz. for a considerable period of time. After this mechanism there
was tremendous improvement in grid discipline. Presently, frequency

12
remains between 49.7—50.2 Hz. for more than 85% of the time. This
has become possible due to UI mechanism. The Committee do not
disputes the benefits that have been derived from the introduction of
UI mechanism in containing the fluctuation of frequency to a certain
extent. However, one mechanism cannot remain relevant for all the
times. Although, the UI mechanism has contained the fluctuation to
a certain extent, it leaves scope for overdrawl of electricity even at low
frequency by just paying more for it. Since the overdrawl at low
frequency can wreck havoc on the smooth functioning of the grid as
witnessed by the country in the year 2012, the safety of the grid cannot
be compromised further. Accordingly, the Committee again emphasize
to replace the UI mechanism. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the final decision taken by the CERC in this regard.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that the whole country is divided into five
regional grids namely, Northern Region, Western Region, Eastern Region,
North Eastern Region and Southern Region. The first four regional grids
are collectively called NEW (Northern, Eastern, North Eastern and Western
Region) Grid. At present all the regional grids, except Southern Region,
are synchronously interconnected with each other and run at one
frequency. However, the Southern Region Grid is connected
asynchronously to NEW Grid through HVDC and has different frequency.
The Committee further note that Synchronization of Southern Region
with NEW Grid is under implementation through two 765 kV lines
connecting Sholapur (WR) to Raichur (SR). One of the circuits is being
implemented by a private company Raichur-Sholapur Transmission
Company Limited (RSTCL), selected through competitive bidding route.
The other circuit is being implemented by PowerGrid. These links will
pave the way for interconnection of all five regional grids in synchronous
mode having same frequency. The work on these lines is expected to be
completed by January, 2014. During the examination by the Committee
it came out that one of the link being implemented by RSTCL has been
facing Right of Way (RoW) problems at 18 locations in Afjalpur area and
at 12 locations at Jewergi area in Karnataka. Though, later it was informed
that RSTCL has resolved issues at all 18 locations in Afjalpur area and
at 6 locations at Jewergi area. But still there are 6 locations at Jewergi
area where the RoW issue is yet to be resolved. Further, the scrutiny of
the Committee have revealed that in respect of project being implemented
by RSTCL only 9 towers have been erected out of 541 towers proposed
for the entire link having a length of 208 km., while, the work of PowerGrid
is even slower as only 8 towers have been erected. The Committee express
their concern over the slow progress of the project which will enable the
interconnection of all the grids of the Country for running at same
frequency and making the National Grid fully functional.

14
The interconnection of the Southern Grid with NEW grid will benefit
the power deficit Southern Region by facilitating it to draw more power
from other regions. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the
Government to ensure that RSTCL resolve the remaining RoW issues at
earliest. It should also be ensured that the other construction work related
to the project be expedited by both the organization i.e. RSTCL and
PowerGrid lest this important project get delayed.
Reply of the Government
Out of two 765 kV S/C transmission lines-under construction for
interconnecting Southern Grid with NEW Grid, one transmission line is
being constructed by Raichur-Sholapur Transmission Company (RSTCL),
a Private Company . On this line out of total 542 tower locations, 480
foundations have been completed and 277 towers have been erected and
out of 208 km of Stringing, 10 km stringing has been completed. RSTCL
has resolved RoW problems faced earlier at all 6 locations in Jewergi
area. More gangs are being deployed by RSTCL for completing the work
by January, 2014.
As regard another 765 kV S/C transmission line being constructed
by PGCIL, out of total 532 tower locations, 430 foundations have been
completed and 285 towers have been erected. Further, out of 208 km of
stringing involved, 65 km of stringing have been completed. The
transmission line is scheduled to be completed by January, 2014. The
above lines are being closely monitored by the Ministry of Power to
ensure that the work is completed in time.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the Country has about 2,23,000 MW
installed power generation capacity. Further, for the 12th Plan period, a
target of generation capacity addition to the tune of, 88,537 MW has been
envisaged from the conventional sources and 30,000 MW from the
Renewable Energy sources. Thus, the total generation capacity at the end
of the 12th Plan would be about 3,40,000 MW. Against this backdrop the
Committee also note, that the Country’s present total inter-regional
links to facilitate the exchange of power among various regions is only
27,750 MW, which in view of the Committee is not adequate considering

15
the present installed capacity and the planned addition. The Government
has stated that they are planning to enhance this to 66,000 MW by adding
transfer capacity of 38,400 MW during the 12th Plan. They have also
stated that about 1,07,000 circuit kilometres of transmission lines, sub-
stations of 2,70,000 MVA and HVDC terminals of about 12,750 MW
capacity at 220 kV and above level are planned to be added in the existing
capacity of about 2,70,000 circuit kilometres of transmission lines and
about 4,20,000 MVA sub-station capacity at the voltage level of 220kV
and above. The Committee feel that the massive addition in generation
capacity envisaged for the 12th Plan and the proposed synchronous
operation of All-India National Grid warrants proportionate augmentation
of transmission links as well as increase in number of sub-stations and
their capabilities. For the efficacious functioning of the National Grid,
it is important that the proposed increase in transfer and transmission
capabilities actually takes place in consonance with the growth of
generation sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government besides, augmenting the transmission capabilities to match
the proposed generation capacity, should simultaneously enhance and
strengthen the relevant infrastructure of National Grid also for its smooth
functioning.
Reply of the Government
The growth of transmission capacity in the country is generally
aligned with the growth of the generation capacity. The inter-State and
intra-State transmission system including the inter-regional transmission
links are planned to deliver the power from the existing generation projects
to the beneficiaries.
The figure of 27,750 MW is only the capacity of inter-regional
transmission links at the end of 11th Plan. These inter-regional links are
used to facilitate the exchange of power among various regions.
Transmission of power within the regions is done through inter-State
and intra-State transmission systems. At present, National Grid with
inter-regional power transfer capacity of about 31,850 MW has been
established.
POWERGRID envisaged addition of about 40,000 Circuit kilometre
(Ckm) of transmission lines and about 1,00,000 MVA of transformation
capacity during 12th Plan matching with generation capacity addition
programme under central sector, UMPPs and IPPS entrusted to it. During
FY 2012-13 (1st year of 12th Plan).

16
POWERGRID has added 7,046 Ckm and 35,480 MVA against target
of 6,186 Ckm and 20,000 MVA respectively and the balance envisaged
during the remaining period of 12th Plan is expected to be achieved.
The inter-regional transmission Capacity at the end of 11th plan
was 27, 750 MW. Government has planned to add another 38,400 MW
of Inter-Regional transmission Capacity during the 12th Plan period taking
the interregional capacity to 65550 MW (excluding 600 MW of 132/110
KV inter-regional links operated in radial mode time to time). Also, it is
planed to add about 107000 circuit kilometres of transmission lines, 12750
MW of HVDC terminal capacity and 270000 MVA substations capacity
(220 kV and above) during the 12th Plan. This transmission capacity has
been planned considering 88537 MW generation addition programme.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that it has been envisaged by establishment
of a National Grid to extend economies of scale by enabling setting up
of large sized pit-head based power station and considering cheaper cost
of transmission of power compared to transportation of fuel. Even National
Electricity Policy stipulates that imported coal based thermal power
stations, particularly at coastal locations should be encouraged based on
their economies. Further, it would be economical for new generating
stations to be located either near the fuel sources e.g. at pit-head locations
or load centres. In this connection the Committee are surprised to note
that out of total 97,720 MW coal based thermal projects which are under
construction, 37,380 MW projects are located at Pit-head, 14,910 MW
projects are located at coastal location, and 45,430 MW are at other
locations. In regard to reasons for setting up projects at locations other
than coastal or pit-heads it has been stated that for locating a thermal
power station, availability of a large area of land, availability of large
quantity of water for cooling and other infrastructure facilities like road
and rail connectivity for transportation of equipments and coal are
required. Thermal power projects are being set up in different States
depending upon availability of land, water and other infrastructure
facilities. Some plants near load centres are also considered necessary for
energy security of those States. Further, it was stated that power generation
being a delicensed activity, a person can choose a place wherever desires
to set up generation project. Though, the Committee do understand that
there are several factors which decisively matter be considered for setting
up of power plants, and hence all the power plants cannot be set up at
pit-heads or coastal areas. However, the fact that surprises the Committee

17
is that almost half of the coal based power projects are coming up at
places other than pit-heads or coastal areas. The factors like sufficient
availability of land, water, and road connectivity and other essential
infrastructures can be explored near and around the fuel sources. This
will not only cut the cost of fuel but will also be a vital factor for the
relevance and importance of transmission network. The Committee feel
that this defeats the very purpose of developing a National Grid for
transmission of electricity from one corner to another of the country
saving cost of transportation of coal for the power stations.
Generation of power at the pit-head or coastal areas (for imported
coal based plant) and transmission of electricity to load centre is certainly
more cost effective. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should encourage setting up of coal based thermal power
projects at pit-heads or coastal areas for projects dependent on imported
coal as the case may be by facilitating and incentivizing them as ultimately
the consumer will have to bear the increased cost of electricity due to
irrational planning of power generation sites.
Reply of the Government
The National Electricity Policy, inter alia,  stipulates that Imported
Coal Based thermal power stations, particularly at coastal locations would
be encouraged based on their economic viability. Further, setting up of
pit-head thermal power plants are also being encouraged wherever found
feasible with respect to availability of land and water and considering
environmental issues.
Ministry of Power has issued coal linkage policy for 12th Plan
power projects as per which Plants located near coal Pit-Head and plants
using sea water are to be given priority. Further, the Ultra Mega Power
plants being proposed under GoI initiative are either at pit-head or at
coastal location.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that fund requirement for the development
of transmission system proposed for the 12th Plan is estimated to be
order of Rs. 2,00,000 crore. In regard to arrangement for this huge fund
the Ministry of Power has stated that Intra-State power transmission
projects will be eligible for viability gap funding. They have also stated
that the figure of Rs. 200,000 crore has three components—Central

18
Transmission Utility, that is, POWERGRID, private licencees and State
Transmission Utilities. CTU will not have any difficulty in raising the
money and they do not need viability gap funding. The same will hold
good for licencees. It will be the State Transmission Utilities which may
require viability gap funding. The Ministry have stated that there will
not be any problem in arrangements of funds for the transmission projects
planned for the 12th Plan. Considering the importance that these projects
hold for the overall development of the nation, it would not be prudent
to become lax in regard to the in arrangement of the required fund. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should not become
complacent in arrangement of the required fund.
Reply of the Government
The Working Group on Power for the 12th Plan assessed fund
requirement for transmission at Rs. 1.8 lakh crores, the respective shares
of the central, State and private sector projects being Rs. 1 lakh crore,
Rs. 55,000 crores and Rs. 25,000 crores.
HCPTCs worth Rs. 66,000 crore which are being implemented by
POWERGRID shall be funded from its internal resources, loans from
Multilateral institutions like The World Bank/ADB/Supplier’s Credit,
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) through bonds/notes and
Commercial loans, besides loans from domestic market. Owing to its
excellent credit rating, availability of funds shall not be a constraint in
implementation of the transmission projects on this account.
During 12th Plan, an investment of about Rs. 100,000 crore is
planned by POWERGRID for further development of inter-State
transmission systems and establishment of National Grid. As a part of
12th Plan outlay, POWERGRID is also implementing High Capacity Power
Transmission Corridors works of about Rs. 66,000 crore. The capital
expenditure (CAPEX) planned by POWERGRID for projects undertaken
in 12th Plan period are as per CERC norms. POWERGRID intends to
maintain Debt: Equity ratio of 70:30. Accordingly, POWERGRID proposes
to raise a Debt of about Rs. 70,000 crore of which about 46% has already
been tied up through funding from Multilateral institutions like The World
Bank/ADB/Supplier’s Credit, External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs)
through bonds/notes and Commercial loans, besides loans from domestic
market through private placement of bonds. During the 1st year of 12th
Plan period (FY 2012-13) POWERGRID has already made a CAPEX of
Rs. 20,037 crore. The Company owing to its excellent credit rating does
not foresee any difficulties in mobilizing balance fund. The Company has
been assigned a Corporate Rating of “BBB—(Outlook: Stable)” by Fitch
Ratings and BBB—(Outlook: Negative) by Standard and Poor’s Rating

19
Services (S&P). These ratings are consistent with Government of India’s
sovereign rating. On the domestic front, the Company enjoys excellent
credit rating with financial institutions, thereby, is placed in a comfortable
position in terms of resource mobilization. Equity requirement shall be
met through POWERGRID’s internal resources.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that with the synchronous integration of
Southern Grid with the NEW Grid, the complexities are bound to increase
in ensuring the seamless transmission of electricity throughout the Country
at a desirable frequency. In regard to review of the present regional grid
transfer capability in view of the synchronous integration of the Southern
Grid with NEW Grid, the Ministry has stated that Central Electricity
Authority (CEA) has convened three meetings during August-September,
2012 to discuss this matter. The matter was also discussed in the Eighth
meeting of the Forum of Load Despatchers (FoLD) held in October 2012.
POSOCO has submitted a comprehensive report to CERC in October,
2012 regarding loadability of transmission lines, which is under
consideration of CERC. The Committee are happy to note that the
Government has started some review of the transmission network,
nonetheless, they believe that integration of all the grids for operating
at one frequency and massive growth proposed in transmission network
will only make the job more challenging. Thus it becomes imperative to
reassess the transmission network system and transfer capabilities
thoroughly by a team of experts on a larger scale. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the outcomes of the Report of POSOCO
whenever approved by CERC should be implemented with sincerity and
expeditious manner. The Committee also expect that they will be apprised
about the outcome of the POSOCO Report as approved by the CERC at
time of Action Taken Report. Simultaneously, the Government should
further plan a thorough review of the transmission networks on a larger
scale keeping in view the future developments, necessities and
complexities by involving experts not only of the Country but also from
abroad having expertise in this field.
Reply of the Government
Regarding comprehensive report submitted by POSOCO on
loadability of transmission lines, it may be mentioned that final orders
of CERC in Suo-Motu Petition No. 188/SM/2012 about Calculation of Total
Transfer Capacity , Available Transfer Capability and Transmission

20
Reliability Margin are yet to be issued. The orders of CERC shall be
implemented in an expeditious manner. The Hon’ble Committee shall be
apprised of the outcome of POSOCO’s report once the CERC issues
necessary orders in this regard.
CEA has revised the Transmission Planning Criteria in January
2013 and this has come into force from 1st February 2013. From the
perspective of improving the reliability of the grid, ‘N-1-1’ has been
adopted as the transmission planning criteria.
The need to expand transmission system is assessed on a regular
basis and is firmed up in the meetings of Regional Standing Committees
on Power System Planning. In 2012-13, the following six meetings of the
Standing Committees were held.
Sl. Region Regional Standing Committee Meeting on Date
No. Power System Planning
1. Eastern 2nd-2012 Meeting 05.01.2013
2. Northern 31st Meeting 02.01.2013
3. Western 34th Meeting 09.05.2013
4. Western 35th Meeting 03.01.2013
5. Southern 34th Meeting 16.04.2012
6. Southern 35th Meeting 04.01.2013
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
High Capacity Corridors
The Committee note that there are certain States viz. Odisha,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh etc. where massive
generation capacity has been planned. To evacuate this large amount of
electricity, 11 High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors (HCPTCs) at
an estimated cost of Rs. 75,000 crore have been planned. They further
note that most of this Corridor work will be done by the PowerGrid and
same is proposed to be implemented through private participation/tariff
based competitive bidding process. Implementation of these corridors
has been taken up in a phased manner matching with generation projects.
The Committee feel that the high capacity corridors have greater
importance for the power sector as these line are meant for evacuation

21
of the large quantum of electricity from the generation stations of
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) to load centres across the States and
Regions. The High Capacity Transmission lines are futuristic technology
of transmission sector as they have numerous benefits such as low AT&C
losses due to high voltage, cost effectiveness, reduced need of RoW etc.
The Committee believe that the project will yield dual benefit, firstly,
evacuation of huge amount of electricity will be helpful in bridging the
gap between demand and supply of power caused by ever growing energy
need of the country, secondly , it will boost the confidence of private
sector for more active participation in power generation field due to
assurance of proper evacuation of electricity generated. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to ensure that these projects are
implemented as scheduled by providing all necessary assistance and
effective intervention in resolution of the problems being faced or
anticipated. The Committee also recommend that the transmission projects
specially HCPTCs should be accorded environment and forest clearance
more liberally and in a time bound manner as the laying of transmission
lines have negligible impact on forest/environment and there is no change
in land use patterns. As, the HCPTCs project has huge fund requirements,
the Committee, also desire the Government to ensure that paucity of
fund does not become a reason for delay in implementation of these
corridors.
Reply of the Government
POWERGRID has signed Bulk Power Transmission agreement
(BPTA) with respective Independent Power Producers (IPPs) for
implementation of corresponding Transmission Systems under High
Capacity Power Transmission Corridors (HCPTCs) and accordingly taken
up for implementation matching with their generation schedule.
Keeping in view criticality involved in obtaining timely forest/and
environmental clearances, POWERGRID has taken-up expeditious action
for framing and submission of forest/environmental proposals and closely
following up with the concerned authorities, including intervention from
Ministry of Power, Government of India for timely clearances. With the
intervention of Ministry of Power, recently linear project including
transmission line projects have got exemption for obtaining NOC from
Gram Sabhas in respect of FRA 2006. Now they only need no objection
from Gram Panchayat. This has expedited the process of forest clearance.
After persuing the matter with the Ministry of Environment and Forests
Stage-I forest clearance of 36 projects (about 1535 Ha.) and Stage-II forest
clearance of 30 (about 1080 Ha.) transmission projects of POWERGRID
were accorded in last seven months.

22
Implementation of HCPCTs are progressing as per schedule. A few
elements under Odisha and Chhattisgarh HCPTC have already been
commissioned. As stated in the reply of recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para
No. 2.5, HCPTCs worth Rs. 66,000 crore which are being implemented
by POWERGRID shall be funded from its internal resources, loans from
Multilateral institutions like The World Bank/ADB/Supplier’s Credit,
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) through bonds/notes and
Commercial loans, besides loans from domestic market. Owing to its
excellent credit rating, availability of funds shall not be a constraint in
implementation of the transmission projects on this account.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
Green Energy Corridor
The Committee note that the renewable energy (RE) resources are
generally located in remote locations and confined in few states like
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir which contribute about 80%
to 90% of total renewable capacity installations in the country. Presently,
the renewable energy generation capacity in the Country is about 26,000
MW. Till recently, the quantum of Renewable Energy was small and it
was being consumed locally . It was presumed that connectivity with the
nearest grid substation of State Transmission Utility (STU) would suffice
for evacuation of Renewable Energy. Now, the emphasis has been given
to harness Renewable Energy on a large scale to supplement the capacity
addition from conventional sources and for clean development as well.
In this connection it is envisaged to add about 30,000 MW renewable
energy generation capacity during the 12th Plan period. The Committee
have been informed that for recognizing the importance of promotion
of renewable generation and its integration into the grid, a comprehensive
plan called Green Energy Corridors has been made by the Power Grid
costing about Rs. 43,000 crore. The Secretary , Ministry of Power informed
the Committee that concerned Ministries are in touch to find out ways
of funding this project. As Renewable Energy sources have intermittency
and variability features which make it challenging for their grid inter
connection, the Committee are heartened to note that a corridor dedicated
for the evacuation of renewable energy and its integration with main grid
is being planned. The Committee also believe that in future energy
producing States would not be able to consume entire Renewable Energy

23
produced within the State beyond their Renewable Purchase Obligation
(RPO) requirements, so it has to be transmitted to other States. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the Green Energy Corridor is in consonance
with the growth in the field of renewable energy in the recent years and
their massive future projections. The Committee recommend that the
Green Energy Corridor should be given utmost priority in terms of
according various clearances, arrangement of funding and other technical
support whenever needed. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry of Power and the Ministry of New and Renewable should chalk
out the modalities for early implementation of time completing this project.
The Committee believe that providing monetary incentives in this project
would go a long way in ensuring proper funding in Green Energy
Corridor.
Reply of the Government
During the visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India to Germany,
a joint declaration of intent was signed between India and Germany for
cooperation in the field of integration of renewable energy sources in
India. The joint declaration consists of two parts, providing assistance
by Germany viz., financial part by driving soft loan, about 1 billion Euro
from KFW, for development of priority “Green Energy Corridors” as
well as sharing of technical expertise in the above field.
In order to facilitate implementation of Green Energy Corridors,
a series of discussions were held by Planning Commission, Ministry of
Power, MNRE, Ministry of Finance, CEA, State Utilities and POWERGRID
for possible means of financing including concessional finance from
various funding agencies as well as grant (40%) from National Clean
Energy Fund (NCEF).
In this context, concessional finance from KFW (about 1 billion
Euro) is being considered in the Ministry in consultation with MNRE
and DEA. A proposal from MNRE has already been submitted to DEA
for external assistance of 1 billion Euro from KFW.
In this direction, the scheme to be considered for concessional
finance covering Intra-state as well as Inter-state transmission systems
are in the process of finalization.
In addition, to address volatility of renewable generation, other
control infrastructure like Forecasting of renewable generation, Flexible
generation, Demand side and Demand response management and energy
storage solutions, Real time measurement/monitoring through

24
Synchrophasor technology, establishment of Renewable Energy
Management Centers (REMC) etc. are also identified as part of Green
Energy Corridor report.
As per the above Joint declaration of Intent, proposal for seeking
technical assistance from GIZ, Germany, in the domain of forecasting,
balancing, market design and network management, setting up of
Renewable Energy Management Center (REMC) etc. is also being explored.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
Grid Management
The Committee note that Regional Load Despatch Centres (RLDCs)
are the apex bodies, as per the Electricity Act, 2003, to ensure integrated
operation of the power system in their concerned region. RLDCs are
responsible for carrying out real time operation of grid control and
despatch of electricity within the region in accordance with the Grid
Standards and Grid Code. Whereas, the State Load Despatch Centres
(SLDCs) have to perform functions similar to RLDCs except the area of
jurisdiction, which in case of SLDCs is the State. The Committee further
note that there is one National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC) for overall
supervision of scheduling and despatch of electricity across various
regions. The Committee feel that for economic, secure and uninterrupted
functioning of National Grid, effective coordinating system among NLDC,
RLDCs and SLDCs is of paramount importance.
During the examination of the subject, the Committee found that
the coordination between RLDCs and SLDCs is not as desired. RLDCs
do not have adequate power to control erring SLDCs, who are under
great control of the respective State Governments, except for giving
directions. If any SLDC does not obey these directions, RLDC files a
petition in the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) who
can fine them if found at fault. The Committee during the examination
of the subject ‘Functioning of CERC’ found that inmost of the cases even
the fine imposed by the CERC have not been realized. As whole of the
Country’s transmission system will now be synchronized soon, any
dereliction/underperformance of SLDCs will have cascading effects and

25
its impact could extend upto entire country. The Committee, therefore,
believe that in view of the growing complexities due to expansion of
National Grid it is crucial that there is an effective control mechanism
for better coordination between RLDCs and SLDCs for enforcing strict
grid discipline. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Government should bring out necessary amendments in the Electricity
Act, 2003 for giving much needed clout to RLDCs/CERC to deter the
erring SLDCs and ensure stricter grid discipline.
Reply of the Government
As per the existing provisions of the Act, SLDCs have to comply
with directions of RLDCs. In case of non-compliance CERC may take
action. In the past, CERC has imposed penalties on SLDCs several times
on this count.
Ministry of Power has constituted a Committee under Chairmanship
of Chairperson, CEA to examine and recommend amendments in this
regard to the Electricity Act, 2003 in April 2012.
In the proposed amendment of Electricity Act, 2003,the penal
provisions have been made more stringent to ensure compliance of RLDC
directions and CERC regulations/orders. The amendments are under
consideration in the Ministry of Power.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee observe that the SLDCs still do not enjoy the due
autonomy and are under influence of State Governments which hampers
their efficacious and neutral discharge of the assigned duties provided
under the Electricity Act, 2003. This often leads to lack of their coordination
with RLDCs. The Committee are of the view that for better coordination
between RLDC and SLDC, providing functional autonomy to SLDCs is
important so that they can be made neutral and more efficacious in
discharge of their duties. The Committee, therefore, also recommend that
under proposed amendments in the Act SLDCs should be granted more
functional autonomy to play a role of integral component of a National
Grid rather of a representative of a particular State.

26
Reply of the Government
In Electricity Act, 2003, there are provisions to provide functional
autonomy to SLDCs. However, it could not be implemented. The matter
was discussed in the last meeting of the National Power Committee (NPC)
held on 15.04.2013, wherein it was agreed that the states would initiate
action in this regard.
To make the existing provisions related to the autonomy to SLDCs
more stringent, the amendment in Electricity Act, 2003 is under
consideration in the Ministry of Power.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Ministry for giving
training to 700 employees of various SLDCs to converge them with the
latest techniques of grid operations. It is envisaged that the training will
improve the capabilities and efficiency of the personnel who man SLDCs.
The Committee also endorse the planning of the Ministry to offer one-
time incentive of Rs. 20,000 to participate in this training programme to
attract more and more personnel of SLDCs to get trained. The Committee
feel that though these efforts are praiseworthy , lot more needed to be
done in regard to modernizing and reforming the SLDCs. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government that apart from carrying on and
intensifying the said training programme, the State Governments and
State Transmission Utilities should be persuaded to sponsor SLDCs
personnel for the training and able to provide incentives on successful
completion of the same.
Reply of the Government
POSOCO has actively been associated with the entire process of
Training and Certification of System Operators in India right from the
inception stage to course design and providing expert faculty for training.
The First and Second System Operator Examination for Basic Level
Certification was held in November, 2011 and December, 2012
respectively . Also, the First System Operator Examination for
Specialist Level Certification was held on 17th March, 2013. More
than 290 System Operators from SLDCs have been declared successful
in the basic level certification. Also, more than 45 System Operators
from SLDCs have been declared successful in the Specialist Level
examination.

27
Further, seven (7) training programs for basic level certification of
System Operators are being organized by PSTI, Bangalore from July 2013
to Dec. 2013, wherein SLDC personnel would be trained. The next
Basic Level certification exam is tentatively scheduled to be held
on 15th Dec. 2013.
A specialist level Certification in Power System Reliability is also
being implemented and a number of training programmes for this are
planned between August 2013 – January 2014.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
Grid Discipline
The Committee note that the Country witnessed two massive grid
failure on 30th and 31st July, 2012, the second failure being bigger and
more severe in impact. The Committee were informed that approximately
36,000 MW of load was lost and power supply in Northern region was
not available for around 13 hours on 30th July 2012 and 31st July 2012,
approximately 48,000 MW of load was lost and power supply was not
available for about 5 hours, 8 hours and 2 hours in Northern, Eastern
and North-Eastern regions, respectively . The Ministry of Power constituted
an Enquiry Committee to analyse the causes of these disturbances and
to suggest measures to avoid recurrence of such disturbance in future.
The Enquiry Committee brought out that no single factor was responsible
for grid disturbances but several factors such as weak inter-regional
corridors, loss of 400 KV Bina-Gwalior-Agra link, inadequate response
by SLDCs to RLDCs’ instructions etc. led to the collapse of the power
systems on both the days. The Committee are aghast by the findings of
the Enquiry Committee as it has pointed out several lapses and deficits
in defense mechanism. The Electricity Act, 2003 provides for various grid
safety measures to be taken with a view to ensure the well functioning
and safety of the grid which have not been adhered to by the authorities.
This Committee are of the view that the decade long absence of any
major grid disturbance has set in complacency and lackadaisical approach
in regard to regular examination and revamping of transmission systems
in the Country. Due to inattention for a long period, the transmission
and grid system in the Country could not match the pace of massive
capacity addition in the recent years and ultimately collapsed. The
Committee feel that for fulfillment of the vision ‘Electricity forAll’, there
is an urgent need not only for quantum increase in generation capacity
but also for refurbishment and strengthening of the transmission network

28
of the country to match the increase in generation capacity for smooth
and reliable transmission of electricity from one corner to another. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to show
utmost urgency in implementation of all the recommendations of the
Enquiry Committee in their letter and spirit and in time bound manner
to ensure non-repetition of such blackouts in future.
Reply of the Government
All the recommendations of the Enquiry Committee on grid
disturbances of 30th and 31st July , 2012 are being implemented in a time
bound manner and the implementation is being monitored on regular
basis at the highest level in MoP and CEA. Some of the recommendations
like - third party protection audit in all regions, review of Zone-3 settings
of all inter-state lines by the CTU, Audit of Rihand-Dadri HVDC and
Pasauli HVDC, survey to ensure healthiness of under frequency relays
and df/dt relays, making all existing PMU functional , tightening of
frequency band from 49.5-50.2 to 49.7-50.2 Hz., identification and
finalization of various Islanding schemes, coordinated outage planning
of inter-State and inter-regional transmission elements, constitution of
Task Force for long term grid management, establishment of National
Power Committee, revision of Transmission planning criteria (TPC) etc.
have been completed and the remaining ones are at different stages of
implementation.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that the Under Frequency Relays and df/dt
relays are installed in distribution substations of State Utilities for
automatic tripping of distribution lines connected to a load centre which
forms part of the distribution network. Power Grid conducted an audit
of all these relays in 175 substations of the Northern Region in August,
2012. As per audit, 36 substations did not have the UFRs and df/dt relays,
in 99 substations the relays did not operate on the date of disturbance
i.e. 30th and 31st July, 2012 as per log book maintained by the substation
itself. The relays operated in only 40 substations on date of disturbance.
The Committee are indignant to note the negligence in regard to up keep
of safety devices which are critical for prevention of grid breakdown of
a large scale. Had these devices been working, it was very much possible
that the blackouts could have been averted. The absence/malfunctioning
of such a large number of devices have lead the Committee to believe
that the safety audits of the transmission/grid network is a rare affair

29
otherwise the faults would have been detected and rectified earlier. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that provisions should be
made for safety audit at a regular intervals and their findings should be
implemented in a time bound manner to ensure safe, reliable and efficient
transmission network in the Country. Also there should be unambiguous
division of roles and responsibilities in ensuring the installation and
upkeep of safety devices/measures so that accountability can be fixed in
case of any mis-happenings.
Reply of the Government
Protection audit in all regions has been completed and the
preparation of DPRs by the States for renovation and up-gradation of
protection systems at their sub-stations has been completed/is underway
in different regions and are being examined in CEA as well as in the
Ministry.
Regarding roles and responsibilities in ensuring the installation
and upkeep of safety devices/measures it may be mentioned that as per
Indian Electricity Grid Code 5.2 System security aspects, RPC Secretariat
shall carry out periodic inspection of the under frequency relays and
maintain proper records of the inspection. RPC shall decide and intimate
the action required by SEB, distribution licensee and STUs to get required
load relief from Under Frequency and df/dt relays. All SEBs, distribution
licensees and STUs shall abide by these decisions.
In order to ensure proper upkeep and availability of safety devices
in the grid, it was decided in National Power Committee (NPC) meeting
held on 15-04-2013 that all RPCs would ensure healthiness of Under
Frequency Relays (UFRs) and rate of change of frequency relay (df/dt
relays) through regular inspection in a year of at least one-third number
of total relays installed in their respective region. RPCs would also furnish
the status of healthiness of UFRs and df/dt relays installed in the region
to CEA on a quarterly basis.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee during the examination of the subject ‘Functioning
of CERC’ had pointed out that Unscheduled Interchange (UI) charges for
the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative value of Rs. 74,181 crore.
The figure itself speaks volume about the misuse of the mechanism. The
Committee had also noted that the frequency had dipped to as low as
48.7 Hz. The Committee infer that UI mechanism, actually legitimize the

30
power overdrawl by utilities by paying a little price for it, therefore,
instead of enforcing grid discipline, have encouraged the overdrawl of
power by the utilities who are ready to pay , leaving the safety of the grid
at stake.
The Committee are against the idea of generation of revenue through
UI mechanism at the cost of grid safety and reliability. The Committee
find that UI mechanism has miserably failed to enforce grid discipline
and deter overdrawl of electricity by Discoms rather it encourage Discoms
to use UI mechanism as an alternative of short term electricity trading.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that there is a need for
formulation of a regulation which can replace UI mechanism and ensure
stricter enforcement of grid discipline by deterring the Discoms to
overdraw after a certain frequency. The Committee further recommend
that the Government, besides exploring the possibility of adopting
disconnection clause in extreme cases, should also incorporate harsh penal
provisions for repeated offenders of overdrawl in the said regulation.
Reply of the Government
UI pricing mechanism was introduced to serve the twin objectives
of specifying settlement rate for deviations from schedules in normal
operating range and ensuring ‘grid discipline’. It’s intention was to ensure
maximisation of generation at optimal cost for grid participants without
intervention/direction of system operator. Priority of Grid security is the
highest in the operation of the grid, and therefore, the generators/sellers
and the beneficiaries/the buyers should use other avenues like
bilateral trading or the trading platforms of power exchanges by availing
open access for meeting short term, medium term or long term
arrangements or agreements. UI mechanism should not be used as a real
time market.
However, there have been instances when this mechanism has not
been utilized in the intended manner notwithstanding the fact that the
UI mechanism has proved a very useful tool for grid discipline. Before,
implementation of UI mechanism, the grid was experiencing wide
fluctuations of frequency excursions from 52.5 Hz. – 48.8 Hz. for a
considerable period of time. After this mechanism there was tremendous
improvement in grid discipline. Presently, frequency remains between
49.7-50.2 Hz. for more than 85% of the time. This has become possible
due to UI mechanism.
In CERC regulations, besides the higher UI rate and additional UI
charges for overdrawal beyond the stipulated quantum and frequency
range, there are provisions to take action under the Act.

31
The matter related to replacement/amendment in UI mechanism is
under CERC consideration.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that with the proposed synchronous
interconnection of Southern Region with NEW grid, a single grid of about
2,50,000 MW capacity shall be operated in coming years thereby
maintaining grid safety, security and reliability of such geographical spread
would be a great challenge. The Committee, therefore, strongly believe
that in that scenario any grid malfunctioning, as happened in July , 2012,
would have the cascading effect making it more severe by affecting one
and all regions. In this scenario, the Committee feel shielding of important
cities from blackout in case of grid failure becomes absolutely necessary.
The Committee have been informed that Islanding Scheme for various
parts of the Country including Delhi is under consideration. The
Committee recommend that the proposal of Islanding Schemes for Delhi,
other important cities/parts of the Country, as proposed by the
Government, should be finalized expeditiously and be implemented within
a fixed timeframe.
Reply of the Government
Islanding schemes are prepared to ensure continuity of supply to
essential services/specified areas and which also help in quick restoration
of the grid in case of grid collapse. Islanding schemes are already
operational for a number of cities/towns like Mumbai, CESC (Kolkata),
Ahmedabad, Narora (UP), etc. Islanding scheme for Delhi was finalized
in October 2012 and is under advance stage of commissioning. Islanding
schemes for other important cities/parts of different states of the country,
wherever technically feasible, have also been identified/finalized and their
implementation is underway. States have been advised by the concerned
Regional Power Committees to implement the designed islanding schemes
in a time-bound manner.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
Transaction of Electricity
The Committee note that Power Exchanges are the platform for
short and medium term transaction of electricity. At present there are
two power exchanges in the Country , and more exchanges are being
planned. The Committee further note that of the total electricity generation,
10.79% were transacted through short term trading. The Committee also
note that average weighted price of electricity transacted during the month
of December, 2012 through traders, Indian Energy Exchange and Power
Exchange of India Limited was Rs. 4.39/kWh, 3.90k/kWh and 3.08/kWh
respectively. It was also observed that on several occasions congestion
in both the Exchanges was felt due to limitation in transmission transfer
capabilities. The Power exchanges were constituted in order to provide
inclusive, transparent and nation-wide competitive platform for better
price discovery of electricity . The objective of Power Exchanges is to
optimize the available generation capacity at national level, facilitating
both, generators and the purchasers of the electricity. As it can be seen
that the average weighted price of electricity transacted through exchanges
are relatively low than that of through traders. The Committee believe
that power exchanges facilitate implementation of the Open Access in
transmission and meeting short term and medium term electricity
demands of the power utilities which cannot be predicted in advance.
The Committee also find that though more than four years have been
elapsed since the inception of power exchanges, yet there are several
issues that remain to be addressed. The volume of electricity transacted
through these exchanges is not much; moreover, most of the transactions
are being done through only one exchange. The Committee feel that the
reason for the less volume could be the congestion due to the limitations
in transmission capabilities. The Committee also find that the top five
trading licensees had a share of about 70% in the total volume traded
by all the licensees indicating that most of the trading players are not
getting participation in these exchanges for whatever reasons. The
Committee feel that domination of few players in the power exchanges
would defeat the very purpose of creating these platforms. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to take some remedial measures
to ensure that the power exchanges, existing as well as proposed, should
work in a fair and transparent manner and allow the inclusive and active
participation of all trading players. Needless to emphasize that the problem
of congestion which obstacle the transaction of electricity through these
exchanges should be dealt expeditiously by suitable measures.

33
Reply of the Government
The power market in India is in an evolution stage. The rules and
regulations are in place for a smooth and transparent market operation.
The market is open for all participants including eligible traders. CERC
monitors the market operation and intervenes whenever required. Any
amendment required in market rules is under the purview of CERC.
Regarding congestion, it is mentioned that it is a dynamic
phenomenon, which depends on several factors including load-generation
balance, availability of transmission system, flow pattern of power, power
system conditions, economic condition of utility for buying short-term
power etc. The power in the system flows under Long-term, Medium
term and short-term transactions. The transmission system is planned
considering Long-term transactions. In the country , normally, there is no
congestion for Long-term transactions. Medium and Short-term
transactions are allowed based on the leftover margin available in
transmission system after Long-term transactions. There are instances of
congestion in medium and short-term transactions. The construction of
a large number of transmission lines are under different stages of
implementation, which would help in removing the bottlenecks, if any,
in transmission system. State utilities also have to plan and implement
transmission and distribution system to alleviate congestion in power
system.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.17)
Smart Grid Technology
The Committee note that the power systems in the Country have
grown manifolds and their complexities are increasing. With the proposed
synchronous interconnection of Southern Region with NEW Grid, there
will be a single grid of about 2,50,000 MW capacity operating at one
frequency . The Committee feel that maintaining grid safety, security and
reliability of such geographical spread is of great challenge. Moreover,
the proposed grid interconnection of Renewable Energy, having
intermittent and variability features will certainly necessitate technological
changes and upgradation of the grid. Against this backdrop, the Committee
have been informed that PowerGrid has taken initiative for implementation
of Smart Grid Technology in the Country and has implemented Phasor
Measurement Units (PMUs) using Wide Area Measurement Systems
(WAMS) in Northern Region Grid for the first time. It is envisaged that

34
the Smart Grid Technology will help in substantially bringing down the
AT&C losses, improvement in quality of power supply, effective
management of peak demand and supply response and grid integration
of Renewable Energy. The Committee feel that the Smart Grid Technology,
though expensive, is an advanced technology which is being used by
many developed countries successfully. They , therefore, recommend the
Government to go ahead and expedite the implementation of this
technology throughout the Country. The Government should also ensure
that lack of funds does not hinder the implementation of this ambitious
project. The Committee expect that the Government will provide details
about the proposals and progress made in implementation of Smart Grid
Technology in the Country in their action taken reply.
Reply of the Government
Full scale implementation of WAMS on pan India basis covering
installation of PMU at all 400kV and above voltage level substations of
State Transmission Utility (STU), Inter State Transmission System (ISTS)
as well as 220kV generation switchyards, HVDC terminals integrated
with regional control centres are being taken up for implementation as
a comprehensive Unified Real Time Dynamic State Measurement
(URTDSM) Scheme. Total cost of URTDSM project is about Rs. 655 crore
and CERC Regulatory approval of the project is under process.
Use of Information Technology (IT) and Automation in Distribution
Sector has been included under on-going R-APDRP Scheme, which is the
first step towards Smart Grid implementation in power distribution sector.
R-APDRP Scheme includes adoption of IT application for meter reading,
billing and collection, energy accounting and auditing, establishment of
IT enabled data centres, consumer care centres, GIS mapping, consumer
indexing, Asset mapping, automatic data login and analysis and also
implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
system in the selected towns in India. 100% funds is being provided by
Government of India for the implementation of IT based services under
Part A of RAPDRP to the States.
For the systemic growth of the Smart Grid in the country, India
Smart Grid Task Force and India Smart Grid Forum have been set up
under the aegis of the Ministry of Power.
The main functions of the Smart Grid Task Force is to ensure
awareness, co-ordination and integration of the diverse activities related
to Smart Grid technologies, practices and services for Smart Grid Research
and Development; Co-ordinate and integrate other relevant inter-

35
governmental activities, Collaborate on interoperability frame work and
review and validate the recommendations from Smart Grid Forum etc.
The Secretariat of ISGTF is at Power Grid which are overseeing the
working of ISGTF presently.
India Smart Grid Forum (ISGF) is a Public Private Partnership (PPP)
initiative of Ministry of Power, Government of India for accelerated
development of smart grid technologies in the Indian power sector. It
is a non-profit voluntary consortium of public and private stakeholders,
research institutes and selected utilities with the prime objective of
accelerating development of Smart Grid technologies in India Power
Sector. The goal of the Forum is to help the Indian power sector to
deploy Smart Grid technologies in an efficient, cost-effective, innovative
and scalable manner by bringing together all the key stakeholders and
enabling technologies. The India Smart Grid Forum will coordinate and
cooperate with relevant global and Indian bodies to leverage global
experience and standards where ever available or helpful, and will
highlight any gaps in the same from an Indian perspective.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]

36
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
- Nil -

37
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
Strengthening of National Grid
The Committee note that the exploitable energy resources are not
uniformly distributed in the Country. Some States have abundant natural
resource while some are deprived of the adequate resources to set up
power plants. This reason has necessitated the shift in focus of planning
the generation and the transmission system in the Country from the
orientation of regional self-sufficiency to the concept of optimization of
utilization of resources on All-India basis. The Committee further note
that the Government has accordingly planned a National Grid by
interconnecting of all the existing five regional grids. It has been stated
that through establishment of National Grid, optimal setting, development
and utilization of power potential through coal, hydro and other resources
has been envisaged in the overall interest of the Nation. It is also expected
that National Grid would enable exchange of power amongst the regions
for optimization of generation resources – transmission of surplus power
to deficit region, dealing commercial obligations and meeting emergencies
in other regions. During the examination of the subject it came out that
at present the Eastern Grid is the only grid which has direct transmission
links with the rest of four regional grids. Theoretically, this region, due
to favorable transmission interconnection should have been in a better
position in terms of the availability of electricity. Ironically, in reality the
States of this region have energy deficit as high as 30%. The situation
indicates that a National Grid per-se is not a solution for the regional
imbalances in the Country in terms of availability of electricity. Rather,
if not regulated by a fair policy, it could become an instrument for further
aggravating the regional imbalance as economically sound States/utilities
will be able to grab the electricity meant for the less developed States
by bidding at higher rates. In North-Eastern Region, where there is
immense potential for hydro power, a high capacity transmission line to
facilitate the evacuation of electricity from the region to northern region
is underway, whereas the region itself reels under power shortages. Eastern

38
Region, where about 20% population of the Country resides, have only
12% of the total power generation capacity. Furthermore, on the basis of
a misconception that the region does not have much demand, a part of
that little generated power is being transmitted to other regions. The
Committee are not averse to the idea of evacuation of electricity from
the regions having power potential to deficit regions, but they have strong
objection in regard to depriving the people of that region of their right
for having fair amount of electricity. The inclusive growth of the Country
is the duty of the Centre. The Committee believe that by creating a National
Grid, the Government has done only half part of the task, remaining
should be accomplished by formulation of a policy which can effectively
address existing regional imbalances in regard to the availability of
electricity in the different States/Regions of the Country. The Committee
also recommend that the Government should allocate more electricity
from the central pool to the economically weaker Regions/States having
acute shortages so that they can also be able to contribute in overall
development of the Nation.
Reply of the Government
Regarding deficit in Eastern and North-Eastern Regions, it is to
state that, there is overall shortage of power in the country. The shortage
varies from State to State and season to season as well as time of the
day depending on demand and supply of power. During the current year
(April, 2013 to July, 2013), the overall energy and peak shortage in the
country was 5.5 % and 6.3 % respectively. The details of State-wise actual
power supply position during April, 2013 to July , 2013 are given in the
Annexure-I. From the details it is evident that except Bihar, other States
in Eastern region have energy and peak shortages less than 3.8%, which
are below the overall shortages in the country. In North – Eastern Region
the percentage peak shortage (in %) in all the States is less than the deficit
(in %) national average. However, energy deficit (in %) in Assam,
Meghalaya and Tripura are more than the national average.
Further, power availability to any State comprises power from its
own State Sector generating Stations, power allocation from Central Sector
Generating Stations (CGSs) and power purchase from private/State/Central
sector generating stations or other States through bilateral contracts or
through Power Exchanges on short-term/medium–term basis. Regarding
increase in power availability by setting up more generating units, the
pace of generation capacity addition in the country has increased
considerably. Generation capacity addition achieved during 11th Five Year
plan was 54,964 MW which was about 2.5 times the capacity addition
achieved during the 10th Plan period. Generation capacity addition
achieved during the year 2012-13 was 20,622.8 MW which is the highest

39
ever capacity addition in a single year in any five year plan period.
Capacity addition of 88,537 MW has been planned from conventional
sources for the 12th Five Year Plan. With this level of capacity addition,
demand for power on all-India basis is likely to be met by the terminal
year of 12th Five Year Plan (2016-17).
In addition to setting up power plants itself, States may meet their
power requirement through purchase of power through competitive
bidding. Government has advised States to tie up for procurement of
power through competitive bidding to meet their requirement, based on
their anticipated demand supply scenario. However, generation is a de-
licensed activity and any party, including any utility can set up a
generating plant at any location. States need to provide conducive policies
and environment for setting up of power plants by Independent Power
Producers (IPPs) or public sector generators. As per policy guidelines
future requirement of power should be procured competitively by
Distribution licensees, after a fixed timeline set by the Government. The
State Utilities are responsible for calling bids to set up power plants,
which is a transparent market based mechanism.
For transmitting power from surplus region to deficit region, inter-
state transmission lines are planned and implemented. It is the
responsibility of power deficit States to assess and plan for import of
power and seek inter-regional/inter-state transmission access from the
CTUs/RLDCs under the provisions of Open Access laid down in the
Electricity Act,2003 and relevant regulations notified by CERC. In the
present scenario, the integrated grid facilitates State utilities in getting
power available in market at reasonable rates from any corner of the
country. Thus, National Grid along with development of power market
would facilitate in alleviating the regional imbalance, if any, of power
availability.
As regards allocating more power from central pool to the deficit
regions, power from Central Sector Generating Stations (CGSs) in a Region
is allocated to the constituent States/UTs of the Region in accordance
with “Central Formula for allocation of power” in two parts. 85% power
is allocated as firm allocation (including home state share).The allocation
of this 85% firm power among the States is made not only on the basis
of power consumption in the States during last five years but also on
plan assistance to them during that period. The plan assistance in turn
is allocated in greater proportion to the poor/under-developed States,
despite low per capita consumption of electricity. The requisition from
different States is also considered while allocation of firm power is done
from CGSs. Thus, the firm allocation is done considering the willingness
of the States to take power as well as the economic condition of the State.

40
The allocation of remaining 15% unallocated power of CGSs, kept
at the disposal of Central Government, is revised from time to time,
generally keeping in view factors like emergent and seasonal nature of
the requirement, relative power shortages, utilization of existing generation
and other power sources, operational and payment performance of the
States/UTs of the region.
It may be noted that the Bongaigaon (Assam, NER) – Siliguri
(West Bengal, ER) 400kV D/c line created primarily for export of power
from NER to ER is now utilised by NER for importing power from ER
for about 60% of time. Similarly, prior to 2009, Eastern Region was
generally considered a surplus region and power was flowing from the
Eastern Region to Western and Northern Regions. However, after 2009,
with generation capacity addition in the Western region and Northern
Region and load growth in the Eastern Region, the power flow direction
has reversed and now power is flowing from the Western Region to the
Eastern Region. Thus, the inter-regional transmission systems built over
a period of time have facilitated meeting of the demand in the Eastern
Region. For example, the Ranchi (Jharkhand, ER) – Sipat (WR) 400kV
line, primarily planned for export of power from ER to WR is now mainly
utilised for import of power by ER from WR.
In North Eastern Region, in order to address the power deficiencies,
two nos. of thermal/gas generating stations are being developed, viz.
Pallatana Power Project with 726 MW capacity by ONGC Tripura Power
Company Private Limited (OTPC) in Tripura and Bongaigaon Power
Project with 750 MW capacity by NTPC Ltd. in Assam. To increase the
thermal share of NER States, entire power of the above two projects has
been allocated to NER States only.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 9/13/2013-PG,
dated 18th October, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)

41
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
- Nil -
NEW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

42
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2013-14) HELD ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2013 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’ PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Shri Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
10. Smt. Pratibha Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
13. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahni
14. Shri Motilal Vora

43
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration of the following draft Reports:—
(i) 41st Report on ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana’.
(ii) 42nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 36th Report on
‘International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector’.
(iii) 43rd Report on ‘Development of Hydro Sector’.
(iv) 44th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 37th Report on
‘Development of National Grid’.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Report without any change.
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Report and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
5. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

44
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 17
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
and 17
Total: 16
Percentage: 94%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation  which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
- Nil -
Total: 0
Percentage: 0%
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. No. 2
Total: 01
Percentage: 6%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
- Nil -
Total: 0
Percentage: 0%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”