CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Thirty-Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for the year 2013-2014.
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
23rd April, 2013 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
25th April, 2013. The Report contained 16 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16
Total-14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 7 and 13
Total-02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. 12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
6. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy had proposed a target of capacity addition to the
tune of 30,000 MW during the 12th Five Year Plan period for which
a financial requirement of Rs. 40,000 crore was projected in the
12th Plan proposal of the Ministry. Against this, the Planning
Commission had indicated an allocation of Rs. 19,113 crore only, which
is less than half of what the Ministry had proposed. Keeping in view
the importance of renewable energy sector in fulfilling the energy need
of the Country and the quantum of investment that would be required
for mainstreaming the renewable energy, the Committee had found
the budget outlay for the 12th Plan grossly inadequate. The Committee,
had therefore, recommended that required funds should be made
available for this important sector so that the ambitious targets set for
12th Plan should not be curtailed due to paucity of the funds.
7. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action
Taken Reply has stated as under:
“The Ministry is thankful to the Committee for its concerns and
will try to get additional funds during the remaining years of the
12th plan. The Ministry is also trying to mobilize additional
resources from other Sources such as National Clean Energy fund,
bilateral fund to meet its targets. As mentioned, the Ministry will
try to achieve the targets by encouraging and involving other
Ministries like Railways, Home, Defence, etc. and Public Sector
Undertakings to take up renewable energy development projects
through their budgets. In this direction the Ministry has already
had a meeting with Railways and major public sectors in the field
of oil and gas during April, 2013.
Regarding Development of Green Energy Corridors the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy in coordination with the Ministry

3
of Power is exploring possibilities of securing funding from bilateral
and multilateral sources and also grant from in-country resources.
In this process an Indo-German Joint Declaration of Intent for
establishment of Green Energy Corridors has been signed in April,
2013. The declaration stipulates concessional loans from Germany
upto one billion Euro over the next six years. On 26 June, 2013 a
consolidated proposal for KfW loan assistance for Intra-State and
Inter-State transmission infrastructure and for technical assistance
for setting up Renewable Energy Management Center has been
submitted to the department of Economic Affairs for posing it to
the German counterpart organization under Indo-German Bilateral
Development Corporation.
The Cabinet note on Generation Based Incentives in the Wind Sector
including reintroduction of Accelerated Deprecation has been
submitted for approval of Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs
(CCEA).”
8. The Committee had expressed its concern about the inadequate
budget allocation for 12th Plan as it will adversely affect the targets
set for the plan period. In reply the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy has stated that they are trying to mobilize additional resources
from other sources such as National Clean Energy fund, bilateral
fund to meet its targets and are trying to achieve the targets by
encouraging and involving other Ministries like Railways, Home,
Defence, etc. and Public Sector Undertakings to takeup renewable
energy development projects through their budgets. The Ministry
has also stated that for Development of Green Energy Corridors, an
Indo-German Joint Declaration of Intent has been signed. The
Committee are also informed that a consolidated proposal for KfW
loan assistance for Intra-State and Inter-State transmission
infrastructure and for technical assistance for setting up Renewable
Energy Management Center has been submitted to the department
of Economic Affairs for posing it to the German counterpart
organization under Indo-German Bilateral Development Corporation.
They are also informed that the Ministry has submitted the Cabinet
note on Generation Based Incentives in the Wind Sector including
reintroduction of Accelerated Deprecation for approval of Cabinet
Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee acknowledge
the initiatives taken by the Ministry in mobilizing the funds and
trust that the Ministry with all its efforts would mobilize the required
funds for the 12th Plan so as to ensure that paucity of funds do not
come on the way of development plans in the renewable energy
sector. They also desire to be apprised about the generation based
incentives for wind sector.

4
B. Budget Outlay for the year 2013-14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
9. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy had sought an allocation of Rs. 6236 crore for the
year 2013-14. However, the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance had subsequently reduced the amount and allocated a meagre
amount of Rs.1521 crore as Budgetary Support. The Committee were
concerned that the drastic reduction in financial allocation vis-à-vis
proposed budget would adversely affect the Ministry’s projects under
various programmes. Keeping in view the importance and significance
of renewable energy in the country energy scenario and the requirement
of funds for achieving the set targets, the Committee had recommended
the Ministry to take up the issue of insufficient allocation with the
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for additional allocation
of funds at RE stage and also to make all out efforts to mobilize
additional funds from internal and external budgetary resources and
other renewable energy development agencies so as to achieve the
targets set for the year 2013-14.
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:
“The expenditure of MNRE during 2012-13 was Rs. 1106.79 which
was 96.24% of the funds available at RE stage (Rs. 1150 crore). As
soon as the budget allocations for 2013-14 were known to the
Ministry, the matter was taken up by Secretary, MNRE with the
Planning Commission with a request to enhance the allocation of
renewable energy. Similar efforts were also made with the Ministry
of Finance through Hon’ble Minister of New and Renewable
Energy. The Ministry is continuously making efforts to mobilize
additional resources for renewable energy programmes and posing
projects to the National Clean Energy Fund and to bilateral
agencies. Due to consistent efforts of the Ministry, Inter Ministerial
Group Constituted to Approve/Appraise the projects under the
National Clean Energy Fund in its 8th meeting have approved
5 projects worth Rs. 275.99 crore out of 6 projects posed by the
Ministry worth 1882.92 crore. However, Funds from these projects
will only be received at the second supplementary stage. The
Ministry would also try to get some additional fund at RE stage
for the year 2013-14.”
11. In reply to the Committee’s recommendation to take up the
issue of insufficient budgetary allocation for the year 2013-14 with
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for additional

5
allocation of funds at RE stage and also to make all out efforts to
mobilize additional funds from internal and external budgetary
resources and other renewable energy development agencies, the
Committee are informed that the matter has been taken up by
Secretary, MNRE with the Planning Commission and that efforts are
being made with the Ministry of Finance through Hon’ble Minister
of New and Renewable Energy. They also note that the Ministry is
making efforts to mobilize additional resources for renewable energy
programmes and posing projects to the National Clean Energy Fund
and to bilateral agencies and the Inter Ministerial Group constituted
for the purpose have approved 5 projects worth Rs. 275.99 crore out
of 6 projects proposed by the Ministry worth Rs. 1882.92 crore. The
Committee appreciate the prompt action taken by the Ministry in
mobilizing additional resources and believe that with their persistent
efforts, the Ministry would manage to mobilize the additional funds
required to achieve the targets set for the year 2013-14. The
Committee would, however, like to re-emphasize their
recommendation to make all out efforts to mobilize additional funds
from all possible resources so that the target set under various
renewable programmes for the year 2013-14 are not affected.
C. Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
12. The Committee were not happy with the poor achievements in
the years 2009-10 and 2012-13 which were stated due to withdrawal of
Accelerated Depreciation Benefits and Generation Based Incentive
scheme. They were, however, informed that an additional amount of
Rs. 800 crore had been earmarked for GBI purposes for wind sector
which the Committee expect it to accelerate the performance of the
wind energy sector during 2013-14 as well as coming years. In view
of this, the Committee, had strongly recommended to make every
effort to outreach the target for the current year without any excuses
and the planning of providing declared financial incentives. They had
also asked the Ministry to initiate publicity for the incentives available
to the industry so that wind energy continue to dominate its share in
renewable energy and become an instrument for achieving 30,000 MW
target set for the 12th Five Year Plan.
13. In their reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has
stated as under:
“Targets of wind power for a prospective financial year are kept
in view of the progress in present year and changes/likely changes
in the policies. It is true that targets and achievements during

6
2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 & 2012-13 have not progressively
increased. The achievement during 2009-10 and 2012-13 were
particularly low. The progress during 2009-10 was adversely affected
because of general global financial recession which dropped the
investment in wind sector. As the wind power projects are
established with private sector investment, the targets in 2009-10
could not be achieved. So far as 2012-13 is concerned, the progress/
achievement is exceptionally low because of absence of Accelerated
Depreciation (AD) benefit and Generation Based Incentive (GBI).
The Ministry is in process of reinstating AD and GBI benefit in
wind sector. The proposal has been considered by Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC). The Ministry of Finance has supported
the GBI but they have reservations about AD. The final Cabinet
Note has been sent for consideration of CCEA. The Ministry has
kept a target of 15000 MW from wind power (out of total 30000
MW from all renewables). During 2012-13, only 1700 MW was
achieved. Therefore, another 13300 MW is to be done in remaining
4 years of 12th Plan. The success will depend upon reinstatement
of AD and GBI.
Regarding financial outlay, it is to be mentioned that until 2009-10,
the Ministry was spending money for wind resource assessment,
support to C-WET and other developmental work. No commercial
projects were taken up with Ministry’s financial support. After
introduction of GBI since 2010-11, budget is also required to provide
GBI for the projects commissioned during 11th Plan through GBI.
Therefore, progressively, the overall budget requirement for wind
power programme is increasing to give GBI.”
14. Regarding Accelerated Depreciation and Generation Based
Incentives, the Ministry in their reply has stated that they are in the
process of reinstating the benefit and that the proposal has been
considered by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). It has also
informed that the Ministry of Finance has supported the GBI but
they have reservations about AD. From their reply, it appears that
Rs. 800 crore which was earlier stated to have been earmarked for
GBI purpose has not so far been approved. The Committee are
apprehensive about the approach of the Government and urge that
the reservations about the Accelerated Depreciation and Generation
Based Incentives should be conclusively dispelled. It should be
impressed upon that the target for the remaining years would depend
upon the early and favourable decision on Accelerated Depreciation
and Generation Based Incentives. Any delay would only affect the
implementation of wind energy projects which would subsequently

7
impact the target achievement. The Committee therefore, would like
to reiterate their recommendation and emphasize that every effort
should be made to expedite early decision on the issue of Accelerated
Depreciation so that the target for the current year and remaining
years of the 12th plan are achieved fully.
D. Remote Village Electrification Programme (RVEP)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para No. 2.14)
15. The Committee had noted that modifying the existing RVE
programme, the Ministry was in the process of formulating a new
scheme called “Rural Area Energy Access Programme” for providing
basic lighting facility to un-electrified villages/hamlets. They were also
informed that if approval of Rural Area Energy Access Programme
takes time, RVE programme will continue in 2013-14. The Committee
had expressed their concern about the delay in approval of the
proposed new scheme and were desirous to know the reasons which
necessitated the formulation of new scheme and in what manner it
would be better than the existing one. While the Committee endorsed
introduction of new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access Programme
(by modifying the RVE Programme) as they believe that the new
scheme is being introduced after thorough examination and review of
their performance under RVE Programme for larger benefit of the rural
population, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to expedite
the approval of the new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access
Programme and had also recommended that the objective of the
programme should not only be the energy accessibility but also to
ensure its availability and affordability to the rural population.
16. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their reply has
stated as under:
“The Rural Area Energy Access Programme is continuation of the
earlier RVE scheme with some modifications based on the past
experiences of RVE programme and feedbacks from different
stakeholders. The Ministry is in the process of formulating the
scheme “Rural Area Energy Access Programme” modifying and
renaming (conforming to the global nomenclature) the earlier RVE
scheme for wider coverage. Through the modified RVE programme
i.e. Rural Area Energy Access Programme, the Ministry’s focus is
to cover more villages/hamlets removing the bottlenecks faced
during the implementation of the RVE programme like population
criterion, scattered approach to cluster approach etc.

8
However, the difference between the proposed Rural Area Energy
Access Programme (REAP) and the RVE Programme (RVEP) is
given below:
Sl.No. Items REAP RVEP
1. Objectives To provide access to electricity to un-
electrified census villages, un-electrified
hamlets of electrified remote census
villages not covered under RGGVY and
electrified villages/hamlets where
power availability is less than 6 hours
per day averaged over the year.
2. Project Design Two to five light points and one to
three sockets for operating electronic
gadgets for each of the willing
households in the village/hamlet may
be provided through mini/micro grid
mode.
Every household will be eligible for a
maximum of 100 Watt.
In scattered population areas, if this is
also not possible, then as a last resort,
stand alone solar lighting systems for
each of the willing households in the
village may be provided.
3. Eligibility of All census un-electrified villages and
Villages/ their hamlets not covered under
Hamlets RGGVY, as confirmed by REC.
Un-electrified hamlets of electrified
census villages not covered under
RGGVY, as confirmed by REC.
Electrified villages and hamlets where
power availability is less than 6 hours
per day averaged over the year.
Left out households in any of the above
villages/hamlets which have already
been supported under the Remote
To provide access to electricity to un-
electrified remote census villages and
remote un-electrified hamlets of
electrified census villages where grid
connectivity is either not feasible or
not cost effective & not covered
under RGGVY .
Creation of capability for availability
of electricity as laid down in the
National Electricity Policy, 2005, i.e.
a minimum of 1 kWh/household/
day.
However, if the State Governments
concluded after due consideration
that the norm of 1 kWh/household/
day was not achievable in a cost
effective manner then as a last resort
they might decide to provide at least
the basic lighting facilities through
solar photovoltaic home lighting
systems for each of the willing
households in the village.
All census un-electrified remote
census villages and their hamlets not
covered under RGGVY, as confirmed
by REC.
Un-electrified hamlets of electrified
census villages having population of
more than 300 and which are
situated at least 3 kms from the
nearest distribution transformer of
the Grid.
Hamlets below population of 100,
subject to all the remote census

9
Sl.No. Items REAP RVEP
Village Electrification programme
during the last two plan period.
4. Activities Installation of MINI GRID (10 kW to
Eligible for 500 kW per site)/MICRO GRID (up to
Support. 10 kW) through various renewable
energy sources.
If MINI/MICRO GRID is not feasible
or cost effective only then the villages/
hamlets may be covered through
standalone lighting systems.
5. Implementation For MINI/MICRO GRID, the Project
Mechanism. Developer(s) shall implement the project
on Build, Operate, Maintain and
Transfer (BOMT) basis for a period of
5 years.
After 5 years, SNAs/State Governments
will have the option to take over the
project or handover the project to the
same agency or any other agency as
approved by the State Government for
running the project.
6. Pattern of Initial release along with the sanction
Release of or der: 60% of the CFA & 100% of
Funds. service charge of the implementing
agency.
Second installment after commissioning
including submission of requisite
certificates: 40% of the CFA.
7. Service The Ministry will provide the
Charges implementing Agencies one time service
to the charge of 2% of total CFA approved
Implementing under the project.
Agencies. A provision of 3% of the total outlay
under the programme will be kept for
monitoring & evaluation of projects,
case study, technology development,
capacity building, training, survey,
publicity, publication and demonstration.
villages and remote hamlets as above
have been covered under the RVE
Programme.
Uncovered households which existed
as on 31.12.2008 of eligible villages
and hamlets which have been earlier
taken up under Remote Village
Electrification Programme.
Installation of power plants based on
small hydro power, solar, biomass,
wind, biofuels, biogas, etc. for
electrification of remote villages/
hamlets.
Solar home lighting systems for
domestic and community lighting
were supported where no other
renewable energy technology is
found to be feasible/cost effective.
The State Government was
responsible for long term
sustainability of the systems,
including replacement of batteries as
and when required.
However, the State notified
implementing agency was
responsible at the field level for
repair and maintenance, upkeep, etc.
of the systems installed under the
project.
Initial release along with the sanction
order : 70% of the CFA.
Final instalment after commissioning
and submission of requisite
certification : 30% of the CFA.
The Ministry provided to the
implementing agencies a one time
service charge of Rs. 50,000/- per
village taken up for coverage
through renewable energy devices. In
the case of hamlets, service charges
was limited to 10% of the approved
CFA for each hamlet subject to a
maximum of Rs. 50,000/- per census
village.

10
17. The Committee had expressed their endorsement regarding
introduction of the new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access
Programme (by modifying the RVE Programme) as they believed
that the new scheme is being introduced for larger benefits of the
rural population. However, at the same time they were apprehensive
that switching over to the new scheme would delay implementation
of the programme which would consequently affect electrification of
rural areas. To avoid such eventuality, the Committee had
recommended approval of the new scheme expediously and without
any delay. Furthering the Committee's apprehension, the Ministry in
their reply has not mentioned about the approval of the proposed
new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access Programme (REAP) and
also its status of implementation. While the Committee expected the
Ministry to provide detailed status of implementation of the new
scheme, the Ministry has merely stated that they are in the process
of formulating the scheme “Rural Area Energy Access Programme”
modifying and renaming (conforming to the global nomenclature)
the earlier RVE scheme for wider coverage. The Committee, therefore
would like to reiterate their recommendation to expedite the approval
of the new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access Programme and
re-emphasize that the objective of the programme should not only
be energy accessibility but also to ensure its availability and
affordability to the rural population.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee
contained in Twenty-Seventh Report, under Direction 73A of the
‘Directions by the Speaker’
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
on Demands for Grants of the MNRE for the year 2012-13 was
presented to Parliament on 3rd May, 2012. The Action Taken Replies
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report
were received on 25th September, 2012. The Thirty-First Report of the
Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report was
presented to Parliament on 18th December, 2012. In the said Report,
the Committee had reiterated their recommendation on ‘Remote Village
Electrification Programme (RVEP)’ and final reply on their
recommendation on ‘Renewable Power—Evacuation Problem is still
awaited. The Committee had also commented on two recommendations
viz. 11th Five Year Plan performance and National Solar Mission. Final
Action Taken Statements on the recommendations contained in the
31st Report are still awaited. The same may be furnished in the
prescribed format immediately . Moreover, the Committee observe that
more than six months have passed since the presentation of the
Twenty-Seventh Report to the Parliament. The Committee would like
to remind the Ministry to observe the provisions of Direction 73A of
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ and arrange for the Statement by the
Minister in the House regarding the status of implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Seventh
Report, expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
ATR of 31st Report of the Standing Committee has been submitted
to the Standing Committee on 5th June, 2013. The Statement by the
Minister for New and Renewable Energy regarding the status of
implementation of the Recommendations contained in the 27th Report
of the Standing Committee on Energy was presented to the Lok Sabha
on 3rd May, 2013.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]

12
12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy has proposed a target of capacity addition to the tune of 30,000
MW during the 12th Five Year Plan period for which a financial
requirement of Rs. 40,000 crore was projected in the 12th Plan proposal
of the Ministry. Against this, the Planning Commission after detailed
discussions on various aspects of renewable energy activities proposed
during the 12th Plan, has indicated an allocation of Rs. 19,113 crore
only, which is less than half of what the Ministry had proposed. When
asked about the likely impact of the substantial reduction in budgetary
allocation, the Committee have been informed that this would affect
the overall targets of the 12th Plan. In this connection the Committee
further note that the budgetary allocation for the terminal year of the
11th Plan i.e. 2011-12 was Rs. 1,200 crore and the actual expenditure
was Rs. 1,348.83 crore. Whereas, the budgetary allocation for the first
two years of the 12th Plan  i.e. 2012-13 and 2013-14 is Rs. 1,385 crore
and Rs. 1,521 crore respectively, leaving a remaining balance of
Rs. 16,207 crore to be utilized during the last three years of the Plan
at an average of Rs. 5,400 crore annually. The Committee are astonished
to note the business as usual approach of the Government for New
and Renewable Energy sector despite the ambitious targets set in this
sector during the 12th Plan. The Committee find that fund allocation
for the first two years of the 12th Plan reflects a mere incremental
budgeting over the previous year’s budget. It seems that the
Government has not appreciated the fact that the actual expenditure
for the terminal year of the 11th Plan was Rs. 1,348.83 crore against
the BE of Rs. 1,200 crore. The Committee fail to comprehend the
skewed allocation for the sector despite their excellent performance
during the 11th Plan and the promising future. Although, the Secretary,
MNRE assured the Committee that the Ministry will try to achieve
the targets with whatever fund is allocated by encouraging other
Ministries like Railways, Home, Defence etc., Public Sector Undertakings
to take up renewable energy development projects through their
budgets, it cannot be stated with certainty as to how much fund can
be mobilized through this and whether that will be sufficient. The
Committee also feel that there are several issues and projects which
are very vital and need attention for the proper development of this
sector viz. development of Green Energy Corridor for evacuation and
grid connectivity of renewable energy, reintroduction of Generation
Based Incentive scheme for wind energy due to decrease in their
performance, developing the sector to achieve grid and cost parity

13
with the conventional energy source etc. Given the importance this
sector hold in fulfiling the energy need of the Country and the quantum
of investment that would be required for mainstreaming the renewable
energy, the budget outlay proposed for the 12th Plan appears to be
grossly inadequate. At the time when the Government is supposed to
accelerate the growth of the renewable sector, the Committee are
inclined to infer that even the current pace is being de-accelerated and
the fledgling sector may be left with insufficient funds and efforts
essential for its growth. The Committee believes that the Sector deserves
more attention of the Government at this crucial juncture as this has
just started making its presence felt. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that required funds should be made available for this
important sector so that the ambitious targets set for 12th Plan should
not be curtailed due to paucity of the funds.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is thankful to the Committee for its concerns and
will try to get additional Funds during the remaining years of the
12th Plan. The Ministry is also trying to mobilize additional resources
from other Sources such as National Clean Energy fund, bilateral fund
to meet its targets. As mentioned, the Ministry will try to achieve the
targets by encouraging and involving other Ministries like Railways,
Home, Defence etc. and Public Sector Undertakings to take up
renewable energy development projects through their budgets. In this
direction the Ministry has already had a meeting with Railways and
major public sectors in the field of oil and gas during April 2013.
Regarding Development of Green Energy Corridors the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy in coordination with the Ministry of
Power is exploring possibilities of securing funding from bilateral and
multilateral sources and also grant from in-country resources. In this
process an Indo-German Joint Declaration of Intent for establishment
of Green Energy Corridors has been signed in April 2013. The
declaration stipulates concessional loans from Germany up to one
billion Euro over the next six years. On 26 June, 2013 a consolidated
proposal for KfW loan assistance for Intra-state and Inter-state
Transmission infrastructure and for technical assistance for setting up
Renewable Energy management center has been submitted to the
department of Economic Affairs for posing it to the German counterpart
organization under Indo-German Bilateral Development Corporation.
The Cabinet note on Generation Based Incentives in the Wind Sector
including reintroduction of Accelerated Deprecation has been submitted
for approval of Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA).
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. /05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]

14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee take note of the fact that energy generation through
conventional sources have limitations on account of limited availability
of required fuel and other essentials. The Government proposes to
add about 30,000 MW from Renewable sources by end of 12th Plan.
The cumulative contribution by renewable sources till that time will
be about 55,000 MW which will be approximately 17% of the total
installed capacity of energy from all sources. The Committee appreciate
the efforts of the Government to involve other Ministries like Railways,
Home, Defence etc. in promoting renewable energy. Nonetheless the
Committee are of the view, that this should be done through a legal
and statutory mechanism making it compulsory to use certain
percentage of this energy failing which it should be followed by the
penal provisions. The Committee are aware that as of now CERC
guidelines in the forms of Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO), exist,
yet they are not being followed by the power utilities. These guidelines
also lack teeth as they are not backed by penal action in case of
failure. Absence of penalty in non-adherence to guidelines over
Renewable Purchase Obligations may not benefit the utilities, but its
affirmation will also not harm them (utilities) and in-turn it will give
thrust to the development of renewable sector in the country. The
Committee, therefore, are of the view that in addition the existing
provision in Policy, Act and CERC guidelines, action should be taken
to formalize them into statute with policy and legal framework. For
the purpose a Cabinet decision should be taken in consultation with
the Planning Commission and other concerned Departments of the
Government of India, State Governments and all stakeholders to ensure
that it is made mandatory to use at least 10% of the energy from
renewable sources out of the total energy requirements of the utilities.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that with a view to
keep our energy future secure and affordable, promote clean and green
energy to protect environment, to discourage monopolies in energy
sector, to ensure energy access in remote and inaccessible areas and
also to encourage people participation in energy generation. It is high
time that a holistic and comprehensive view is taken about the
renewable energy vis-à-vis conventional energy for its usefulness and
development accordingly. A legislation should also be enacted with
the approval of the Cabinet for making 10% usage of renewable energy
mandatory by all power utilities with the appropriate penal provisions
in case of non-compliance with the statutory provisions.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, in coordination with
the Ministry of Power has been making efforts to amend Electricity
Act, 2003 and also the Tariff Policy to incorporate provisions for

15
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) compliance and also for long
term RPO trajectory. The ultimate attempt is to achieve 15% share of
renewable energy, excluding large hydro, in the electricity mix by 2020,
as suggested under National Action Plan on Climate Change.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the 12th Plan of the Ministry aims at
accelerated exploitation of the renewable energy potential. The main
focus would be on research, development and deployment of renewable
energy generation systems for rural, urban and industrial/commercial
applications in addition to grid interactive renewable energy.
Productivity and reliability will be the hallmark for renewable energy
growth in the country. As of now, the contribution from this Sector in
the national electricity installed capacity is 12% and the target is to
achieve 17% contribution from renewable sector by the end of the
12th Plan period. However, going by the performance in the first year
of the 12th Plan and the target set for the year 2013-14, it is
inconceivable that the end targets of the 12th Five Year Plan can be
achieved. As against the physical target of 4,125 MW in the year
2012-13 under grid-interactive power, only 2,608 MW could be achieved.
The performance in wind, small hydro and solar has been far from
satisfactory. In the off-grid sector also performance in solar applications,
energy from urban and industrial waste, biomass gasifiers in the rural
areas has been very poor. Similarly, the target for the year 2013-14 in
the grid interactive segment has been fixed as 4,330 MW with an
outlay of Rs. 600 crore. In off-grid the target is about 138 MW with
an outlay of Rs. 430 crore. The Committee find the mismatch between
physical and financial targets for the year 2013-14 when compared to
the target achievement and financial expenditure in the year 2012-13
in off-grid segments. In the grid interactive, the target set for 2013-14
is quite high as compared to the performance in the first year of the
12th Five Year Plan. Although, the outlay has been increased as
compared to the previous year yet the performance mainly hinges
around the efforts made by the private sector. Even if the target for
the year 2013-14 is fully achieved then also the target for the remaining
three years of the 12th Plan will have to be 8000 MW per year to
attain the 12th Plan targets. The Government has to act as a facilitator
creating congenial environment for the private entrepreneurs to perform
in the right earnest. The target of the 12th Plan, which is around
30,000 MW, is also not based upon the latest potential in the renewable

16
energy sector which is about 2,50,000 MW. Hence, the targets set for
12th Plan must be achieved by overcoming prevailing constraints. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that for registering the
presence of renewable energy sector in a significant manner it is high
time that the target set under both, grid interactive and off-grid,
categories should be vigorously followed for achievement as any laxity
in achieving them may demoralize the entire upcoming
entrepreneurship which is so vital for the growth of the sector. Needless
to emphasise that the MNRE in coordination with Ministry of Power
will implement a holistic programme to evacuate the electricity from
renewable sources.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
is aware of the ambitious targets set for itself for the 12th Plan
specifically when the budget provisions made for the plan period are
not adequate. Keeping this in view, various steps are being taken
specifically for attracting investment by public sector and facilitating
private sector. The achievements during 2012-13 under grid interactive
power category were 3163 MW at the end of March 2013. The Ministry
would make all out efforts to achieve the 12th Plan targets both in
grid connected as well as off-grid category of its programmes and
more and more entrepreneurship activities would be encouraged as
suggested by the Committee. The Ministry is working in close
co-ordination with the Ministry of Power to address the issues
mentioned by the Committee and also to systematically develop
evacuation facilities for power generated from renewable sources.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Demands for Grants of MNRE for 2013-14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee find that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1385 crore
during the year 2012-13 was reduced to Rs. 1150 crore at RE stage and
an amount of only Rs. 979.67 crore could be spent as on 28th February,
2013 which is 85 per cent of the RE. For the year 2013-14, the Ministry
has sought an allocation of Rs. 6236 crore in their Annual Plan. The
Committee are surprised to note that the Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance have subsequently reduced the amount and
allocated a meager amount of Rs. 1521 crore as Budgetary Support.
The Committee do not find any justification by the Ministry in

17
demanding Rs. 6236 crore as the highest annual fund utilization during
the last 3 years was Rs. 3715.43 crore i.e. in 2011-12 of which the GBS
was Rs. 1348.83 crore and IEBR was Rs. 2366.60 crore. This is nothing
but an improper assessment and estimation of requirement of funds
by the Ministry. Moreover, this also reflects about the lack of synergy
between the targets set and strategy adopted to achieve them. If at all,
the proposed amount is required to achieve the proposed targets of
the Ministry for 2013-14, the Committee are concerned that the
Ministry's projects under various programmes would be adversely
affected with the drastic reduction in financial allocation vis-à-vis
proposed budget. In view of the importance and significance of
renewable energy in the country energy scenario, it is all the more
necessary that there should be perfect coordination based on scientific
formula between the target set and requirement of funds for achieving
the set targets. In the present circumstances, the Ministry has no option
but to maneuver within the limitations of fund constraints and to
strive to achieve the physical targets with the truncated allocations.
Nevertheless, the Committee are aware that the allocated fund is
insufficient to achieve the targets and some out of box thinking and
caution will have to be taken. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that issue of insufficient allocation should be taken up with the
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance emphasizing the
importance of the sector for additional allocation of funds at RE stage.
The Ministry should also make all efforts to mobilize additional funds
from internal and external budgetary resources and other renewable
energy development agencies so that the targets set for the year are
achieved fully.
Reply of the Government
The expenditure of MNRE during 2012-13 was Rs. 1106.79 which
was 96.24% of the funds available at RE stage (Rs. 1150 crore). As
soon as the budget allocations for 2013-14 were known to the Ministry,
the matter was taken up by Secretary, MNRE with the Planning
Commission with a request to enhance the allocation of renewable
energy. Similar efforts were also made with the Ministry of Finance
through Hon’ble Minister of New and Renewable Energy. The Ministry
is continuously making efforts to mobilize additional resources for
renewable energy programmes and posing projects to the National
Clean Energy Fund and to bilateral agencies. Due to consistent efforts
of the Ministry, Inter-Ministerial Group Constituted to Approve/
Appraise the projects under the National Clean Energy Fund in its
8th meeting have approved 5 projects worth Rs. 275.99 crore out of
6 projects posed by the Ministry worth Rs. 1882.92 crore. However,

18
Funds from these projects will only be received at the second
supplementary stage. The Ministry would also try to get some
additional fund at RE stage for the year 2013-14.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07/08/2013]
Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that wind energy has substantial contribution
which is about 70 per cent of the renewable energy power capacity
installed in the country. The Wind power potential in the country has
been varying at different heights, but at the height of 80 metres it has
been estimated to be more than 1,00,000 MW. Against this, the installed
capacity of wind energy as on March, 2013 is 19,051 MW. Despite the
fact, that it contributes substantially in the total installed capacity of
renewable energy, it is only about 19 per cent of its potential. This
situation is not at all satisfactory despite having a leading share in the
renewable energy achievement. On a conservative consideration a
fraction of 2 per cent land availability for all States except Himalayan
States, North-Eastern States and Andaman and Nicobar Islands has
been assumed for potential estimation. In these States i.e. Himalayan,
North-Eastern and Andaman and Nicobar Islands it is assumed as
0.5 per cent. Hence, it would be appropriate to infer that potential
would change substantially if land availability in each States is real
and certain. This would also necessitate changes in the Wind Resource
Assessment Programme because as of now only about 696 automated
wind monitoring stations are working under the aegis of C-WET in
collaboration with State Nodal Agencies. For assessing of wind energy
resources all over India, the establishment of meteorological basis by
Indian Wind Atlas is still a distant reality. Hence the entire scenario of
wind energy is yet to crystallize into some formal shape wherein
something can be done with certainty and reliability. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that for proper exploitation of wind
energy potential in the country a scientific and implementable strategy
is the need of the hour for which necessary steps should be taken
immediately. Without being sure of the potential, no definite strategy
can be drawn to harness it with proper and adequate infrastructure
support. Therefore, potential identification and steps to harness it
should go hand in hand in a stable manner with the involvement of
all the stakeholders ensuring their positive contribution.

19
Reply of the Government
The wind power potential in the country has been estimated to be
around one lakh MW at 80 m height. So far, a capacity of 19600 MW
has been commissioned in the country. The estimated potential of one
lakh MW is the gross potential and harnessing of the same depends
upon many factors such as the State Government policies/regulatory
framework to attract private sector investment, power evacuation/
transmission infrastructure, identification of specific suitable wind
potential locations to install the wind turbines, availability of incentives
and market condition. Constant efforts on these issues are being made
at Central as well as State Government levels and installations are
progressively increasing. During last year i.e. 2012-13 and upto June
2013 in current financial year, the installations have dropped due to
absence of Generation Based Incentive (GBI) and Accelerated
Depreciation (AD). The Ministry has submitted a proposal before the
Union Cabinet for re-introducing GBI and AD benefits. The Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) has considered the proposal and now it has
to be taken up by the Cabinet (CCEA).
It is true that the estimated potential of one lakh MW is based on
conservative assumption of potential land availability, land requirement
per MW and wind turbine’s capacities. The Ministry through the Centre
for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET) has initiated a study for more
ground level validation of the estimate of wind potential. It will be
done by taking up extensive wind resource assessment studies by
installation of approximately 500 wind monitoring stations in the
country.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Solar Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that our country is endowed with vast solar
energy potential which is estimated to be more than 1,00,000 MW on
conservative assessment. Despite, the vast availability of solar radiation,
a total capacity of only 1686 MW has been reportedly installed (upto
March, 2013) which constitutes 6% of the total renewable energy
installed capacity of 28000 MW and only 1.6% of its potential. During
the first phase of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM)
i.e. from January, 2010 to March, 2013, against the physical target of
1100 MW grid connected solar power, 680 MW capacity projects have

20
been commissioned. Against a target of 200 MWp capacity equivalent
off-grid solar photovoltaic systems, SPV systems aggregating to
207 MW have been sanctioned and about 50 MW systems have been
installed. A budget of Rs. 1450 crore provided for first phase of the
Mission has been reported fully utilised. Under grid interactive solar
power, the achievement during 2012-13 was 505 MW against the target
of 800 MW. The physical target for the 12th Plan is 10,000 MW of
which 3000 MW of grid connected solar power projects and 800 MWp
off-grid SPV systems is the physical target for second phase of JNNSM.
The Committee have been informed that these targets are subject to
availability of funds for the scheme. Keeping in view, the first phase
performance of the Ministry under JNNSM, the Committee have a
serious doubt about the accomplishment of second phase targets of
the Mission which will subsequently have a cascading affect on 12th
Plan target and ultimately on the ambitious target of JNNSM which
aims at deployment of 20,000 MW of grid connected solar power by
2022. Even if the 12th Plan target is achieved miraculously, the total
installed capacity of solar power by end of 12th Plan would be around
11,600 MW. In that event, to achieve the target set under JNNSM, a
capacity addition of 8400 MW would be required to achieve during
the last five years of the Mission. The Committee find that with this
target and half hearted efforts to achieve it, the Phase-II of the Mission
are bound to head the Phase-I way. The uncertain fund arrangements
will further add to the woes resulting in the non-achievement of targets
under JNNSM Phase-II. From an energy security perspective, the
Committee find that Solar is the most secure of all sources of renewable
energy since it is abundantly available all over the country . It is felt
that if captured effectively, the solar energy can meet the entire
country's power requirement. Keeping in view the large proportion of
poor and energy deprived population in the country, every effort needs
to be made to exploit the relatively abundant sources of solar energy
available in the country. The Committee are apprehensive that due to
shortage of funds there is possibility of interruption in the
implementation of projects under solar energy sector. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should make every
effort to ensure uninterrupted implementation of the solar energy
projects. For this, the Ministry should pursue the matter with the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for more allocation
of funds at RE stage. They should also seek the assistance from other
renewable energy development agencies. Needless to say , the Ministry
should also involve larger participation of private sector, renewable
energy service providing companies, financing institutions, State
Renewable Energy Development Agencies, reputed NGOs etc. to ensure
that targets under 12th Plan as well as JNNSM are met successfully.

21
Reply of the Government
It is clarified that during the first phase of JNNSM, the physical
target of 1100 MW grid connected solar power comprised of 100 MW
capacity small grid solar power plant and 1000 MW capacity large
solar power plants (500 MW Photovoltaic and 500 MW Solar Thermal).
Against this target of 1100 MW, 468 MW (large) + 89 MW (small)
=557MW capacity projects and not 680 MW as mentioned in Para 2.9,
have been commissioned. The figure of 680 MW included achievements
against grid as well as non-grid solar power projects as mentioned
under Para 1.50 on page 21 of the Report.
The actual achievement during 2012-13 has been 754 MW against
the target of 800 MW under all schemes, Central as well as States.
The physical target for grid-connected solar power capacity addition
during 12th Plan is 9000 MW of which 3000 MW is envisaged under
Central schemes and the remaining 6000 MW under State Initiatives
and other initiatives like Renewable Energy Certificate (REC)
mechanism, Renewable Power Obligation (RPO) etc.
Against the target of 500 MW large grid solar thermal power plants,
52.5 MW have been commissioned. Plants of 420 MW capacity under
Batch-I are scheduled for commissioning by March 2014 and are in
various stages of implementation.
The major reason for shortfall in the achievement of targeted
addition of 800 MW grid solar power in the year 2012-13 has been the
delay in commissioning of the solar thermal power plants allotted
under JNNSM as per their original scheduled commissioning date of
May 2013 and not enough grid solar power capacity being
commissioned under State initiatives and REC/RPO mechanism. Solar
thermal power developers under JNNSM are being provided necessary
support by the Ministry and have been allowed extended time for
commissioning till March 2014. The Ministry is also pursuing States to
take up projects under their respective solar policies to comply with
the Solar RPO requirements.
Though the solar thermal projects under JNNSM have got delayed
as per their original schedule, it will not affect Phase-II of the Mission
and the Ministry is moving ahead for implementation of solar PV
power projects under Phase-II as per schedule. PV power projects under
the JNNSM have mostly been commissioned within permissible time,
hence the non-achievement of targets in Phase-I may not have any
major effect in the progress of Phase-II of JNNSM.

22
It is true that from energy security perspective, solar is the most
secure of all sources of renewable energy since it is abundantly available
all over the country and if captured effectively can meet the entire
country’s power requirement. However, given the present state of
development of solar power technology globally, the capturing of solar
power is a capital intensive and requires Government’s continued
financial support for making it commercially viable. The persisting
shortage of funds available to the Ministry for this sector is a definite
bottleneck as also observed by the Committee. The Ministry is making
all efforts and pursing Planning Commission as well as Ministry of
Finance for more allocation of funds at RE stage as well as from the
National Clean Energy Fund. Once the same are available/committed,
the same will help attract larger involvement of private sector, RESCOs,
FIs, NGOs, etc. for ensuring that the targets set for 12th Plan are met
successfully. The Ministry has already got the In-Principle approval
for a grant of Rs. 1875 crore from National Clean Energy Fund for
setting up 750 MW grid solar power projects through Viability Gap
Funding mechanism.
Against a target of 200 MWp capacity equivalents off-grid solar
photovoltaic systems/power plants, the SPV systems and power plants
aggregating to 234 MWp were sanctioned and 67 MWp systems were
installed during first phase of JNNSM. For first year (2013-14) of the
second phase of the JNNSM Ministry had set the target of 200 MWp
capacity equivalent off-grid SPV systems for which the financial
requirement was about Rs. 2000 cr. The budget allocation is Rs. 279.00
cr. (for N.E. Rs. 80 cr, General Rs. 155.77 cr. and SCP Rs. 43.23 cr.) for
the financial Year 2013-14 for off-grid SPV Scheme implementation.
With this budget allocation, the Ministry could release funds for the
projects of about 40 MWp capacities already sanctioned during the
first phase of JNNSM. No New projects could be sanctioned during
the current year.
Here it may be noted that about Rs. 1300 cr. are required to fulfil
the liabilities of the projects sanctioned in previous years.
The Ministry will approach Ministry of Finance to obtain additional
funds under National Clean Energy Fund or any other scheme. For
implementation of off-grid SPV projects the Ministry is also seeking
the assistance from State Renewable Energy Development Agencies
and other Channel Partners for larger participation of private sector.
The officials of the Ministry and State Nodal Agencies monitor the
implementation of the projects sanctioned by the Ministry. All off-grid
SPV power plants and a few SPV systems installed under the JNNSM

23
are also inspected by the officials of the Ministry and State Nodal
Agencies. Ministry is also empanelling the retired personals who have
knowledge and experience .of the SPV technology for inspection of
Projects as per MNRE norms in the field.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07/08/2013]
Small Hydro Power
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee find that the estimated potential for power
generation in the country from small/mini hydel projects is 19,749
MW from 6474 identified sites. They are also informed that the
cumulative installed capacity of small hydro projects is 3632 MW (upto
March, 2013) which is 18% of the identified potential. The achievement
in the last three years of the 11th Plan under Small Hydro Power has
been satisfactory as the set targets have been achieved during each of
the year i.e. in 2009-10 achievement was 305 MW and in 2010-11 it
was 307 MW against the target of 300 MW in each year, while in the
year 2011-12 achievement was 352 MW against the target of 350.
However, the Committee are unhappy to note the poor performance
in the sector during the year 2012-13  i.e. against the target of 350 MW,
only 176 MW could be achieved which is about 50 per cent of the
target. In the financial front too the performance was not satisfactory
as about 17 per cent of the allocated budget remains unutilized. It is
also unexplained that a capacity addition of 352 MW was achieved
with an expenditure of Rs. 154 crore in the year 2011-12, whereas in
the year 2012-13, 176 MW could be achieved with an expenditure of
Rs. 125 crore. This mismatch in financial and physical figures of the
performance is incomprehensible. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that a fine balance should be maintained between the
expenditure in the target achievements in terms of Megawatt. Variation
to a limited extent in expenditure vis-à-vis achievement can be justified
owing to circumstances beyond control but huge difference in
expenditure and achievement cannot be justified as the installation of
SHP and the technique required in it are similar and local in nature.
Therefore, planning for installation of SHP should be done in a careful
manner by utilizing funds in an efficient manner.
Reply of the Government
The total installed capacity from small hydro projects during the
year 2012-13 was 236.93 MW against a target of 350 MW. The
expenditure during the year was Rs. 147.34 crore. The mismatch

24
between physical figures in comparison to the last year is mainly
because the expenditure is not only for subsidies but is also booked
for other activities which includes R&D, support for Ladakh Renewable
Energy Initiative Project, Arunachal Pradesh Special Package etc. It
may also be mentioned that in most of the cases, the subsidy for a
small hydro project commissioned in a particular year becomes due in
the next year or so which is released only after performance testing
and achieving generation for over three months. Hence, in the small
hydro programme the expenditure in a particular year reflects
commissioning of projects in the previous year(s). The direction of
Standing Committee to carefully plan and utilize the funds in an
effective manner has been noted.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee was informed that the target for capacity addition
under Small Hydro Power for the 12th Plan period is 2100 MW and
the capacity addition target during each year of the Plan period is
350 MW. The Committee observe mismatch of figures of the
12th Plan target vis-a-vis the target set for each year of the Plan period.
If the target of 350 MW set for each year of the Plan period is achieved,
the total capacity addition of 12th Plan would be only 1750 MW.
Moreover, the performance during the first year of the Plan period
raises many questions. With an expenditure of about 83 per cent of
the financial allocation a physical target of only 50 percent could be
achieved and there is no indication of achieving the leftover target in
the remaining years as the target for the year 2013-14 has been set as
300 MW with an outlay of Rs. 135 crore. With this pace a deficit of
200 MW has existed in the second year of the Plan and it is almost
impossible to make it up in the leftover target in the remaining years
of the Plan for target achievement. The poor performance in the sector
is unjustifiable. More so, a small hydro project usually do not encounter
the problems associated with large hydro projects such as acquisition
of land, deforestation and resettlement and various other clearances.
The positive sides of these projects are that they have the potential to
meet power requirements of remote and isolated areas. The Committee
are of the opinion that special emphasis should be given to promote
use of new and efficient designs of watermills for mechanical as well
as electricity generation for the purpose of setting up of small and
micro hydel projects for rural village electrification. The sector is of
such a nature that involvement of local people become necessary for
its success and hence Associations, Cooperative Societies, NGOs, Village

25
Panchayats/Gram Sabhas should be associated for making the projects
a success. The Committee also find that SHP has a great social bearing
as it can create a sense of belonging to the modern world among the
villagers besides providing them the electricity and earning and
ensuring their livelihood. This is also one of the most cost effective
options for power generation as it does not rely on conventional fuel
for its operation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
option of SHP should be explored and utilized to its full capacity
owing to its importance to the rural masses. The Committee also
recommend that the Government should critically review its
performance for the year 2012-13 and ensure that the factors which
hindered the growth of the sector are addressed and are not repeated
henceforth.
Reply of the Government
The target for capacity addition under small hydro power for the
12th Plan period is 2100 MW which is kept by taking into consideration
the projects under implementation in various States and their schedule
of completion. Due to natural calamities leading to delay in
commissioning of projects was the main reason for a lower capacity
addition during 2012-13. It is expected that while some projects may
face similar difficulties, other projects would be commissioned as per
schedule and in overall terms it will be possible to achieve the
12th Plan target in the SHP sector. The Ministry is giving special
emphasis to small size projects and involvement of Co-operatives,
NGOs, Village Pachayats etc. in construction of micro hydel projects.
R&D efforts are being made to get developed low head turbines and
velocity turbines so that smaller streams can be utilized and smaller
capacity projects are also developed in future. As suggested by the
Standing Committee, a critical review is being done for delay in
installation of private sector projects with the States so that this can
be avoided. The Ministry recently had meetings with the States of
Karnataka, Kerala on 23rd May, 2013 and J&K, Himachal, Uttarakhand
and Punjab on 5th July, 2013 to discuss these issues and strategy for
achieving the 12th Plan targets.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Biomass Power
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that biomass power programme of the
Ministry is implemented with the objective of harnessing the potential
for grid quality power from biomass resources through various

26
conversion technologies. The biomass materials used for power
generation inter-alia include bagasse, rice husk, straw, cotton stalk,
coconut shells, soya husk, de-oiled cakes, coffee waste, jute wastes,
groundnut shells, saw dust etc. The Committee find that biomass
resources are abundantly available in the country. They also note that
the potential could be increased substantially if linked with dedicated
plantations on forest and non-forest degraded lands. It has been
reported that Studies sponsored by the Ministry has estimated that
about 18000 MW of power can be generated from agro-residues
covering agricultural and forestry residue. During the year 2012-13,
the capacity addition from biomass is 255 MW taking the cumulative
cogeneration capacity in the country to 2240 MW (upto December,
2012). In view of the abundant availability of biomass resources, the
Committee find the performance so far under the sector far from
satisfactory. Biomass is found to be a clean renewable energy resources
derived from the waste of various human and natural activities and
the resources are widely available all over the country. The use of
biomass energy has the potential to greatly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. The other benefits is that it generate direct and indirect
income for the rural communities, generate employment in rural areas
and results in net positive environmental benefits due to reduction of
local pollution from field burning and methane emission from decay
of surplus biomass. In regard to constraints in development of Biomass
Sector it was stated that the constraints are competitive uses of biomass
as cattle feed and partly used by process and power industries leading
to unavailability or rise in the cost of fuel for biomass power plant.
However, they can be overcome by way of promotion of dedicated
energy plantations through appropriate waste land development
programme in each district/taluk based on a suitable public-private
partnership model or contract farming. The Committee strongly feels
that using the resources that are easily available would make the
production of energy efficient and reliable and biomass is certainly
one of such resources. Therefore, to encourage the use of biomass, the
Committee recommends that the supply of biomass material should
be improved by improving the technologies. Moreover, provision of
financial incentives and subsidies should also be improved to attract
more investment from private participants.
Reply of the Government
The concerns of the Committee have been noted. During the year
2012-13, the capacity addition from biomass co-generation projects has
been 352.20 MW against a target of 350 MW taking the cumulative

27
capacity in the country to 2337.43 MW as on 31.3.2013. The Ministry
is taking following measures in the promotion of Biomass Sector:
I. Efforts are underway to provide support for pilot energy
plantation linked with biomass power projects and initiated
discussions with concerned Central/State Ministries/
Departments.
II. Awareness is being created amongst private developers to
establish biomass supply chain using improved technologies.
III. Ministry is already providing higher financial incentives for
setting up of small (up to 2 MW capacity) biomass power
projects connected at the tail end of the grid.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Renewable Energy for Rural Applications
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee find that the Ministry’s programmes under
Renewable Energy for Rural Applications include deployment of
renewable energy systems and devices such as biogas plants,
photovoltaic systems, biomass, gasifiers, solar cookers and other solar
thermal systems, etc. in rural areas of the country as well as remote
village electrification programme and village energy security test
projects. The Committee observe that the physical targets and financial
outlays proposed and approved for the year 2013-14 under renewable
energy for rural applications are quite confusing. Under RVE
Programme, the physical target of 250 villages/hamlets with a financial
outlay of Rs. 500 crore were proposed. The approved outlay is Rs. 15
crore which is only about 3 per cent of the proposed outlay with no
changes in the physical target. Similarly, the approved outlay under
family type biogas plant is Rs. 123 crore against the proposed outlay
of Rs. 200 crore. However, there is no reduction in the physical target
which remains 1.1 lakh. The Committee are apprehensive about the
attainability of the physical targets of the above categories with the
reduced approved outlay . They would like to know that if they are
attainable, than how the inflated proposed outlay can be justified and
if they are unattainable why the physical targets have not been revised.
With regard to performance in the year 2012-13, the Committee are
astonished to note that 746 villages/hamlets were completed under
Remove Village Electrification Programme without any target and

28
without any budget as well. This is a very peculiar situation which
requires to be explained as to how 746 villages were electrified without
any pre-set financial outlay as well as physical targets. The performance
under biogas programme is also far from satisfactory as only 77000
plants could be set-up against the target of 1.25 lakh plants. Financial
performance is also not very encouraging as only Rs. 91 crore could
be spent against the revised estimate of Rs. 120 crore. The Committee
feel that the action plan of the Government under renewable energy
for rural applications is extremely sketchy without any definite goal
and appropriate and implementable strategy. The areas where this
system is meant for are isolated, remote and far-flung for the purpose
of accessibility and the proper working of these devices will bring the
people of those areas to the mainstream and hence the importance of
these systems cannot be over-emphasized. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the proper survey must be done for devising an
effective strategy with regard to the implementation of various systems
and devices under renewable energy for rural applications. It should
be followed by a clear and definite strategy to implement it in a result
oriented manner so that the benefits reach the intended beneficiaries.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is in the process of modifying and renaming the
existing RVE scheme as "Rural Area Energy Access Programme" where
after it will be approved by competent authority. The Rural Area Energy
Access Programme for providing basic lighting facility of un-electrified
villages/hamlets will be continuing in the 12th Plan, modifying the
existing RVE programme as per feedback from different stakeholders.
The Ministry has proposed requirement of funds of Rs. 3000 crore
with a target of 20000 villages/hamlets/padas/basties during the
current plan period under the proposed scheme. The amount of
Rs. 500 crore has been asked as proportionate allocation for 2013-14.
Historically, for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, expenditure to the tune
of around Rs. 80 crore per year had been incurred on existing RVE
programme.
Request for allocation of more funds for this programme for
2013-14 is being made for meeting the current year target as well as
liabilities under RVEP for past plan period. Once the modified RVE
scheme is approved by the competent authority, projection for more
funds will be made. Physical target will be decided based on the
request consideration for fund allocation.
The figure of completion of 746 villages/hamlets was out of
villages/hamlets sanctioned during the 11th Plan period. During 2012-13,
total 975 nos. of villages/hamlets were reported to be completed out
of villages/hamlets sanctioned during the 11th Plan period.

29
Bio-Gas
The requirement of Rs. 200 crore under the National Bio-gas and
Manure Management Programme (NBMMP) for setting up family type
bio-gas plants during the year 2013-14 was projected in view the past
liabilities of the NBMMP programme implemented upto 31st March,
2013 (2012-13), which will be claimed by the States during the
year 2013-14 for final settlement and release of their balance due
amounts. The past liabilities at the time of preparing Annual Plan
2013-14 proposal were estimated to be about Rs. 73.00 crore. However,
looking to the approved outlay of Rs. 123 crore, the revised annual
physical targets of about 1.00 lakh bio-gas plants has been fixed and
conveyed to the States on 22.5.2013. Funds required for this physical
goal and also to clear past liabilities would still not be sufficient,
hence, in order to achieve the physical targets of One Lakh Bio-gas
Plants, it would be proposed to enhance the outlay at the RE stage to
bridge the gap, particularly if the States submit all the required
documents for settlements of the accounts during current year 2013-14
itself.
About 1.24 lakh family type bio-gas plants have been set up against
an annual target of 1.25 lakh plants as on 31.03.2013 (2012-13). During
the financial year 2012-13, a total of Rs. 116.52 crore have been released
against the revised estimate of Rs. 120.00 crore. There is a slight shortfall
in financial performance/fund release which is attributable to hindrance
caused by the outstanding Utilization Certificates of the previous years
upto 31st March, 2011 (2010-11) of the State Agencies in respect of the
other programmes/projects of the Ministry.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Renewable Energy for Urban, Industrial and Commercial Applications
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that the Ministry has been promoting the use
of technologies for solar energy recovery and energy from municipal,
industrial and commercial waste, formatting certain niche energy
demands of urban, industrial and commercial sectors in the country.
The programmes being implemented include Energy Efficient Solar/
Green Building Programme, Energy Recovery from Urban, Industrial
and Commercial Wastes and Bio-energy and Cogeneration in industry.
On scrutiny of the performance under the sector for the last five years,
the Committee observe an improvement in the physical achievement

30
during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, where in the achievements are
31.20 MW and 48.41 MW against the targets of 30 MW and 40 MW
respectively. However, the achievement prior to that periods were less
than targets. Keeping in view, the available potential, the overall
performance under the sector is not satisfactory. The Committee have
been informed that the existing potential for generation of power from
urban and industrial wastes in the country is about 4000 MW. They,
however, feel that with proper survey/assessment, the potential would
be much higher than the present estimate. It has been informed that
five pilot projects on energy recovery from Municipal Solid Wastes
have been working for some years, however the sucesess story has
never been reported on any of the pilot projects. The Committee are
aware that the Ministry itself is not setting up the projects but is
playing the role of a catalyst and accordingly the progress of the
projects should be monitored by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should play a proactive role in
coordinating with the State Governments, Municipal Corporations and
other concerned Departments so that more projects for recovery of
waste to energy are implemented. Besides, they should also strengthen
their monitoring system for timely completion of the on-going projects.
They also feel that the concept of Green Building, which aims to
increase use of renewable energy in buildings by using solar passive
design, use of eco-friendly and less energy intensive building materials,
integration of renewable energy and energy efficiency, needs promotions
through financial and promotional incentives and other promotional
activities such as awareness campaign, seminar, workshops etc. For
this the Ministry should coordinate with the Ministry of Urban
Development and State/UT Administrations for adequate policy for
uniform application across the country.
Reply of the Government
The progress under Waste-to-Energy programme is restricted by a
decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court allowing the Government to
support only five Projects on Energy Recovery from Municipal Solid
Wastes. This was after a complete ban on Government support for
such projects imposed in the year 2005. Only one new pilot project of
16 MW installed at Okhla, New Delhi has so far been commissioned
whereas other four are likely to be commissioned during the current
year. A full fledged programme for the promotion of Waste-to-Energy
projects based on municipal solid wastes can be taken up only after
an evaluation of performance of the five pilot projects is carried out.
In the meanwhile, Ministry of Urban Development has been assigned
the task of promoting Waste-to-Energy projects based on municipal
solid wastes through Municipal Corporations and other Urban Local
Bodies.

31
The Ministry has been implementing a Scheme on "Energy Efficient
Solar/Green Buildings" since, February, 2009 which aims to promote
the widespread construction of energy efficient solar/green buildings
in the country through a combination of financial and promotional
incentives. The major achievements made under the scheme are as
follows:
(i) 97 building projects of Government with 3.05 million sq. m
builtup area have been sanctioned for the exemption from
the registration cum rating fees for acquiring GRIHA rating.
These buildings are at various stages of construction.
(ii) The Ministry approached various Central and State
Departments/PSUs to adopt the concept of green buildings
with GRIHA ratings in their future constructions.
(iii) An independent registered society ADARSH (Association for
Development and Research for Sustainable Habitats) created
and headed by TERI has been provided some financial
support by the Ministry which is promoting the GRIHA
rating.
(iv) So far 148 capacity building programmes including
Workshops for Evaluators and Trainers on GRIHA Ratings
and awareness programmes on Green Buildings/GRIHA
Ratings/Green Architecture were sanctioned/organized
across the country by various organisations.
(v) Under this scheme, the total CFA of Rs. 6.82 crore have
been sanctioned of which Rs. 4.48 crore have been released
to various Implementing Agencies.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Research, Design and Development in New and Renewable Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that in view of the yawning gap between
demand and supply of the electricity due to ever growing demand of
energy in the Country and the inability of the conventional electricity
generation sector to match the pace due to several reasons including
constraints in supply of fuel, the need for developing the renewable
sources at a rapid pace has gained significance in the recent times.

32
The Country, at present, has about 27,000 MW renewable energy
installed capacity, against the total identified potential of 2,50,000 MW,
producing only 55 Billion Units annually. The figures mentioned, in
no way justify large geographical dimension of the Country. It is not
that there is scarcity of renewable energy potential in the Country but
the technological inadequacy has restricted the scope of optimal
exhaustion of these sources. The Committee during their study visit to
Gujarat in January, 2013 had noted that the installed wind and solar
energy plant were having Plant Load Factor (PLF) as low as 15%. The
low PLF of the renewable installation due to poor efficiency of the
equipment increases the overall cost of the electricity produced
therefrom. The Committee find that the indigenous research projects
have failed to achieve any significant technological breakthrough in
terms of reducing cost or increasing efficiency of renewable equipment.
The Committee believe that it is not possible to become a leader in
renewable energy sector unless we become a leading nation in
renewable technological innovation and advancement also. Today, most
of the renewable equipment are being imported and our country is
dependent on the developed nations for technological advancement in
renewable sector due to the inadequate indigenous research and support
programme. Though, the ambitious programme in Solar Energy i.e.
National Solar Mission has completed its first phase, proper assessment
of solar energy capabilities of some parts of the Country, especially
Eastern India where not a single Solar Radiation Assessment Centre
has been established, are yet to be done. This reflects the non-
seriousness of the Government on technological advancements of the
Sector. Though some attention is being paid to technological
advancements of grid connected renewable energy sector, the off-grid
sector is still deprived of the due attention. Off-grid renewable energy
such as bio-mass holds the key in the States where there is not much
scope for grid connected renewable energy. The Committee believe
that to become a leading country in the field of Renewable Energy, it
is of paramount importance that Research and Development is given
highest priority to improve their quality, reliability and costing. If the
country remains dependent on other developed nations for technological
advancement in the field of renewable energy and import of key
components/materials required for the sector, optimum exhaustion of
the available potential renewable energy source of the country will
remain a distant dream making the speculation of Country’s becoming
a leader of the Sector preposterous. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that indigenous research and development in the field of
renewable energy should be given utmost priority to bring the cost of
renewable equipment substantially cheaper and improve their efficiency
considerably to attract substantive investment which will provide much
needed impetus to this Sector.

33
Reply of the Government
Realizing the importance of indigenous research and development
to attain better efficiencies, reliability and reduction in cost, the Ministry
is supporting research and development activities in almost all areas
of renewable energy including product development and involvement
of industry. The main objective of R&D in the renewable energy sector
during the 12th Plan is to focus on cost effective and efficient products
with higher reliability. The Ministry is also supporting R&D activities
in the futuristic areas of hydrogen energy, fuel cells and bio-fuels.
The wind electric generator technology has evolved quite rapidly
over the last decade in the country. Today, state-of-art technologies are
available in the country for the manufacture of wind turbines. All the
major manufacturers in the field of wind technology have their presence
in the country and wind turbines upto the capacity of 2.5 MW (single
turbine) are being manufactured in the country. India has emerged as
an important manufacturing hub for wind electric generators. The wind
turbines have international level efficiencies. As the wind power
development in the country is mainly through private sector investment,
the technological advancements and related basic Research and
Development (R&D) is also driven by the private manufacturers. The
Ministry, through C-WET, is focusing on the research projects related
with the problems of interfacing such turbines in Indian grid conditions
and wind regimes.
The Ministry is supporting R&D activities in all the sub-areas of
solar photovoltaic and solar thermal energy. Specific roadmaps have
been developed to achieve higher efficiencies and new materials for
solar cell development. Co-ordinated research programmes have been
initiated involving all leading R&D institutions in the country. As a
part of Solar Radiation Resource Assessment (SRRA) Phase-I project,
initially 51 high potential sites were identified by the MNRE/C-WET
and installation of ground level measurement stations have been
completed in the country. Similarly, in SRRA Phase-II project,
60 additional sites have been identified to install the similar kind of
measurement equipments in the remaining parts of the country.
25 locations have been identified in the eastern parts of the country to
set up solar monitoring stations. The sites where SRRA stations
installed, as a part of Phase-I of the project, started generating the
data and receiving online through GPRS and stored at C-WET, Chennai
for further analysis. Similarly, from Phase-II stations also data will be
received online and analysed for further applications.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]

34
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that against the proposal of Rs. 261.5 crore in
Annual Plan of the MNRE for Research and Development of Renewable
Energy, only Rs. 160 crore has been allocated for the year 2013-14.
However, the scrutiny of the data by the Committee reveals that the
actual spending of the Ministry in Research and Development of
Renewable Energy for the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 has been Rs. 111.46
crore, Rs. 109 crore respectively, whereas, the Ministry could spent
only Rs. 85.09 crore (upto Feb. 2013) against the BE of Rs. 192 crore
in 2012-13. The figures reflect poorly on the Ministry for attention
being paid by them on R&D programmes for renewable energy. The
spending pattern of the Ministry for this field has not been impressive
enough to justify allocation of whopping Rs. 261.5 crore as proposed.
The Committee, believe that due to poor utilization of the allocated
fund in the previous years, this sector has not been allocated the fund
which it otherwise deserves. As the Committee have discussed the
importance of Research and Development for the overall growth of
this Sector in the preceeding para, they, therefore recommend that the
Ministry instead of being discouraged for getting less allocation for
R&D field should focus on full utilization of whatever fund allocated
as soon as possible so that at the time of RE more fund for this head
can be insisted. Needless to emphasize it will be ensured by the
Government that no R&D activity of this Sector is adversely affected
due to paucity of fund.
Reply of the Government
At the outset, the Ministry would like to assure the Committee
that no R&D activity in the renewable energy sector would be adversely
affected due to paucity of fund. The Ministry gives highest priority to
the R&D activities and projects considering that this is the back bone
of realizing overall growth of this Sector and for achieving better
efficiencies and reliability of renewable energy products.
The expenditure during 2012-13 on Research and Development of
Renewable Energy was 108.90 crore. Funds during the year 2012-13
were mainly released for ongoing R&D projects that were taken up
during the 11th Plan Period. A two-day “R&D Conclave on New and
Renewable Energy” was organized by the MNRE on 9-10th August
2012 to discuss the progress and seek inputs from experts for taking
further steps for faster development of technology. Important results
in the ongoing R&D projects were presented by the Project Investigators
and discussed for further development. It is proposed to make this as

35
an annual exercise and the next conclave is proposed to be held in
September, 2013. The Ministry is attempting to give further impetus to
R&D efforts for faster development of technology for commercialization.
In this connection, a detailed review meeting was held in the Ministry
under the chairmanship of Secretary to further strengthen the R&D
scheme of the Ministry. It has been decided that the Ministry’s
institutions (Solar Energy Center, C-WET and NIRE) will be further
strengthened to take up advanced research activities and would act as
focal point R&D in their respective areas.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]

36
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

37
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Wind Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that there has been incoherence in the physical
and financial targets with regard to the wind energy in the country .
The targets during the last four years 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and
2012-13 were restricted to 2500 MW, 2000 MW, 2400 MW and
2500 MW respectively. The achievements during these years are
1565 MW, 2349 MW, 3196 MW and 1492 MW respectively. Despite the
targets not being so high, the achievements were very poor in the
years 2009-10 and 2012-13, whereas in the remaining two years the
achievement exceeded the targets. The Committee feels that there
should be correlation in the targets and growth in the successive years
of planning and it should be ensured that the target set for the next
year is not less than the preceding year. Otherwise, there is every
chance that the cycle of sustainable growth will be hampered impacting
the growth of the sector. The target for the year 2013-14 for wind
energy has also been fixed as 2500 MW with an outlay of Rs. 230
crore. The Committee presume that this outlay also include incentive
components otherwise this kind of variation in financial allocations
cannot be justified and it may raises serious questions about the
planning and strategy as well as expenditure per MW in target
achievements. The year 2012-13 has been extremely disappointing for
the wind sector and the Committee have been apprised that the
withdrawal of Accelerated Depreciation Benefits and Generation Based
Incentive scheme have substantially affected investment from
Private Sector resulting in low achievement of the target. But the
performance exceeded the target in the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 with
the meagre allocation of Rs. 34.90 crore and Rs. 28 crore respectively.
Hence, the Committee desire that relation between targets, financial
allocations and incentives in the achievement of targets may be made
more explicit. The Committee are happy to learn that an additional
amount of Rs. 800 crore has been earmarked for GBI purposes for
wind sector and this should accelerate the performance of the wind

38
energy sector during the current as well as coming years. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that every effort should be
made to outreach the target for the current year without any excuses
and the planning of providing declared financial incentives. The
Ministry should also initiate publicity for the incentives available to
the industry so that wind energy continue to dominate its share in
renewable energy and become an instrument for achieving 30,000 MW
target set for the 12th Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
Targets of wind power for a prospective financial year are kept in
view of the progress in present year and changes/likely changes in
the policies. It is true that targets and achievements during 2009-10,
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 have not progressively increased. The
achievement during 2009-10 and 2012-13 were particularly low. The
progress during 2009-10 was adversely affected because of general
global financial recession which dropped the investment in wind sector.
As the wind power projects are established with private sector
investment, the targets in 2009-10 could not be achieved. So far as
2012-13 is concerned, the progress/achievement is exceptionally low
because of absence of Accelerated Depreciation (AD) benefit and
Generation Based Incentive (GBI). The Ministry is in process of
reinstating AD and GBI benefit in wind sector. The proposal has been
considered by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The Ministry of
Finance has supported the GBI but they have reservations about AD.
The final Cabinet Note has been sent for consideration of CCEA. The
Ministry has kept a target of 15000 MW from wind power (out of
total 30000 MW from all renewables). During 2012-13, only 1700 MW
was achieved. Therefore, another 13300 MW is to be done in remaining
4 years of 12th Plan. The success will depend upon reinstatement of
AD and GBI.
Regarding financial outlay, it is to be mentioned that until 2009-10,
the Ministry was spending money for wind resource assessment,
support to C-WET and other developmental work. No commercial
projects were taken up with Ministry’s financial support. After
introduction of GBI since 2010-11, budget is also required to provide
GBI for the projects commissioned during 11th Plan through GBI.
Therefore, progressively, the overall budget requirement for wind power
programme is increasing to give GBI.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

39
Remote Village Electrification Programme
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that the Remote Village Electrification
Programme is implemented for providing financial support for lighting/
basic electricity using renewable energy sources in those remote un-
electrified census villages and unelectrified hamlets of electrified census
villages where grid extension is either not found feasible or not cost
effective and are not covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin
Vidyutikaran Yojana. The Committee observe that against the overall
target of 10,000 villages and hamlet for 11th Plan, 7091 villages/hamlets
have been sanctioned for electrification, out of which 6693 villages/
hamlets have been completed till 31st January, 2013. The Committee
are informed that with a view to modify the existing RVE programme,
the Ministry is in the process of formulating a new scheme called
“Rural Area Energy Access Programme” for providing basic lighting
facility to unelectrified villages/hamlets. It has also been stated that if
approval of Rural Area Energy Access Programme takes time, RVE
programme will continue in 2013-14 also. The Committee is surprised
to find that though the first year of 12th Plan is completed, the
Government is yet to approve their new scheme of Rural Area Energy
Access Programme for 12th plan. The Committee would like to know
the reasons which necessitated the formulation of new scheme and in
what manner it will be better than the existing one. The Committee
endorse introduction of new scheme of Rural Area Energy Access
Programme (by modifying the RVE Programme) as they believe that
the new scheme is being introduced after thorough examination and
review of their performance under RVE Programme for larger benefit
of the rural population. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should expedite the approval of the new scheme of Rural
Area Energy Access Programme without delay so that the programme
implementation does not suffer. They also recommend that the objective
of the RAEA programme should not only be the energy accessibility
but also to ensure its availability and affordability to the rural
population.
Reply of the Government
The Rural Area Energy Access Programme is continuation of the
earlier RVE scheme with some modifications based on the past
experiences of RVE programme and feedbacks from different
stakeholders. The Ministry is in the process of formulating the scheme
“Rural Area Energy Access Programme” modifying and renaming
(conforming to the global nomenclature) the earlier RVE scheme for
wider coverage. Through the modified RVE programme i.e. Rural Area
Energy Access Programme, the Ministry’s focus is to cover more
villages/hamlets removing the bottlenecks faced during the
implementation of the RVE programme like population criterion,
scattered approach to cluster approach etc.

40
However, the difference between the proposed Rural Area Energy
Access Programme (REAP) and the RVE programme (RVEP) is given
below:
Sl.No. Items REAP RVEP
1. Objectives To provide access to electricity to un-
electrified census villages, un-electrified
hamlets of electrified remote census
villages not covered under RGGVY and
electrified villages/hamlets where
power availability is less than 6 hours
per day averaged over the year.
2. Project Design Two to five light points and one to
three sockets for operating electronic
gadgets for each of the willing
households in the village/hamlet may
be provided through mini/micro grid
mode.
Every household will be eligible for a
maximum of 100 Watt.
In scattered population areas, if this is
also not possible, then as a last resort,
standalone solar lighting systems for
each of the willing households in the
village may be provided.
3. Eligibility of All census un-electrified villages and
Villages/ their hamlets not covered under
Hamlets RGGVY, as confirmed by REC.
Un-electrified hamlets of electrified
census villages not covered under
RGGVY, as confirmed by REC.
Electrified villages and hamlets where
power availability is less than 6 hours
per day averaged over the year.
Left out households in any of the above
villages/hamlets which have already
been supported under the Remote
Village Electrification programme
during the last two plan period.
To provide access to electricity to un-
electrified remote census villages and
remote un-electrified hamlets of
electrified census villages where grid
connectivity is either not feasible or
not cost effective & not covered
under RGGVY .
Creation of capability for availability
of electricity as laid down in the
National Electricity Policy, 2005, i.e.
a minimum of 1 kWh/household/
day.
However, if the State Governments
concluded after due consideration
that the norm of 1 kWh/household/
day was not achievable in a cost
effective manner then as a last resort
they might decide to provide at least
the basic lighting facilities through
solar photovoltaic home lighting
systems for each of the willing
households in the village.
All census un-electrified remote
census villages and their hamlets not
covered under RGGVY, as confirmed
by REC.
Un-electrified hamlets of electrified
census villages having population of
more than 300 and which are
situated at least 3 kms from the
nearest distribution transformer of
the Grid.
Hamlets below population of 100,
subject to all the remote census
villages and remote hamlets as above
have been covered under the RVE
Programme.
Uncovered households which existed
as on 31.12.2008 of eligible villages
and hamlets which have been earlier
taken up under Remote Village
Electrification Programme.

41
Sl.No. Items REAP RVEP
4. Activities Installation of MINI GRID (10 kW to
Eligible for 500 kW per site)/MICRO GRID (up to
Support 10 kW) through various renewable
energy sources.
If MINI/MICRO GRID is not feasible
or cost effective only then the villages/
hamlets may be covered through
standalone lighting systems.
5. Implementation For MINI/MICRO GRID, the Project
Mechanism Developer(s) shall implement the project
on Build, Operate, Maintain and
Transfer (BOMT) basis for a period of
5 years.
After 5 years, SNAs/State Governments
will have the option to take over the
project or handover the project to the
same agency or any other agency as
approved by the State Government for
running the project.
6. Pattern of Initial release along with the sanction
Release of or der: 60% of the CFA & 100% of
Funds service charge of the implementing
agency.
Second installment after commissioning
including submission of requisite
certificates: 40% of the CFA.
7. Service The Ministry will provide the
Charges implementing Agencies onetime service
to the charge of 2% of total CFA approved
Implementing under the project.
Agencies A provision of 3% of the total outlay
under the programme will be kept for
monitoring & evaluation of projects,
case study, technology development,
capacity building, training, survey,
publicity, publication and demonstration.
Installation of power plants based on
small hydro power, solar, biomass,
wind, biofuels, biogas, etc. for
electrification of remote villages/
hamlets.
Solar home lighting systems for
domestic and community lighting
were supported where no other
renewable energy technology is
found to be feasible/cost effective.
The State Government was
responsible for long term
sustainability of the systems,
including replacement of batteries as
and when required.
However, the State notified
implementing agency was
responsible at the field level for
repair and maintenance, upkeep, etc.
of the systems installed under the
project.
Initial release along with the sanction
order: 70% of the CFA.
Final installment after commissioning
and submission of requisite
certification: 30% of the CFA.
The Ministry provided to the
implementing agencies a one time
service charge of Rs. 50,000/- per
village taken up for coverage
through renewable energy devices. In
the case of hamlets, service charges
was limited to 10% of the approved
CFA for each hamlet subject to a
maximum of Rs. 50,000/- per census
village.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 08/05/2012-P&C,
Dated: 07.08.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

42
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

43
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2013-14) HELD  ON
28TH OCTOBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1340 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
5. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
11. Shri Jagdanand Singh
12. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
14. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
15. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
16. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
17. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
2. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

44
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee.
**** **** ****
2. **** **** ****
3. **** **** ****
4. **** **** ****
5. The Committee then took up for consideration of two Draft
Reports (39th and 40th) on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the 34th and 35th Reports on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
and the Ministry of Power for the year 2013-14 respectively. The
Committee adopted the Reports without any modification and
authorized the Chairman to present the Report to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

45
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 15 and 16
Total: 14
Percentage 87.5%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
-Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of  the  Government  have  not  been
accepted by the Committee  and  which  require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 7 and 13
Total: 02
Percentage 12.5%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%