 
a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER  
 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL ELECTRICITY 
REGULATORY COMMISSION (CERC) 
 
 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2011-12) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  30 
 

 
b 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2011-12) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER  
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL ELECTRICITY  
REGULATORY COMMISSION (CERC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.08.2012 
  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.08.2012  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012/Shravana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
c 
 
 
COE NO. 224
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs..................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Twelfth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 
 
  

 
i 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
CONTENTS  
Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)…………………………………… ……………………..  (ii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………………………...  (iv)  
 
REPORT 
PART –I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
I Introductory 1 
II Mandate vis-à-vis Performance of CERC 3 
III Establishment of CERC 6 
IV  Forum of Regulators (FOR) 12 
V Tariff Regulation 19 
VI Grid Discipline and Transmission 26 
VII Trading of Electricity 36 
VIII Open Access 44 
IX Promotion of Renewable Energy 51 
PART-II 
 
Recommendations /  Observations of the Committee 54 
ANNEXURES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 0 9.11.2011. 85 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12.06.2012. 89 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  16.08.2012. 92 

 
ii 
 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2011 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2011 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2011 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2011-- --12) 12) 12) 12)    
    
    
 Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav              Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav              Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav              Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav              -- --                        Chairman Chairman Chairman Chairman    
    
MEMBERS MEMBERS MEMBERS MEMBERS     
LOK SABHA LOK SABHA LOK SABHA LOK SABHA  
2.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
3.   Mohammad Azharuddin 
4.   Dr. Baliram 
5.   Shri P.C. Chacko 
6.   Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.   Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
8.   Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9.   Shri Gurudas Kamat 
10.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
11.   Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
12.   Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
13.   Shri Jagdambika Pal 
14.   Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
15.   Shri C. Rajendran 
16.   Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy 
17.   Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
18.   Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
19.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran) 
20.   Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
21.   Shri Makansingh Solanki 
    
 
 
 

 
iii 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA RAJYA SABHA RAJYA SABHA RAJYA SABHA    
22.   Shri V.P. Singh Badnore 
23.   Shri Shyamal Chakraborty    
24.   Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
25.   Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
26.   @ Hishey Lachungpa 
27.   Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
28.   Shri Mohammad Shafi 
29.   * Shri D.P. Tripathi 
30.   Shri Motilal Vora    
31.   @ Shri Darshan Singh Yadav  
 
    
SECRETARIAT SECRETARIAT SECRETARIAT SECRETARIAT    
1 Shri Brahm Dutt Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N.K.Pandey Additional Director 
3. Shri Manish Kumar Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
*  Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 04.0 5.2012 vice Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
@  Nominated as members of the Committee w.e.f. 15. 05.2012 vice Shri Govindrao Adik and            Shri Veer 
Pal Singh Yadav     
 

 
iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy havin g been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Thirtieth Report on 
Functioning of Central Electricity Regulatory Commi ssion (CERC) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Power. 
2. The Committee had a briefing followed by oral ev idence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Power/CERC on 9 
th  November, 2011 and 12 th  June, 2012 respectively. 
The Committee wish to express their thanks to the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Power /CERC for appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing the 
information, desired by the Committee in connection  with the issues relating to the 
subject.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Com mittee at their sitting held on 
16 
th  August, 2012. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation  for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
August 22, 2012________ 
 
Shravana 31, 1934 (Saka) 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV  
Chairman,  
Standing Committee on Energy  
  
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
PART – I 
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1.1 The Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1 998 paved the way for 
creation of the Regulatory Commissions at the Centr e and in the States. The 
1998 Act was enacted with the objective of distanci ng Government from the tariff 
regulation. The Act provided for Electricity Regulatory Commissions at the Center 
and in the States for rationalization of electricit y tariff, transparent policies 
regarding subsidies etc. Under the provisions of this Act, the Central Government 
constituted the Central Electricity Regulatory Comm ission (CERC) in July, 1998. 
The ERC Act, 1998 has since been replaced by the El ectricity Act, 2003. The 
CERC created under the provisions of the ERC Act, 1 998 has been recognized 
as the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission under the Electricity Act, 2003. 
 
1.1.2 Considering the fact that the Government was the biggest stakeholder, it 
was felt that it would be prudent for the Governmen t to distance itself from 
Regulation in order to instill confidence in the in vestors in terms of providing a 
level playing field.  The Regulatory Commissions we re therefore given all powers 
of Regulation with the larger objective of bringing  in transparency, accountability, 
professional approach to regulate the sector and im partially balancing the interest 
of investors as well as consumers. 
 
1.1.3 The Commission functions in a quasi-judicial manner. It has the powers of 
Civil Courts. It consists of a Chairperson, three f ull time Members and the 
Chairperson of the Central Electricity Authority (C EA) as Ex-officio Member. In 
recognition of the need for a multi-disciplinary ap proach while addressing issues 

 
2 
 
related to independent regulation, the Act prescrib es that the Chairperson and 
Members shall be persons having adequate knowledge and experience in 
engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance or m anagement. It also 
prescribes a broad mix of disciplines to be represe nted in the Commission. The 
Chairperson and Members are appointed by the Presid ent of India on the 
recommendation of a selection committee constituted  by the Central Government 
as prescribed under the Act. The Act also provides for the appointment of a 
Secretary of the Commission whose powers and duties  are defined by the 
Commission.  
 
1.1.4 The Electricity Act, 2003 has significantly e nlarged the spectrum of 
responsibility of CERC. Under the ERC Act, 1998 onl y the tariff fixation powers 
were vested in CERC. The Electricity Act 2003 has e ntrusted the CERC with 
several other responsibilities in addition to the t ariff fixation powers like the 
powers to grant license for inter-State transmissio n, inter-State trading and 
consequently to amend, suspend and revoke the licen ce, the powers to regulate 
the licensees by setting performance standards and ensuring their compliance, 
etc.  
 
  

 
3 
 
II. MANDATE VIS-À-VIS PERFORMANCE OF CERC 
 
1.2.1 The Electricity Act 2003 has widened the mand ate of CERC to make the 
sector modern, vibrant, responsive and productive. As entrusted by the Act the 
Commission has the responsibility to discharge the following functions:-  
a) To regulate the tariff of generating companies o wned or controlled by 
the Central Government; 
b) To regulate the tariff of generating companies o ther than those owned 
or controlled by the Central Government specified i n clause(a), if such 
generating companies enter into or otherwise have a  composite 
scheme for generation and sale of electricity in more than one State; 
c) To regulate the inter-State transmission of elec tricity; 
d) To determine tariff for inter-State transmission  of electricity; 
e) To issue licenses to persons to function as tran smission licensee and 
electricity trader with respect to their inter-State operations;  
f) To adjudicate upon disputes involving generating  companies or 
transmission licensee in regard to matters connecte d with clauses (a)to 
(d) above and to refer any dispute for arbitration;  
g) To levy fees for the purposes of the Act;  
h) To specify Grid Code having regard to Grid Stand ards;  
i) To specify and enforce the standards with respec t to quality, continuity 
and reliability of service by licensees;  
j) To fix the trading margin in the inter-State tra ding of electricity, if 
considered, necessary;  
k) To discharge such other functions as may be assi gned under the Act. 
l) To advise the Central Government on: 
i.  Formulation of National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy; 
ii.  Promotion of competition, efficiency and econo my in the 
activities of the electricity industry;  
iii.  Promotion of investment in electricity indust ry;  
iv.  Any other matter referred to the Central Commi ssion by the 
Central Government. 
 

 
4 
 
1.2.2 According to the Mission Statement of the CER C the Commission intends 
to promote competition, efficiency and economy in b ulk power markets, improve 
the quality of supply, promote investments and advise government on the removal 
of institutional barriers to bridge the demand supp ly gap and thus foster the 
interests of consumers. In pursuit of these objectives the Commission aims to:   
• Improve the operations and management of the regio nal transmission 
systems through Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) , Availability Based 
Tariff (ABT), etc.  
 
• Formulate an efficient tariff setting mechanism, w hich ensures speedy and 
time bound disposal of tariff petitions, promotes c ompetition, economy and 
efficiency in the pricing of bulk power and transmi ssion services and 
ensures least cost investments.  
 
• Facilitate open access in inter-state transmission  
 
• Facilitate inter-state trading  
 
• Promote development of power market 
 
• Improve access to information for all stakeholders .  
 
• Facilitate technological and institutional changes  required for the 
development of competitive markets in bulk power an d transmission 
services.  
 
• Advise on the removal of barriers to entry and exi t for capital and 
management, within the limits of environmental, saf ety and security 
concerns and the existing legislative requirements,  as the first step to the 
creation of competitive markets.  
 
1.2.3 To pursue the mission statement and its goals ’ the Commission has 
informed that it is guided by the following principles: 

 
5 
 
• Protect the Interest of Society including Consumer  Interest and Supplier 
Interest while remaining fair, transparent and neutral to all stakeholders 
• Remain equitable in conflict resolution brought to  it through petitions after 
providing sufficient and equal opportunity to participants to be heard.  
 
• Maintain regulatory certainty by remaining consist ent in views on one hand 
and being open minded to adopting change in the evolving power sector on 
the other  
 
• Adopt a stakeholder consultation and participative  process in formulation of 
its regulations to ensure that the regulation are in line with the expectations 
of stakeholders,  
 
• Ensure optimal allocation of resources in the powe r sector using regulatory 
and market based mechanism  
 
• Encourage sustainable development by promoting ren ewable sources in 
the power generation.  
 
  

 
6 
 
III. CERC ESTABLISHMENT 
 
1.3.1 The CERC consists of a Chairperson, three ful l time Members and the 
Chairperson of the Central Electricity Authority (C EA) as Ex-officio Member. 
According to section 89(1) of the Electricity Act, 2003 the Chairperson or other 
Member shall hold office for a term of five years f rom the date he enters upon his 
office. It is further provided that no Chairperson or Member shall hold office as 
such after he has attained the age of sixty-five ye ars. The Act also provides that 
the salary, allowances and other terms and conditio ns of service of the 
Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Appropriate 
Government.
 
 
1.3.2   The Commission has a very wide mandate under the Act. The efficiency of 
the Commission in discharging its responsibilities depend upon the quality and 
functional specialization of its staff with the req uisite expertise and experience in 
engineering, economics, financial management, accou nting, law, environment, 
management information system and other related ski lls. In addition, the 
Commission intends to utilise the human resources w ith their wide range of 
expertise and experience available within the Gover nment, industry and research 
institutions. Further, the CERC informed that to su pplement the in-house skills 
and experience available to it, the Commission enga ges consultants and for this 
purpose it has framed regulations.  
1.3.3  Sanctioned Strength and Pay Scales of Staff in CERC  as on 23- 11-2011 
are as under: 
Name of the  
post 
Scale of Pay/Pay 
Band 
Grade Pay  Total  
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Secretary PB-4/Rs.37400- Rs.10,000 01 

 
7 
 
67000 
Chief -do- -do- 04 
Joint Chief -do- Rs.8700 05 
Deputy Chief PB-3/Rs.15600-
39100 
Rs.7600 13 
Integrated 
Financial Advisor 
-do- -do- 01 
Assistant 
Secretary 
-do- Rs.6600 02 
Assistant  Chief -do- -do- 16 
Bench Officer -do- -do- 02 
Pr. Pvt Secy -do- -do- 04 
PAO/Senior 
Accounts Officer 
-do- Rs.5400 02 
Private Secretary PB-2/Rs.9300-34800 Rs.4600 05 
Assistant -do- Rs.4200 06 
Personal Assistant -do- -do- 07 
Stenographer PB-1/Rs.5200-20200 Rs.2400 03 
Receptionist cum 
Tele operator 
-do- Rs.1900 01 
Driver -do- Rs.1900 04 
Senior Peon/Peon PB-1/Rs. 5200-20200  
-1S Rs.4440 -7440 
Rs.1800 
Rs. 1300 
04 
Total   80 
 
 
1.3.4  When the Committee desired to know whether the pre sent strength at 
different levels in CERC is sufficient for  smooth functioning of the organization, 
CERC in their written reply has stated as under:  
 
“CERC has been facing difficulties due to inadequat e staff-
strength. When Central Electricity Regulatory Commi ssion was 
set up in 1999 only the bare minimum staff strength was approved 
for it. The   sanctioned staff strength of CERC is 80 only.  Almost 
all of these posts are required to be filled up on deputation basis 
from Govt. Deptts./ Autonomous Bodies/PSUs etc.  So me of 
these   posts are mandatorily to be filled up from amongst the 
officers of the Central Electricity Authority. The pay structure and 
other conditions of service of the employees of CER C are strictly 
based on the pay structures of Central Govt. employ ees. 
However, certain benefits available to Central Govt . Employees 
are not available to CERC officials like Pension, C GHS facility, 
Govt. accommodation etc.    
 
 Independent regulation is an emerging concept and the 
Commission needs manpower with adequate qualificati on and 
skill level to discharge the challenging role entru sted to it under 
the Act. People from Government may not necessarily  have the 

 
8 
 
desired skill sets and in cases where they have, th e various 
constraints highlighted above discourage them from applying for 
posts in CERC.  
 
 People from PSUs or open market may have the requi red 
qualification and skill sets but the existing pay s cales structure on 
Government lines are not adequate to attract them.    
 
 In view of the above, the entire staffing pattern of CERC 
needs to be restructured.  On the one hand the number of posts is 
to be increased in view of the functional needs; on  the other hand 
adequate compensation package is to be introduced t o attract 
people of adequate talent and skill capable of deal ing with the 
challenges ahead. 
 
 The Commission being a knowledge based organisatio n also 
needs flexibility on some other fronts, for instanc e in sending its 
officers abroad for exposure on global practices. 
 
A detailed proposal   is being prepared to take up the matter 
with Ministry of Power.” 
 
1.3.5 The Committee enquired that whether a large number of consultants have 
been engaged by CERC for looking after perennial na ture of work. They also 
desired to know the terms and conditions for their engagement and mechanism to 
ensure that they abide by the conditions of engagem ent. In their written reply 
CERC stated as under:  
 
“The Act has provided for meeting manpower requirem ent of the 
Commission by two means – through regular staffing as per 
regulations framed in this regard with the approval  of the 
Government; and through appointment of consultants. 
 
Constraints on appointment through regular staffing  have been 
highlighted above. Moreover, for specialised tasks the 
Commission needs to look for people in the open market. 
 
So far, only a few Consultants have been engaged by  CERC in 
such cases when the Commission felt the need for av ailing of 
consultancy services which could be more efficientl y performed 
by a Consultant. They have been appointed in accord ance with 
the terms and conditions laid down in CERC(Appointm ent of 
Consultant) Regulation,  2008 and its amendment in 2010. They 
constitute only 10% of the total sanctioned manpower. 

 
9 
 
 
Consultants are engaged in accordance with the prov isions of 
CERC (Appointment of Consultants) Regulation, 2008 and its 
amendment in 2010. Whenever any Consultant is engag ed, an 
agreement is executed which contains all the terms and 
conditions of their engagement. The performance of the 
Consultants is closely monitored by the Commission.  The fees of 
the Consultants are released subject to satisfactory performance.” 
 
Funding of CERC:  
 
1.3.6 Section 99 of Electricity Act, 2003 has  prov ided for establishment of CERC 
Fund comprising the following to meet its expenditure: 
(i) any grants and loans made to the Central Commis sion by the Central 
Government under section 98 of the Act; 
(ii) all fees received by the Central Commission un der the Act; 
(iii) all sums received by the Central Commission f rom other sources as 
may be decided upon by the Central Government from time to time. 
 
 
 1.3.7  When the Committee wanted to know that under which  authority income 
and expenditure of CERC is regulated and whether th e expenditure of CERC is 
scrutinized and audited at regular intervals, they were informed by CERC as 
under:  
 
“The income of CERC i.e. fee receipts are regulated  as per the 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Payment of Fee) 
Regulations amended from time to time. The expendit ure of 
CERC is being regulated as per the CERC Fund (Constitution and 
the manner of application of the Fund) Rules, 2007,  CERC 
(Recruitment, Control and Service Conditions of Sta ff) 
Regulations, 2007, CERC (Indoor/Outdoor Medical Fac ilities) 
Regulations, 2005 and other general instructions of  GoI, as 
applicable. 
 
Under the Section 100 of the Electricity Act, 2003 and as per the 
CERC fund rules, the Accounts and transactions of t he 
Commission are being audited by the Comptroller and  Auditor-
General of India (C&AG) regularly from the year 200 4-05 and 
annual accounts of the Commission upto FY 2009-10 duly audited 
by C&AG were placed before the both houses of Parli ament.  The 
Annual Accounts for the year 2010-11 along with Aud it Report of 
C&AG is being placed before the both houses of Parliament.” 

 
10 
 
 
1.3.8  Explaining the accountability and independent func tioning of CERC, the 
Chairman, CERC deposed before the Committee as under: 
“We are accountable to the Parliament. That is why the role of the 
Committee becomes very important: we get this oppor tunity to 
discuss what we are doing. Under the law, our repor ts are laid on 
the Table of Parliament. That is the accountability  that we are 
talking about. The new Act has also given us financ ial freedom. We 
are not dependent on Government funding. Since we i ssue 
licences, we levy licence fees and also we collect hearing fees. So, 
you will find that in the last two years we have be en taking a token 
money of Rs.1 lakh from the Central Government. All  our 
expenditure is managed through our own funds.” 
   
1.3.9 In reply to a query about the apprehension regarding establishment 
of Regulatory Bodies being burden on the exchequer,  the Secretary, the 
Ministry of Power defending the existence of CERC stated as under:  
 “If, you look at the cost actually incurred at the  time of setting 
up of the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions,  we also 
would have gone through the likely cost, particular ly, the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission.  Then, you try t o estimate the 
cost.  So, I would not think that the costs are very high.  The costs 
are that what we actually require to incur to develop this sector.   
 As far as the duplication is concerned, there was a time 
when Government was fixing tariffs and so on.  That  job has been 
given to the Central Electricity Regulatory Commiss ion (CERC) or 
to the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SE RC).  Now, 
what we see is that what they are doing today is fa r more than 
what was done before.  It may be that to begin with  some part of 
Government work was hived off and given to them.  B ut what 
CERC or SERCs do today is far beyond that what the 
Government was doing.  So, to that extent, it could  have started 
with some duplication.  Today, there is nothing at all.  What they 
are doing, the Government does not do.”
   
 
1.3.10  When the Committee desired to know as to how the 
existence of CERC has benefitted the common man in getting adequate 
reliable power at reasonable rates, the Secretary, the Ministry of Power, 
stated as below:  

 
11 
 
 “You need to have a much bigger development in the  power 
sector.  It was identified that only the Central PS Us or the State 
generation companies cannot fulfil the needs of the  country.  It 
was important that we bring in the private sector.  In 1991, we 
made an attempt to bring in the private sector thro ugh 
liberalisation.  It did not happen.  The reason for  it not happening 
was that there was no credible regulatory mechanism , which will 
indicate to a developer that he is likely to recover his cost.  That is 
why, since 2003 there has been a big spurt in setti ng up of the 
private sector capacity in the power sector.  All t his is an attempt 
to help the people of the country.  You need more p ower and you 
have to get it through some way.  If, you feel that  public sector 
cannot do it, then private sector will come in.  Ho w do you bring in 
the private sector?  All this has been done to faci litate the entry of 
private sector.  He has mentioned about the finding  of tariff 
through competition.  Earlier, it was cost-plus but  even there the 
feeling was that whatever you had in terms of ineff iciency of the 
public sector, would actually get pass through, may  be less and 
may be more.  Through discovering tariff in a compe titive mode, 
you are finding lower tariffs.  This should definit ely help the 
common man.  We have to see the broad approach.  To day, we 
might not be able to exactly compute the costs and benefits. But 
when we see the sector developing, it had because o f the stability 
of the Commissions. The faith people have is that t here would be 
a transparent non-interference mechanism to fix the tariffs.” 
  

 
12 
 
IV FORM OF REGULATORS (FOR)  
1.4.1 The Forum of Regulators (FOR) was constituted  vide the Ministry of Power 
Notification dated 16 th  February, 2005 in pursuance of the provision under  section 
166(2) of the EA, 2003 with the primary objective o f harmonization of regulation in 
the power sector.  The Forum consists of Chairperson of CERC and Chairpersons 
of SERCs. The Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperso n of the Forum. The 
Central Government has made the following rules for Forum of Regulators.  
 
1.4.2 The Forum shall discharge the following funct ions, namely:-  
 
/head2right analysis of the tariff orders and other orders of the Central Commission 
and State Commissions, and compilation of data aris ing out of the said 
orders, especially highlighting the efficiency impr ovements of the 
utilities;  
/head2right harmonization of regulation in power sector;  
/head2right laying of standards of performance of licensees as  required under the 
Act; 
/head2right sharing of information among the members of the Fo rum on various 
issues of common interest and also of common approach; 
/head2right undertaking research work in-house or through outs ourcing on issues 
relevant to power sector regulation;  
/head2right evolving measures for protection of interest of co nsumers and 
promotion of efficiency, economy and competition in power sector; and  
/head2right Such other functions as the Central Government may  assign to it from 
time to time. 
 
 
Funding of Forum of Regulators  
 
1.4.3 THE FORUM OF REGULATORS RULES, 2005 notified by the Ministry of 
Power vide Gazette notification G.S.R. 75(E) dated 16 th  February, 2005 inter-alia 
provide that the Central Commission may take financ ial contributions from the 
State Commissions for carrying out the activities o f the Forum. Accordingly, 

 
13 
 
annual subscription is being collected from SERCs a nd CERC for the activities of 
Forum. The Ministry of Power has also transferred c orpus of Rs.3.75 crores and 
the interest earned on same is also being utilized for the activities of Forum. 
During the 11th Plan period Forum has also been giv en plan assistance for the 
capacity building and consultancy.  
 
 1.4.4 Head-Wise details of Annual Income and Expen diture for the Years 2006-
2007 to 2010-2011 (cash basis) 
(Amount in 
Rs. crore)    
Sl. 
NO.  
YEAR                 
2006-
2007  
YEAR                 
2007-
2008  
YEAR                 
2008-
2009  
YEAR                 
2009-
2010  
YEAR                 
2010-
2011  
 Heads of Income      
1. Grants/ Subsidies 5.65  6.00  7.27  4.00  0.00  
2. Fee/ Subscription 6.18  6.53  9.27  21.01  31.72  
3. Interest Earned 0.14  1.57  0.93  0.18  4.98  
4. Other Income 0.03  0.03  0.04  0.01  0.00  
 Total (A) 12.01  14.12  17.50  25.19  36.70  
       
 Heads of Expenditure      
1. Salary 2.20  2.31  3.82  6.43  5.96  
2. Domestic Travelling 
Expenses (DTE) 0.14 
 0.13  0.21  0.49  0.54  
3. Foreign Travelling 
Expenses (FTE) 0.23 
 0.08  0.10  0.31  0.30  
4. Other Charges  0.04  0.06  0.11  0.22  0.30  
5. Professional Fee (PFS) 0.10  0.14  0.71  4.04  5.94  
6. Rent, Rates & Taxes (RRT) 3.54  8.56  6.73  5.32  7.85  
7. RIMS & IT (RIMS) 0.00  0.00  0.00  0.08  1.03  
8. Office Expenses (OE) 0.92  3.89  3.27  2.74  3.84  
 TOTAL (B) 7.17  15.17  14.96  19.64  25.77  
 
 
 1.4.5 Explaining the relation between CERC and SERCs and the role of FOR, 
the Secretary, the Ministry of Power during the oral evidence stated as under:  
 
“CERC is not the appellate or the regulatory author ity. He is not 
the monitor for those Regulatory Commissions (SERCs ).  The 
only thing that he exercises is that he has a body where he has all 
of them together and tries to bring them on common platform with 
regard to several regulations. That is one of the p oints that I 
would like to mention. On the regulation side, what  one attempts 

 
14 
 
through the FOR is to bring about model regulations which can be 
adopted by the Regulatory Commissions. The regulati ons 
adopted by the Regulatory Commissions become the standard for 
measurement.  If there is any Commission which is d eparting 
from that regulation, he is subject to challenge.  That is one thing 
which we have been working on for some time. On dif ferent 
aspect, common regulations have been framed and regulators are 
adopting them.  In any case if there is a violation  of regulation 
made by that regulator, then the aggrieved party wi ll have to go 
and appeal.  That is the legal process.  He will ha ve to go to the 
APTEL to appeal against that.  But in the absence o f a regulation 
decided upon by that regulator, there will be no ya rdstick like how 
you mentioned.  So, this is what one is attempting to do.  We 
have done that in terms of tariff rationalisation.  A lot of things 
have also been done.  We talked about open access. In the 
distribution side also, we went through model regul ations to 
ensure that all the regulators fall on the same sid e of the 
regulation.  They have a uniform regulation which t hey will adopt 
with that particular standard.  This is one thing t hat has been 
done.”  
 
1.4.6  On being desirous to know about the manner in whic h FOR serve as an 
instrument for coordination between CERC and SERCs towards effective 
implementations of the regulations for the ultimate  benefit to the consumers, the 
Committee was informed by CERC as under: 
 
“FOR provides a platform for the regulators at the Centre and 
state level to exchange ideas and best practices. I ssues of 
importance facing the sector (at inter-state level or intra-state 
level) are discussed and consensus is evolved in FOR. 
 
In order to encourage uniformity of regulations amo ng SERCs, 
the Forum has evolved several Model Regulations. Th ese help 
bring regulatory certainty in the sector. Some of t he important 
Model Regulations are mentioned below:  
 
• Model Regulations for Multi Year Distribution Tariff 
• Model Regulations for Protection of Consumer Interest 
• Model Terms and Conditions of Intra-State Open Access 
Regulations 
• Model DSM Regulation for SERCs 
• Model Regulation for SERCs for Renewable Energy 
Certificate (REC) Framework 
• Model Regulation on Standards of Performance for 
Distribution Licensees 
• Model Supply Code” 

 
15 
 
 
 
1.4.7 When asked by the Committee about the intervention of FOR in issues 
relating to over-drawl of electricity by States, ta riff fixation in distribution sector 
and promotion of open access have been taken up at FOR, it was stated as 
under:  
 
“FOR interventions on the three issues are summarized below: 
 
• Over-drawal of Power from the Grid: 
Regarding over-drawal of power, the recommendation made by 
the Standing committee on Energy regarding addition al UI 
charges was discussed in FOR meeting. The inclusion  of 
additional Unscheduled Interchange (UI) charge impo sed on the 
utilities under CERC’s UI Regulation for over-drawa l during the 
time blocks when frequency was below 49.2 Hz was di scussed. It 
was decided that the SERCs should not allow the sam e in the 
Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR). 
 
• Tariff Fixation in Distribution sector: 
Tariff revision and tariff adequacy are the primary  issues with 
respect to the financial viability of Distribution companies. The 
financial viability of State Distribution has been deliberated at 
length in various meeting of FOR.  
 
In this regard the Forum of Regulator conducted a s tudy – 
Assessment of Financial viability of Discoms which analysed the 
tariff orders of various State commissions and the reasons for 
increasing revenue gap in state utilities. The study brought out the 
following facts: 
 
1. Barring a few states, tariffs have not been incr easing vis 
à-vis the increase witnessed in the cost of supply.  
2. Requirement of increase in tariff is primarily o n account 
of increase in power purchase cost and certain inflationary 
impact on other input costs. 
3.  Estimation of distribution loss level remains a  concern 
considering the large quantum of un-metered sales to 
agriculture consumers in certain states. 
4. Time lag in tariff change (including true-up exe rcise) is 
impacting the finances of the utility 
5. A few SERCs have created regulatory asset primar ily to 
contain the tariff increase. 
 

 
16 
 
Further, Model Tariff Regulations have been framed to address 
the above issues. 
 
Highlighting the facts in the study report of FOR, Ministry of 
Power wrote a letter to the Appellate Tribunal raising the issues of 
tariff revisions and tariff adequacy. Subsequently,  the Appellate 
Tribunal (APTEL) issued a suo motu order dated 4th February, 
2011 asking all State Commission /Joint Commissions to send the 
status report with reference to the determination o f annual 
revenue requirement/ tariff for all the years from the date of the 
constitution of the Commission. The status report w as directed to 
be compiled by Forum of Regulators secretariat.  
 
The judgment on the aforesaid petition filed with A ppellate 
Tribunal was given on 11 
th  Nov 2011 which directs all State 
Commissions to revise tariffs every fiscal year and  initiate suo 
motu hearings on tariffs in case the Discoms have n ot filed for 
tariff revision. 
 
• Promotion of Open Access: 
FOR undertook a study on Open Access: Theory and Pr actice 
which recommended the standard practices that need to be 
followed to remove the hurdles to open access. Sali ent points of 
the study which highlight the hurdles and possible solutions to 
implementation of Open Access are: 
 
• Independence of SLDC  
- SLDC not to report to transmission or trading 
licensee.  
- Reporting requirements could be on lines of   Stat e 
Electoral Officer under Election Commission.  
 
• Operation of SLDC 
- with  STU as a subsidiary of transmission utility  as 
stop-gap arrangement; 
- by a separate entity as soon as possible 
 
• State Governments be advised to phase out single 
buyer model. 
• A model scheme for technological upgradation of 
SLDCs recommended.  
• Urgent need of financial autonomy to SLDCs. 
- CERC to make regulations for RLDCs 
- Similar pattern to be adopted by SERCs for LDCs. 
 

 
17 
 
• Display of information on OA charges in the websi tes 
of SERC/FOR for  transparency and to enable 
informed decision on open access.  
Standby arrangement for open access consumers  
- by levying  retail tariff as applicable for respec tive 
consumer categories only for the period during whic h 
such standby support is requested. 
• The cross-subsidy surcharge needs to be calculate d 
as per the formula given in the Tariff Policy unles s there are 
valid reasons for deviation.  
 
Subsequently, model regulations on distribution ope n access 
were evolved by the Forum. The model seeks to addre ss several 
critical issues like processes and procedures, noda l agencies for 
seeking open access, various charges including tran smission and 
wheeling charges and surcharge, imbalance settlement, metering, 
billing etc. This Ministry has also written to Stat es/SERCs for 
coming out with similar regulations.”  
 
1.4.8 The Electricity Act, 2003 empowers the State/ Joint Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs / JERCs) to fix tariffs for cons umers. The Act also requires 
under section 61 that the SERCs while fixing the ta riff should be guided by the 
factors inter-alia that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity 
and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner spe cified by the Appropriate 
Commission. Section 63 of the Act provides for tari ff determination through 
competitive bidding.  
  
1.4.9 The Committee was informed that one of the fu nctions of FOR includes 
harmonization of regulations. Model Tariff Regulati ons have been formulated by 
Forum of Regulators to inter alia  address the major issues responsible for 
financial distress of the distribution companies. The Model Tariff Regulations have 
been designed to arrive at a set of uniform practic es that the various State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions could adopt. The  major objective of these 
model regulations is to standardize the process of determination of tariff for a 
distribution utility, which smoothens out the cost pass through in retail tariff 
appropriately. 
 
 

 
18 
 
1.4.10   Regarding financial health of the Discoms, the Ch airman, CERC, 
during the oral evidence stated as under:  
“As you are aware, recently, the 13 th  Finance Commission came 
out with startling figures. The losses of the SEBs,  which are now 
the Discoms, have mounted up to Rs.70,000 crore. Th eir financial 
health is poor. It appears that it has gone back to  where we 
started in 1998. We took up this issue. The Secreta ry, Power also 
had attended our FOR meeting. We framed draft tariff regulations. 
The idea was that there has to be a regular tariff revision at the 
State level.” 
 
1.4.11  T he Committee pointed out about poor financial healt h of 
Discoms and desired to know the steps taken by CERC  and FOR to 
address the issue. The Secretary, Ministry of Power stated as under:  
“At this distance, there was a mention of the pligh t of the 
Electricity Boards and the financial difficulties t hey are in, what 
they were in 2001 and what they are today. So, from  the point of 
view of the Ministry of Power, what we are trying t o do is, the 
Electricity Commission should ensure that tariff is  rationalised.  
We are not saying that tariff should be increased.  Tariff should be 
rationalised. Tariff rationalisation would also tak e into account the 
attempt to bring down the losses. These are differe nt things that 
the Regulatory Commissions are expected to do. They also set up 
a trajectory for ensuring that the losses come down . An extremely 
important aspect here has been the lack of rational isation of tariff 
for many years. There are State Commissions which h ave not 
rationalised tariff for seven to eight years and th ere, even if they 
had taken up any kind of rationalisation exercise, it had been 
more of a formality.  All this has contributed to t he Electricity 
Boards coming back to the situation which they were  in 2001 and 
probably getting worse… Now, if you try to look as how these 
Commissions are functioning, in a country where 26 Commissions 
are functioning, it will be very difficult to say who is doing how. But 
you can also definitely see certain trends.  Certai n Commissions 
have done well.  They have been able to administer or regulate 
their distribution companies and they were able to bring them out 
into much healthier organisations.  There are some States where 
nothing much is happening.”   
 
   

 
19 
 
V TARIFF REGULATION  
1.5.1 Section 62 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provi des that t he Appropriate 
Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with provisions of this Act for:  
  (a)  supply of electricity by a generating compan y to a distribution licensee:  
Provided  that the Appropriate  Commission may, in case of  shortage of 
supply  of electricity, fix  the minimum  and maxim um  ceiling of tariff for 
sale or  purchase  of electricity in pursuance of a n agreement, entered into 
between  a generating  company and a licensee  or b etween  licensees,  
for a period not  exceeding  one year  to ensure re asonable  prices of 
electricity; 
(b) transmission of electricity ;  
(c) wheeling of electricity;   
(d) retail sale of electricity.  
 
Process and Principles of Tariff Determination 
 
 
1.5.2 Prior to the creation of CERC, the tariff of Central generating companies 
namely NTPC, NHPC, NLC and NEEPCO were being determ ined by the 
Government of India through project specific notifi cations. The Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission came into existence in July, 1998 under the Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998. The determination of tariff inter-alia of Central 
generating companies was entrusted to CERC. In order to discharge this task, the 
Commission was required to finalize terms & conditi ons of tariff. After going 
through transparent process of hearing all stakehol ders, the Commission finalized 
and notified Terms & Conditions of tariff initially  for a three-year period i.e. 2001-
04 in March 2001.  
 
1.5.3 After the enactment of the Electricity Act, 2 003 (which repealed inter-alia  
the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998) t he Commission notified new 

 
20 
 
Terms & Conditions of tariff for a further five yea r period i.e. 2004-09 in March 
2004. The above notifications provide for determination of generation tariff station-
wise and transmission tariff line or system-wise. The tariff is determined as per the 
terms & conditions of tariff as applicable from time to time. The terms & conditions 
contain the financial norms and technical norms.  
 
1.5.4 The tariff is usually called the cost plus ta riff because the capital cost of the 
project is the starting point for tariff calculations. It is also known as regulated tariff 
because other than actual capital expenditure, most  of the financial & technical 
parameters adopted for tariff are normative and not  actual. The variable charges 
of thermal stations are corrected for fuel price va riation as per monthly weighted 
average price and heat value of fuel. The tariff ca lculations are quite elaborate, as 
various elements going into the tariff are computed  individually to arrive at the full 
tariff. The tariff is different for each generating  station depending on its admitted 
capital cost, base fuel price and gross calorific v alue 
 and applicable norms of 
efficient operation. The exercise is time consuming  but nevertheless essential to 
ensure that the utilities function in an efficient and economic manner and do not 
misuse their dominant position to extract high prices from the buying utilities.  
 
1.5.5 Explaining the relation between Multi Year Ta riff (MYT) and Availability 
Based Tariff (ABT), the CERC stated that MYT implie s that the various financial 
and operational norms specified by the Commission w ould remain valid and un-
changed during the control period (presently 5 year s) of the MYT regime. For 
instance, if the norms of availability have been fi xed at 85%, such norms will 
remain valid for the entire control period (present ly 2009-14). ABT is a tariff 
principle – the principle of recovery of fixed cost  based on the achievement target 

 
21 
 
availability. This principle has been adopted by th e Commission for adoption in 
the MYT period since its introduction. Thus the ABT  principles are like any other 
principles which remain in force during the currenc y of the MYT control period. 
Normally the terms and condition of tariff for the five year period remain same but 
in some exceptional circumstances, the same may be reviewed also. 
 
1.5.6 Further, in MYT the tariff principles and the ir application generally remain 
same during the tariff period, the annual fixed cha rges and the energy charges do 
not remain static and vary from year to year and mo nth to month respectively on 
account of inflation and increase in O&M cost, chan ges in the interest rates and 
due to variation in quality and price of fuel. 
 
1.5.7 The role of CERC in tariff fixation under the  Electricity Act, 2003 is 
governed by the provisions of Section 79 read with sections 61 and 62 of the Act 
which inter-alia provides that the Central Commissi on shall discharge  the 
following functions, namely:-  
  
(a) to regulate the tariff of generating companies  owned or controlled 
by the Central Government; 
 
(b) to regulate the tariff of generating companies  other than those 
owned or controlled by the Central Government speci fied in clause 
(a), if such generating companies enter into or oth erwise have a 
composite scheme for generation and sale of electricity in more than 
one State; 
 
(c) to regulate the inter-State transmission  of el ectricity ; 
 
 
 

 
22 
 
1.5.8 In reply to a specific query of the Committee regar ding scope of tariff 
fixation by CERC, they were informed as under:  
  
“The tariff is determined as per the terms & condit ions of tariff as 
applicable from  time to time. The terms & conditio ns contain 
the financial norms and technical norms. The scope of tariff 
fixation by CERC covers determination of following  components: 
(1) Thermal generating station: Fixation of capacit y charge (for 
recovery of annual fixed cost) and energy charge (f or recovery of 
primary fuel cost and limestone cost where applicable). 
(2) Hydro generating station: Fixation of capacity charge and 
energy charge, for recovery of annual fixed cost th rough the two 
charges. 
(3) Inter-State transmission system: Fixation of tr ansmission 
charge for recovery of annual fixed cost. 
(4) Commission sets the principles for rewarding pe rformance 
through incentive/ disincentive scheme under Tariff  Regulation 
keeping in view the interest of consumers by settin g operating 
norms.” 
 
1.5.9 The structure of Tariff Fixation covers follo wing Financial and Technical 
norms: 
1) Capital Cost 
 Debt: Equity Ratio 
 Initial Spares 
            Additional Capital Expenditure 
            R&M Expenditure 
2) Annual Fixed Cost 
 Return on equity; 
 Interest on loan capital; 
 Depreciation;   
 Interest on working capital; 
 Operation and maintenance expenses; 
 Cost of secondary fuel oil (for coal-based and 
lignite stations only); 
 Special allowance in lieu of R&M 
3) Technical Norms 
 Normative Annual Plant Availability Factor 
 Gross Station Heat Rate 
 Secondary fuel oil consumption 
 Auxiliary Energy Consumption 
  

 
23 
 
 1.5.10  When the Committee asked that as to how far the CER C has been 
successful in bringing down the prices of electrici ty, CERC in their written reply 
have stated as under:  
 
“The Central Commission in exercise of its powers u nder section 
79 read with sections 61 and 62 of the Act determin es the tariff of 
bulk power supply by the generating companies to St ate Utilities/ 
Distribution Companies based on the CERC "Terms & 
Conditions" of tariff Regulations.  
  
The Central Commission, as a regulatory philosophy,  has been 
providing incentives for efficiency gains and penal izing under-
performing stations by providing disincentive if they perform below 
the targeted level. In 2009-14 tariff regulations a lso the 
Commission has tightened the operational norms base d on the 
actual past performance while keeping rooms for eff iciency gains. 
It can be seen that the Central Commission has ende avoured to 
safeguard the interest of the consumers while remai ning fair to 
the generators for getting their reasonable return on their 
investment. 
 
Under the Availability  Based Tariff (ABT), the  an nual bulk power 
tariff for supply of electricity from a generating station as 
determined by the  Central Commission comprises the  following 
two components :- 
(i) Annual Fixed  Charges (AFC) 
(ii) Energy Charge. 
  
The Annual Fixed Charge is determined based on the admitted 
capital cost as on the date of commercial operation  (COD) and 
consists of Return on Equity (RoE),  Interest on Loan capital (IoL), 
Depreciation, Interest on working capital, Operatio n and 
maintenance expenses, Cost of secondary fuel oil (i n case of coal 
& lignite based stations), etc. . 
  
The fixed charges are payable based on the availabi lity of the 
station. Each beneficiary pays the fixed charges co rresponding to 
the availability and in proportion to their allocat ion of power from 
the station.   
  
The Energy Charges for recovery of fuel cost depend s upon the 
scheduled generation, gross station heat rate, auxi liary energy 
consumption, gross calorific value of fuel and the price of fuel. 
  

 
24 
 
Energy Charge Rate in paisa/ kWh is calculated base d on the 
specified norms and considering actual heat value ( GCV) and 
prices of fuel on month to month basis. The energy charges are 
payable based on the power scheduled from the stati on. The 
beneficiaries may prefer their drawal schedule on t he basis of 
merit order of the stations depending upon the energy charges.  
 
The Central Commission does not have any control ov er the 
quality and price of fuel used for power generation  and the fuel 
prices are passed-through in tariff.  
  
As a result of bringing further improvement in the operation norms 
of heat rate, auxiliary power consumption, and spec ific fuel oil 
consumption, there should be reduction in the energ y charges, 
provided fuel price and the Gross Calorific Value ( GCV) of fuel 
remains same. However, in actual practice, there is  deterioration 
in the GCV and increase in the prices of fuel viz. coal / lignite / 
gas / RLNG and liquid fuel. Further, the generating stations based 
on coal are required to blend imported coal due to shortage of 
domestic coal. This also leads to increase in price s of fuel and 
corresponding increase in the energy charges despit e 
improvement in operation norms.”   
 
1.5.11  There was no concept of competitive bidding  or tariff discovery 
through competitive bidding under the 1948 Act.  El ectricity Act, 2003 has brought 
in the concept of tariff discovery through competit ive bidding process and the 
Commission is required to adopt the tariff so disco vered. As per section 63 of the 
Act, the CERC has to adopt the tariff if such tarif f has been determined by the 
competitive bidding process in accordance with the guidelines framed by the 
Central Government in this regard. 
 
1.5.12  On being enquired whether any study has bee n carried out to find 
out which method discovers cheaper rate, competitiv e bidding or cost plus 
approach, it was informed that in 2011, CERC had ca rried out a study of 14 
competitively bid power plants with commercial date  of operation between 2011-
2014, comparing the bids with cost plus approach.  The prices under cost plus 

 
25 
 
approach were found higher in respect of 11 of the 14 projects.   Two plants in 
Maharashtra and one plant in MP were the cases in w hich competitive bids were 
found higher than cost plus approach. It was conclu ded that in general, 
competitive bid can lead to lower tariff. However, these were levelized prices and 
actual payment over years depends on bid structure (particularly proportion of 
variable part in the tariff), and how the parameters really vary in future. 
 
1.5.13  In reply to a specific question of the Committee th at 85% tie up of 
power through competitive bidding will not stall th e process of development of 
thermal power projects by private developers, it was stated as under: 
“The provision of 85% tie up of private power throu gh competitive 
bidding is to ensure availability of power to the d istribution 
licensee at a relatively cheaper rate in power shor tage condition. 
The 85% tie up of power would not stall the develop ment of 
thermal power stations by the project developers be cause by this, 
the developer would be assured of the customer for his 85% 
output and balance 15% power could be sold by him b ased upon 
prevailing power merchant rate.” 
  

 
26 
 
VI GRID DISCIPLINE & TRANSMISSION  
 1.6.1 For smooth conveyance of electricity across States, it is necessary to have 
a robust Inter-State Transmission System. To achiev e this, the Electricity Act, 
2003 has entrusted CERC with the responsibility of regulating Inter-State 
Transmission System and also notifying Grid Code.    
 1.6.2 CERC stated that in discharge of above menti oned responsibility, they 
have taken the following major initiatives:  
  “CERC issued the revised Regulation on Indian Ele ctricity Grid 
Code (IEGC) in April, 2010.  IEGC brings together a  single set of 
technical rules, encompassing all the utilities con nected to or using 
the Inter-State Transmission System.  It lays down the rules, 
guidelines and standards to be followed by the vari ous agencies 
and participants in the system to plan, develop, ma intain and 
operate the power system in the most efficient, rel iable, economic 
and secure manner, while facilitating healthy compe tition in the 
generation of supply of electricity”. 
 1.6.3 In respect of regulation for Unscheduled Int erchange (UI) it was informed 
that the Commission had introduced the concept of a vailability based tariff (ABT) 
which primarily has two components, namely fixed co st and variable cost.  Fixed 
cost is allowed to be recovered on the basis of a n ormative plant availability factor 
determined by CERC whereas recovery of variable cha rges is linked to achieving 
operational norms such as station efficiency in ter ms of heat rate and auxiliary 
consumption specified by CERC.  In the case of hydr o-stations, there is no fuel 
component and the Average Fixed Cost is notionally divided into capacity charge 
and variable charge.  The full recovery of capacity  charge for a hydro generating 
station is linked to achieving target availability corresponding to normative annual 
plant availability factor (NAPAF). 

 
27 
 
1.6.4 Under Availability Based Tariff (ABT) a gener ator is allowed to recover the 
fixed cost only if it is able to make its capacity available for use.  The energy 
charge is recoverable as per the pre-committed sche dule of supply.  This 
mechanism also provides for a charge of Unscheduled  Interchange (UI) for 
supply and drawal of energy in variation from pre-committed schedule.  
 
1.6.5 The States / DISCOMs are entitled to draw ele ctricity from the grid 
equivalent to the generation from the generating st ations owned by them or with 
which they have PPA. However, since the grid is int erconnected, States, and 
DISCOMs can draw power over and above their entitlement.  
 
1.6.6 When the generation of power is equal to draw al of power from the grid, 
the frequency would remain at an ideal 50 Hz.  When  some States draw more 
than their entitlement from the grid they deprive other States from their share, also 
resulting in lowering of frequency and endangering the grid security. 
 
1.6.7 Low frequency also causes damage to various e quipments connected to 
the grid and at very low levels the grid may also s uffer a break down which 
causes huge amount of tangible and intangible losse s.   Overdraw from the grid is 
thus a serious problem and to address this problem a commercial mechanism of 
UI charges (unscheduled interchanges charges) has b een devised by the CERC 
which discourages States/DISCOMS from  overdrawing power in a shortage 
condition and disincentivises generators from gener ating less than their schedule 
in a shortage condition. This commercial mechanism aims to restore the 
frequency to the normal frequency of 50Hz.  
 

 
28 
 
1.6.8 UI charges are imposed when a generator gener ates less than the 
schedule thereby decreasing the frequency or when a  beneficiary overdraws 
power thereby decreasing the frequency.  The UI cha rges are charged for 
overdrawal of power at rates which are linked to th e frequency. At certain high 
frequency level (50.2 Hz and above), there are no charges for overdrawal.  The UI 
charges increase per unit as the frequency decrease s and reach the highest level 
at certain thresh hold level  (below 49.5 Hz). When  the frequency is low it is 
important to encourage greater generation of power and to discourage overdrawal 
of power.  A high UI rate (payable by the overdrawer and payable to the generator 
for generation greater than the schedule or payable  to the beneficiary drawing 
less than his entitlement) would encourage high cos t generating stations to come 
on stream and discourage overdrawing entities from overdrawing from the already 
low frequency grid. 
 
1.6.9 UI charges are thus a commercial mechanism to  maintain grid discipline. 
They are not payable if the beneficiary maintains i t’s drawal of electricity 
consistent with its entitlement and the schedule given by them.  
 
1.6.10  The Chairman, CERC, during the oral evidence before  the 
Committee, has elucidated the problem of grid indiscipline as under:  
 
“Grid discipline... this is very important in the I ndian context. You 
must have experienced that if you go to the remote rural areas, the 
voltages drop; you find that a tube light is not wo rking. When you 
have shortage of electricity, which is a reality, t he tendency is that 
when you do not have contracted power, the unpleasa nt alternative 
is that you have to go for load shedding or you ten d to overdraw. If 
you overdraw, that affects the frequency. If you go  to any 
developed country, you will find that the frequency  of 50/60 Hz is 
maintained. Here, in the Indian context, this is a big problem. This 
has been addressed through a commercial mechanism. We do not 
have that option like the electricity company has –  if you have the 
10 KW sanctioned load and if you start using 20 KW, they will come 
and disconnect. It is not possible. If you find that if a particular State 

 
29 
 
is overdrawing, the only thing you can do is to give a signal which is 
given through an unscheduled interchange mechanism.  We keep 
issuing warning messages. A system operator plays a  very 
important role. We had recommended that the Governm ent should 
create a subsidiary of the Power Grid Corporation. Otherwise, this 
body was a part of that. Now it is a subsidiary; th e idea is that this 
will become independent. A similar thing has to hap pen in the 
States. In fact, you will find that in the last 2-3  years, the frequency 
has stabilized and we are approaching a stable stag e. But still we 
have persistent shortages and this creates a proble m. So, we have 
to take action.”     
 
1.6.11  When the Committee desired to know the provisions f or elimination 
of gaming to ensure that the UI does not result in short supply and non supply to 
pre-committed schedule, it was informed by the CERC as under:  
  
“The gaming under UI regulation means an intentiona l mis-
declaration of declared capacity by any generating station or 
seller to make an undue commercial gain through UI charges. 
The Commission may, either suo-moto or on a petitio n made by 
RLDC, initiates proceedings against any generating company or 
seller on charges of gaming and if required, may or der an inquiry 
in such manner as decided by the Commission. When t he charge 
of gaming is established in the above inquiry, the Commission 
may, without prejudice to any other action under th e Act or 
regulations there under, disallow any unscheduled i nterchange 
charges received by such generating company or the seller during 
the period of such gaming. In fact there is commercial disincentive 
to upset the pre-committed schedule by overdrawing in deficit 
conditions. The deviations from schedules as mentio ned above 
prevent short supply or no supply to a utility by i mposing a harsh 
penalty of 40% additional charge to an overdrawing utility over the 
UI charge when frequency is below 49.5Hz (i.e. Rs 8 .73 + Rs 
3.49 = Rs 12.22 per unit) and penalty of 100% over the UI charge, 
when the frequency is below 49.0Hz (i.e. Rs 8.73 +R s 8.73 = Rs 
17.46 per unit).” 
  
1.6.12  When the Committee enquired that how far th e provision of 
imposing UI charges has proved to be successful in enforcing grid discipline it 
was stated by CERC that imposition of UI charges ha s resulted in substantial 
improvement in the frequency profile in the grid th rough successful enforcement 
of grid discipline. The grid frequency which used t o operate at frequency below 

 
30 
 
49.0Hz most of the time prior to introduction of UI  commercial mechanism now 
operates most of the time above 49.5Hz. This is the  reason that Commission 
could in stages, narrow down the operating grid fre quency range from 49.2Hz – 
50.3Hz to 49.5Hz – 50.2Hz with effect from 03.05.2010.  
     
1.6.13  The CERC furnished the following details ab out the Grid Frequency 
Status: 
 
Year  
 
Below 
49.2Hz  
(% of 
times)  
Between 
49.2-
+50.3Hz 
(% of times)  
Above 
50.3Hz 
(% of 
times) 
Average 
Frequency  
Max. 
Freq. 
Min. 
Freq. 
2009 -10  
NEW Grid  8.98 89.58 1.44  50.74 48.73 
SR Grid  4.73 94.07 1.20  50.78 48.61 
2010 -11(upto October 2010)  
NEW Grid  11.50 82.66 5.84 49.85 50.69 48.87 
SR Grid  8.68 85.77 5.55 49.80 50.77 48.84 
2011 -12  
NEW Grid  7.54 89.10 3.36 49.86 50.68 48.85 
SR Grid  6.11 91.76 2.13 49.80 50.70 48.95 
 
 
1.6.14  The Committee were further informed that as  a result of 
enforcement of grid discipline through UI commercia l mechanism, there has been 
no major grid failure in any region since January, 2001. It can be seen that 
despite increase in UI volumes there has been reduc tion in average UI prices 
indicative of improved grid discipline and improved grid frequency profile. 
 
1.6.15   On being desirous to know whether it was possible to dispense with 
provisions of UI charges to enforce the scheduled pattern of supply and drawal of 
electricity strictly to ensure grid discipline and if not, what were the other options, 
the Committee were informed by the CERC as under:  
 

 
31 
 
“It is difficult for a State to maintain its schedu le exactly in an A.C. 
connected grid due to fluctuation of consumer load.  The option of 
dispensing with UI provisions could be considered w hen 
generation is in excess of demand. i.e. there are a dequate 
reserves of generation. When that happens ancillary  services can 
be provided by the system operator. The other optio n is to 
introduce ancillary services to be provided by the system 
operator. A petition of National Load Dispatch Cent re (NLDC) for 
the introduction of ancillary market is before the Commission.”  
 
 
 1.6.16  When the Committee enquired about the recov ery of penalties 
imposed by CERC for grid indiscipline, it was state d that the power given to the 
Commission under the Act is limited with regard to the penalties for grid discipline. 
The Commission has only been given the power under section 142 of the Act to 
impose penalty of an amount of Rs.1 lakh for each i nstance of non-compliance 
with the provisions of the Act, rules and regulatio ns framed there under and the 
orders of the Commission.  The Commission has also been given the power to 
impose penalty under section 143 of the Act upto an  amount of Rs. 15 lakh for 
non-compliance of the directions of the Regional Lo ad Dispatch Centre for 
maintenance of grid discipline by the erring entiti es. These amounts are 
insufficient to act as effective deterrent against the tendencies of the erring utilities 
to violate the grid discipline.   
 
1.6.17  It has been further stated that as per sect ion 170 of the Act, any 
penalty payable by a person under the Act, if not p aid may be recovered as if it 
were an arrear of land revenue.  Since, the Commission does not have any power 
to execute its orders, the Commission is required t o approach the Civil Courts for 
execution of the orders.  Execution of the orders b y the Civil Court is a 
labyrinthine process.  Further, function of penalty  as a deterrent will be lost due to 
the time gap between the date of imposition of penalty and realization of the same 
as land revenue after following the due procedure.  Therefore, the Commission 
needs to be provided with better ways for execution of the orders passed by it and 
for realizing the penalty imposed.  This issue need s to be examined and finalized 
in consultations with all concerned.   
 
 

 
32 
 
 1.6.18    On being enquired by the Committee about quantum  of the amount 
that has been collected by CERC through UI charges and from which 
units/entities it has been collected, the CERC furnished the following details:   
  
“UI Charges are collected from overdrawing & under- injecting 
entities and disbursed to under-drawing and over-injecting entities. 
The summary of the UI Charges billed is as follows: 
 
 
1.6.19  When the Committee asked that who is the custodian of this corpus 
and whether it has been remitted to its lawful cust odian, the CERC replied as 
under:   
  
“Prior to capping of the UI rates for the generator s, UI was a zero 
sum mechanism.  The UI charges collected from the o verdrawing 
entities were disbursed among the over injecting en tities.  After 
the capping of UI rates for generators, some funds are available 
which are maintained as Regional Unscheduled Interc hange Pool 
Account Fund maintained by respective Regional Load  Despatch 
Centre. The fund is created and operated in accorda nce with the 
provisions of the Regulation 9(2) of the Central El ectricity 
Regulatory Commission (Unscheduled Interchange char ges & 
related matters) Regulations, 2009 as amended from time to time.  
Subsequently, the Commission has specified Central Electricity 
Regulation Commission (Power System Development Fun ds) 
Regulations, 2010 (PSDF Regulations).  In accordanc e with 
Regulation 3 of the said Regulations, the UI charge s standing to 
the credit of Unscheduled Interchange Pool Account Fund has 
been credited to the Power System Development Fund.   The said 
regulation is under examination in this Ministry an d final decision 
in this regard will be taken in consultation with M inistry of 
Finance.” 
 
1.6.20  In regard to the amount of Rs. 74,181 crore , it was clarified 
by the CERC that it is the total amount of UI charg es billed by the RLDCs 


 
33 
 
for the period from 2002-03 to 2011-12 (upto Octobe r, 2011).  It was also 
clarified that UI charges are collected from overdr awing and under 
injecting entities and disbursed to under drawing a nd over injecting 
entities. The surplus amount of UI charges inter al ia are deposited in the 
PSDF.  At present, the total amount of funds in PSD F is Rs. 3404 crore 
only as on 31st May, 2012. 
 
Transmission 
 
1.6.21  The Committee were informed that for meetin g the evacuation 
requirement of Independent Power Producers (IPPs) c oming up in clusters in 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim, Jhark hand, Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh, CERC has already granted regulatory  approval for 9 High 
Capacity Power Transmission Corridors (HCPTCs) at a n estimated cost of about 
Rs. 58,000 crore. Implementation of these corridors  has been taken up by 
Powergrid in a phased manner and partly by private sector. These HCPTCs are 
progressing matching with commissioning of generati on projects. Most of these 
HCPTCs are scheduled to be commissioned within XII Plan i.e. by 2016-17. 
Further, CERC has recently granted regulatory appro val for 2 more HCPTCs for 
evacuation of power from IPPs coming up in Vemagiri  and Nagapattinam/ 
Cuddalore area and 2 up-gradation of earlier HCPTCs  for IPPs coming up in 
Maharashtra/ Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh area a t an estimated cost of 
about Rs. 23,000 crore. Parts of these corridors we re placed for implementation 
through tariff based competitive bidding.
  
 
1.6.22  The Committee was informed that as per the provisions under 
section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Nat ional Electricity Policy, the 
Ministry of Power, on 13-4-2006 issued “Guidelines for Encouraging Competition 
in Development of Transmission Projects” and “Tarif f Based Competitive Bidding 
Guidelines for Transmission Services”. These guidel ines aim at laying down a 
transparent procedure for facilitating competition in the transmission sector 
through wide participation in providing transmissio n services and tariff 
determination through a process of tariff based competitive bidding.    
 

 
34 
 
 1.6.23  The Committee were informed that 8 transmi ssion projects awarded 
through the process of competitive bidding introduc ed in the inter-State 
transmission system are as per following detail:  
Sl. 
No. 
Name and Scope of Transmission 
Projects 
 
Name of Selected 
Bidder 
Name of project 
company   
1. Name: Transmission scheme for 
enabling import of NER/ER surplus 
power by NR 
Sterlite Grid Limited 
(Erstwhile Sterlite 
Technologies Limited) 
East-North 
Interconnection 
Company Ltd. 
2. Name: System Strengthening 
common for WR and NR  
 
Sterlite Grid Limited 
(Erstwhile Sterlite 
Technologies Limited) 
Jabalpur 
Transmission 
Company Ltd. 
 
3. Name: System Strengthening for 
WR  
Sterlite Grid Limited 
(Erstwhile Sterlite 
Technologies Limited) 
Jabalpur 
Transmission 
Company Ltd. 
4. Name: Transmission System 
associated with IPPs of 
Nagapattinam/ Cuddalore Area – 
Package A 
Power Grid Corporation 
of India Limited 
(PGCIL) 
Nagapattinam – 
Madhugiri 
Transmission 
Company Ltd. 
5. Name: System Strengthening in 
Northern Region for import of 
power from North Karanpura and 
other projects outside NR and 
System Strengthening in Western 
Region for import of power from 
North Karanpura and other 
projects outside WR and also for 
power evacuation from projects 
within WR Scope. 
M/s Reliance Power 
Transmission Limited 
North Karanpur 
Transmission 
Company Limited 
6. Name: Augmentation of Talcher-II 
Transmission  System 
Scope. 
M/s Reliance Power 
Transmission Limited 
Talcher-II 
Transmission 
Company Limited 
7. Name: Transmission System 
associated with Krishnapattnam 
UMPP- Synchronous 
interconnection between Southern 
Region and Western Region. 
Consortium of M/s 
Patel Engineering 
Limited, M/s Simplex 
Infrastructures Limited 
& M/s BSTransComm 
Limited 
Raichur Sholapur 
Transmission 
Company Limited 
8. Name: Transmission System 
associated with IPPs of  Vemagiri 
Area.  
M/s Power Grid 
Corporation of India 
Limited 
Vemagiri 
Transmission 
System Limited 
 
1.6.24  When the Committee enquired whether any of the abo ve mentioned 
projects are facing any problems, the following details were furnished: 
“(A)  East-North Interconnection Company Ltd. 
(i) Enhancement in transmission tariff due to the c hange in the 
geographical co-ordinates viz. “start” and “end” po ints of the 
transmission lines 
(ii) Allowing additional expenditure towards forest  clearance of 
1.84 km (8.46 Ha forest land). 

 
35 
 
 
(B) North Karanpura Transmission Company Ltd. 
(i) Persistent delay in the issuance of approval un der Section 
164 of the Electricity Act, 2003 by the Ministry of Power. 
(ii) Persistent delay in the notification of suitab le sponsoring 
authority in terms of the Projects Import Regulatio ns, 1986 for 
inter-State transmission projects being implemented  by private 
entities to avail of the concessional custom duty u nder Heading 
9801 of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Ac t 1975 read 
with Section 157 of the Customs Act 1962 .  
(iii) Cost escalations in major components viz stee l, zinc and 
aluminum due to the enhancement of excise duty.  
(iv) Risk of lapsing of approval under Section 68 o f the Electricity 
Act.  
(C) Talcher II Transmission Company Ltd.   
(i) Inordinate delay in the issuance of approval un der Section 
164 of the Electricity Act, 2003 by the Ministry of Power. 
Delay in the notification of suitable sponsoring authority for private 
inter-State transmission projects to avail of the c oncessional 
custom duties”  

 
36 
 
VII ELECTRICITY TRADING  
 
1.7.1 In regard to background of initiating the int er-state trading of electricity in 
India it was stated that prior to the Electricity A ct, 2003, the electricity industry 
recognized generation, transmission and supply as t he three principal activities, 
and the legal provisions were also woven around the se concepts. Bulk purchase 
and sale, although a regular phenomenon between State Electricity Boards and/or 
licensees was construed as part of the activity of supply of electricity. It is only 
with the enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003 tha t the transaction involving 
purchase and sale of electricity has been recognize d as a distinct licensed 
activity. This has been termed as ‘trading’ and def ined in section 2(71) of the Act 
as “ purchase of electricity for resale thereof…. ” The Regulatory Commissions 
have been given the powers to grant trading license.  
 
1.7.2 It has been reported by the CERC that trading  in electricity has helped 
optimum utilization of resources between deficit an d surplus areas. The price of 
electricity transacted in the short-term electricit y market (through traders and 
Power Exchanges) has declined over the last three years. 
 
1.7.3 It was stated by CERC that recognition of tra ding as a separate activity is in 
sync with the overall framework of encouraging comp etition in all segments of the 
electricity industry. The entry barriers have been sought to be removed and the 
State Electricity Boards have been mandated to be r eorganized within a definite 
time frame. This is expected to result in multiplic ity of players in generation, 
transmission and distribution, a sine qua non for c ompetition. In such a scenario, 
traders are expected to add value by facilitating t he transfer of surplus power 
available in one region to the regions experiencing  deficit of supply. The next step 

 
37 
 
in the direction of inducing competition, as the Ac t envisages, is to create a 
framework of market in electricity where buyers and  sellers could meet and 
engage in purchase and sale of electricity. The res ponsibility of developing the 
market in electricity has been vested with the Regu latory Commission. To 
promote trading in electricity the Central Commission has formulated the following 
regulations: 
1. Inter-State Trading Regulations   
2. Power market Regulations 
3. Trading Margin Regulations  
4. Short term Open Access Regulations  
 
 
1.7.4 The SEBs/Discoms who have the obligation to p rovide electricity to their 
consumers mainly rely on supplies from long-term contracts. However, it is neither 
feasible nor economical to meet short term, seasona l or peaking demand through 
long-term contracts. Be it a deficit scenario or ot herwise, power trading is 
essential for meeting the short-term demand at an o ptimum cost. Similarly, power 
trading is essential for distribution utilities for  selling short-term surpluses in order 
to optimize the cost of procurement. A few captive generating plants participate in 
trading in order to optimize their operating cost a nd in the process, supply 
electricity to the grid.  
 
1.7.5 When the Committee desired to know the functioning of inter-state trading 
machinery and the role of CERC in it, the CERC in t heir written reply stated as 
under:  
 
 “The institutions involved in Inter State trading include inter-
State Trading Licensees and Power Exchanges: 
 
1. Role of Inter-State Trading licensees: 
(i) Traders enter into long term contract with gene rators and 
this transfer of power off take risk and power pric e risk from 

 
38 
 
generator to trader helps in financial closure of m any generation 
projects.   
(ii) Power Trading has also helped in optimal utili zation of 
generating assets by facilitating transfer of power  between 
surplus and deficit regions.         
 
2. Role of Power Exchanges: 
Ensure fair, neutral, efficient and robust price di scovery to provide 
equal opportunity to all participants (small and la rge) in the 
market.  
(i)  Power Exchange being anonymous platform provides e qual 
bargaining power to buyers and sellers. This is imp ortant in a 
market which has supply deficit. 
(ii)  Provide extensive and quick price dissemination to  reduce 
information asymmetry in the market and improve inf ormed 
pricing decisions for participants. eg. (a buyer / seller  in 
Arunachal Pradesh or in Mumbai has equal access to price 
information and ability to participate in national power market to 
buy power competitively)  
(iii)  Design standardised contracts and work towards inc reasing 
liquidity in such contracts. As liquidity improves the pricing 
becomes more efficient. 
(iv)  Power exchanges have introduced robust risk manage ment 
practices, clearing and settlement process which re duce payment 
and credit risk between parties.  This helps genera tors in light of 
the poor financial condition of the Discoms.  
(v)  Power exchanges have also helped to facilitate ope n access 
and a large number of consumers (around 1000 consum ers) 
especially small and medium enterprises are using t he exchange 
platform.      
 
3. Role of CERC:   
CERC grants interstate trading license to electrici ty traders and 
registration to the power exchanges. It constantly monitors the 
function of these institutions through regular repo rting of 
transactions undertaken by them. In case of traders  the trading 
margin charged by them is also monitored.”    
 
1.7.6 Section 12 of the Electricity Act 2003 provid es that no person shall 
undertake trading in electricity unless it is autho rized to do so under section 14 or 
is exempt under section 13.  Therefore, a license i ssued by the Appropriate 
Commission is a pre-requisite for undertaking trading in electricity. 
 

 
39 
 
1.7.7 In regard to issuance of Licences, it was inf ormed by CERC that these 
issued in accordance with the criteria specified by  the Commission in Trading 
Licence Regulations and after following the due pro cedure. In accordance with 
Regulation 3 of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Procedure, Terms and 
Conditions for Grant of Trading License and Other R elated Matters) Regulations 
2009, an applicant for inter-state trading license shall be a citizen of India or a 
partnership firm registered under the Indian Partne rship Act, 1932 or a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 or an as sociation or body of 
individuals who are citizens of India whether incor porated or not or an artificial 
juridical person recognized under the Indian laws.  The Regulation does not make 
any distinction between the Government and Private Sector operators.  Also 
under 3rd proviso to section 14 of the Electricity Act 2003, in case an appropriate 
Government undertakes trading electricity, such Gov ernment shall be deemed to 
be a licensee under the Act and shall not be required to obtain a license under the 
Act. 
 
1.7.8 When the Committee asked the manner in which CERC c ontrols the 
trading mechanism ensuring that it is done as per t he laid down norms, the CERC 
in their written reply have stated as under:    
 
“The Commission controls the inter-state trading th rough the 
provisions of the trading license Regulations, trad ing margin 
Regulations and Power Market Regulations and the te rms and 
conditions of the license.  The Commission has put in place a 
Market Monitoring Cell which monitors the activitie s of the traders 
in accordance with the regulations and any trader found lacking or 
violating provisions of the Act or Regulations are liable for 
suspension or revocation of the license, apart from other penalties 
provided under the Act.” 
 
1.7.9 The Committee were informed that there are tw o Power Exchanges 
operational presently namely Indian Energy Exchange  and Power Exchanges of 

 
40 
 
India Limited. These are operational from June, 200 8 and October, 2008 
respectively.  
 
1.7.10  Asked by the Committee that in which way competitio n is being 
promoted in trading of electricity and what impact does it make on the tariff of 
electricity transmission, it was replied as under:   
 
“Markets function efficiently when there are a larg e number of 
market players leading to competition and price dis covery. 
Considering the imminent capacity addition, a large  pool of 
trading licensees to cater to the growing market in  electricity 
would be needed.  The Commission has re-aligned tra ding 
volumes amongst different categories of licence. The Commission 
has also introduced new category of inter-state tra ding licence 
with lower requirement of net worth to bring small open access 
consumer and captive power producers in the short t erm market. 
It is expected that the new category would act as a new marketing 
channel, further penetrating the market and accommo dating the 
marginal players. 
 
The steps taken by  Commission through Inter-State Trading 
Regulations, Power market Regulations and Short ter m Open 
Access Regulations  have promoted competition and  provided 
sufficient choice to generating companies and distr ibution 
licensees for selling and buying power. 
 
Impact of competition in trading of electricity on tariff of 
transmission 
Competition in trading of electricity results in mo re power flowing 
from surplus area to deficit areas thereby resultin g in optimum 
utilization of the generation assets and, therefore , lower effective 
generation tariff. 
   
Competition in trading of electricity also results in better utilization 
of transmission assets as the inherent margins in the transmission 
capacity are utilized for transfer of power traded through short 
term bilateral and collective transaction. 
 
In accordance with Regulation 25 of the Central Ele ctricity 
Regulatory Commission (Open Access in Inter State 
Transmission) Regulation, 2009 75% of the transmiss ion charges 
for Inter-state transmission network  collected thr ough trading of 
power under short term open access are directly rei mbursed to 
the long term customers of the concerned region in proportion to 

 
41 
 
the monthly transmission charges payable by them. T his 
effectively reduces the transmission charge liabili ty of long term 
customers (state utilities) of the inter-state tran smission system 
which effectively benefits the ultimate consumer.” 
 
 
 1.7.11  The Committee enquired about the criteria of finali zing the rates of 
purchase and sale of electricity by the traders and  the role of CERC in this 
regard.  They also desired to know the steps taken to ensure that the cost of 
electricity does not rise to the disadvantage of co nsumers and advantage of 
traders. In reply the CERC stated as under:   
 
“In the short term market (contracts where power su pply is for 
less than 1 year period) traders work through negotiated contracts 
between buyers (Discoms) and sellers (Captive plant s, IPP, MPP, 
states with surplus power). Buyers would agree to c ontract only if 
they find power price is acceptable to them. The bu yers have a 
choice of a large number of traders through whom th ey can 
procure power. Competition among the traders ensure s buyers 
get competitive power rates offered to them. Also, in light of the 
general supply deficit scenario the trading margin that can be 
charge by the trader is also capped at 4 paise/ kwh  and 7 paise 
/kwh for power prices less than Rs 3.5/kwh and above Rs 3.5/kwh 
respectively. This also ensures that traders do not  take undue 
advantage of a shortage scenario. Growth rate of tr ansactions 
through traders was 6.5% in 2009-10. 
 
Buyers c an also procure power bilaterally, directly from any  other 
Discoms without interference of any trader if they wish to. As per 
the data for 2009-10, such transactions have grown by 26% in 
2009-10. 
 
Power is also transacted on a day ahead basis (buye rs and seller 
can procure power one day in advance) through Power  
Exchanges. The mechanism adopted is a double sided closed bid 
auction with a uniform price. The buyers and seller  anonymously 
give their bids into an electronic platform. The ag gregated 
demand and supply is matched to determine one singl e price for 
all buyers and sellers.  However, in case of transm ission 
constraint (when power cannot flow from one region to another 
due to congestion in transmission network), the pri ce reduces in 
surplus region and increases in deficit region.  Pr esently, 
transactions through Power Exchange constitute arou nd 1% of 
the total electricity generated in the country.  Ho wever, this 
recorded a growth rate of 53% in 2009-10.         

 
42 
 
 
Role of CERC      
The Market Monitoring Cell of the Commission monito rs the short 
term markets by collecting data from electricity tr ader, power 
exchanges and National Load Dispatch Centre. It pub lishes three 
reports, The Monthly Market Monitoring report, Mont hly analysis 
of weekly transaction of traders and Annual Market report.   
 
The Commission has intervened in the short term mar kets 
through issue of a Price Cap order in September 200 9 when the 
short term power price had increased significantly in 2008. The 
price cap was applicable in interstate day ahead tr ansactions due 
to failed monsoon and prolonged high temperatures i n Northern 
and Western India undertaken by traders and Power E xchange 
for a period of 45 days.   
 
The Commission floated a discussion paper “Principl es and 
methodologies for intervention in short term market s” to lay down 
the principle for any intervention in market and en sure that there 
is no regulatory uncertainty created due to interventions. This was 
also discussed in Central Advisory Committee meetin g of the 
Commission.”  
 
 
 
1.7.12    When the Committee asked as to how introduction of traders in 
electricity has furthered the interest of the consumers, CERC informed as under:  
 
“The power prices in the short term market have dec reased in the 
last three years and the volume has increased. Both Discoms and 
open access consumers, who participate in this mark et actively, 
have benefited due to the price decrease in this market.  
 
The creation of a liquid short term market also ens ures that 
Discoms can procure power at a short notice and adj ust their 
power procurement based on demand fluctuation which  may be 
difficult to forecast sometimes. This helps consume rs to get 
reliable power supply and improves the quality of service provided 
by the Discoms.   
 
In states where Discoms are unable to serve their c onsumers, 
short term markets have helped open access consumer s to 
access the national market and procure power compet itively.  
Presently, more than 1000 Small and Medium Enterpri se (SME) 
with load around of 1- 2 MW are procuring power thr ough power 
exchanges regularly. This number is expected to further increase.  
 

 
43 
 
It is also observed that many generators (IPPs) see ing the 
constant reduction in prices over this period, now prefer to 
undertake more long term contracts with Discoms. Th is helps 
Discoms to procure power through longer contracts a nd bring 
assured supply to consumers.   
 
Short term markets have helped build investor confi dence and 
attract investments. The fact that a power generato r today has an 
alternative avenue to sell power, through the marke t, over and 
above the long term PPAs acts as strong risk mitiga tion for their 
business. Availability of an alternative market red uces risk for 
their business. The perceived risk reduction not on ly helps attract 
capital but also reduces the cost of capital, makin g the business 
more competitive. This is evident from the enthusia sm displayed 
by private generators to set up new generation capa city and this 
interest has resulted in actual investments on the ground. The 
share of private generation has increased from 11% to 23 % in 
the last five years. Increase in supply serves consumers interests, 
as having no power is the costliest form of power.”   
 
 
  

 
44 
 
VIII OPEN ACCESS  
 
1.8.1  Open access is central to bring about competition in the power sector. After 
de-licensing of Generation, it was necessary that a  generator can sell its power 
anywhere in India. For the consumer also it is bene ficial to have a "choice" to 
procure power from reliable and efficient source. T his objective can be achieved 
through Open access. It also facilitates power to flow from surplus to deficit areas.  
 
1.8.2 The Electricity Act, 2003 provides under sect ion 42 that open access for 
consumers with load of one megawatt and above has t o be allowed by SERCs by 
24 th  January, 2009. 
 
1.8.3 The relevant clause 5.4.5 of the National Ele ctricity Policy states that: 
 
"The Electricity Act 2003 enables competing generat ing 
companies and trading licensees, besides the area d istribution 
licensees, to sell electricity to consumers when op en access in 
distribution is introduced by the State Electricity  Regulatory 
Commissions. As required by the Act, the SERCs shal l notify 
regulations by June 2005 that would enable open acc ess to 
distribution networks in terms of sub-section 2 of section 42 which 
stipulates that such open access would be allowed, not later than 
five years from 27th January 2004 to consumers who require a 
supply of electricity where the maximum power to be  made 
available at any time exceeds one mega watt. Sectio n 49 of the 
Act provides that such consumers who have been allo wed open 
access under section 42 may enter into agreement wi th any 
person for supply of electricity on such terms and conditions, 
including tariff, as may be agreed upon by them. Wh ile making 
regulations for open access in distribution, the SE RCs will also 
determine wheeling charges and cross-subsidy surcha rge as 
required under section 42 of the Act." 
 
1.8.4 During the oral evidence the Chairman, CERC, descri bing the benefits of 
open access and hindrances in implementation of the same, stated as under:  
 
“As far as the common wires and how does the consum er get a 
choice, this is something which is at the heart of the Electricity 
Act. Unlike in the telecom, you have the option. On ce mobile 

 
45 
 
phones came, you found that because of the competit ion, the 
price dropped. But you cannot have two wires. For e xample, the 
Parliament House gets power from the NDMC. But if a  private 
player can give power tomorrow at a cheaper rate, y ou have the 
option. You do not have to have other lines. You ca n have the 
same lines; NDMC cannot say that it would not allow  getting that 
power. This is the choice. Under the law, from 1st January 2009, 
one MW and above customers have that choice. Obviou sly there 
are many difficulties because we still have State d iscoms who do 
not have that tendency to allow, then we do not hav e State load 
dispatch centres, which are not functioning indepen dently, like we 
have done at the Centre. So, section 11 is invoked, which is in the 
Supreme Court, though these are matters of detail. 
You must also get cheaper power. If you see the ind ustry today, 
nobody pays less than Rs.5. Industry will be very h appy to pay at 
Rs.2.50-Rs.3. Even if they have to pay Re.1 extra f or wheeling 
charge, transmission charge, then it becomes an opt ion; they can 
do that. But this power has to be available on a me dium term 
basis; then it can happen.” 
 
1.8.5 The CERC informed the Committee that they hav e brought out the 
following Regulations on Open Access:- 
I. Short Term Open Access in Inter State Transmissi on. 
II. Grant of Connectivity, Long Term Access and Med ium term open 
Access in Inter State Transmission and related matters. 
 
1.8.6 The CERC further informed that Open Access at  inter-state level is fully 
operational. With regard to Open Access at Inter-St ate level, during the F. Y. 
2010-11, the total number of transactions under Ope n Access was 19,883 as 
against 778 in 2004-05. Further, Central Transmissi on Utility (CTU) is reported to 
have received 225 applications in F.Y. 2009-10 from  private developers for Long 
Term Open Access amounting to 1,62,898 MW. At State  level, as per information 
available with Forum of Regulators Secretariat, 24 SERCs have notified terms 
and conditions of Open Access Regulations, 20 SERCs  have determined cross 
subsidy surcharge, 25 SERCs have allowed Open Access up to 1 MW and above, 

 
46 
 
22 SERCs have determined transmission charges and 1 8 SERCs have 
determined wheeling charges . 
 
1.8.7 Open access in transmission has helped make g eneration more 
competitive and has provided choice to Discoms as w ell as open access 
consumers. This is helping many captive generators and well as open access 
consumers to buy and sell electricity in the short- term market.  Over 1000 open 
access consumers are buying power through Power Exchanges. 
 
1.8.8 Electricity traders and Power Exchanges have started functioning. Short 
term trading in electricity through traders and pow er exchange has provided an 
alternative market for electricity other than long term PPA. This has reduced the 
Discom default risk for generators significantly. 
 
1.8.9 The function of   Central Commission in accor dance with section 79(c) of 
the Act is to regulate the inter-state transmission of electricity and other role of the 
Commission (under section 66 of the Act) is develop ment of market in power 
including trading. For power market development, it s necessary that open access 
is facilitated through regulations. Hence Commissio n brought out Open access 
Regulation 2004 and later Open access in Inter Stat e Transmission Regulation, 
2008 was issued. Also, Grant of Connectivity, Long Term Access and Medium 
term open Access, 2009 was issued.    
 
1.8.10  In regard the role of CERC in promting Open  Access in transmission 
and trading it was stated that  t he CERC promotes Open Access through 
Regulations on the same, and also hearing petitions  if an entity violates these 
Regulations. In accordance with the Regulation, the  concurrence of State load 

 
47 
 
dispatch center for open access can be denied only when surplus transmission 
capacity is not available in the State network or m etering infrastructure is not 
available for energy metering and accounting in acc ordance with the Grid Code. 
In case no communication is received from State loa d dispatch center within a 
stipulated time period from the date of receipt of application, open access, shall 
be deemed to have been granted. 
 
1.8.11  Also the Commission has specified the Centr al Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (Open Access interstate transmission) Re gulations, 2004 and 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Open Acc ess interstate transmission) 
Regulations, 2008 for facilitating open access in i nter-state transmission.  Without 
open access in inter-state transmission, inter-stat e trading in electricity is not 
possible.   
 
1.8.12  However, due to shortage conditions, some o f the States through 
their Load Despatch Centers have tried to impose re strictions upon inter-state 
open access.  The Commission has issued appropriate  orders in the cases filed 
before it for ensuring non discriminatory open acce ss.  Further, the Commission 
has introduced the concept of deemed concurrence / clearance / no objection if 
the concerned SLDCs do not act within the period sp ecified in the Regulation.    
This has facilitated open access in inter-state tra nsmission and the number of the 
cases involving the dispute regarding open access has drastically come down.   
 
 
1.8.13  On being asked by the Committee that how far the CE RC has 
succeeded in promoting Open Access in their domain,  the CERC stated that their 
interventions have facilitated Open Access in inter -state transmission system. 
They furnished the table below to illustrate this:-  

 
48 
 
 2008 -09  2009 -10  2010 -11  2011 -12  
(Apr-Sept, 
2011) 
No. of 
Transactions 
15414 18128 19883 11403 
Energy  
(in MU) 
30521 39547 55232 37558 
 
 
1.8.14  When the Committee asked about the impact o f open access in 
electricity sector and whether the progress is as p er the desired objective, it was 
stated that open access has had a remarkable positi ve impact on power market 
development and the volume in both segments of the power market, bilateral and 
collective transaction (i.e. through Power Exchange ) have increased. More power 
has been transferred from surplus to deficit areas.  
 
1.8.15  Open access in distribution implies choice to a consumer to choose 
his supplier or choice to a supplier to choose his buyer.  CERC informed that as a 
secretariat to the Forum of Regulators they have he lped analyse the issues at 
stake in implementation of open access and evolve c onsensus on the way 
forward.  
 
1.8.16  When the Committee asked about the role of FOR/CERC  in 
promotion of open access in distribution sector, it was replied by CERC as under:  
 
“FOR undertook a study on Open Access: Theory and Pr actice 
which recommended the standard practices that need to be 
followed to remove the hurdles to open access. Sali ent points of 
the study which highlight the hurdles and possible solutions to 
implementation of Open Access are: 
 
 
• Independence of SLDC  
- SLDC not to report to transmission or trading lice nsee.  
- Reporting requirements could be on lines of   Stat e 
Electoral Officer under Election Commission.  
 
• Operation of SLDC 

 
49 
 
- with  STU as a subsidiary of transmission utility  as stop-
gap arrangement; 
- by a separate entity as soon as possible 
 
• State Governments be advised to phase out single buyer 
model. 
• A model scheme for technological up-gradation of SLDCs 
recommended.  
• Urgent need of financial autonomy to SLDCs. 
- CERC to make regulations for RLDCs 
- Similar pattern to be adopted by SERCs for LDCs. 
 
• Display of information on OA charges in the websi tes of 
SERC/FOR for transparency and to enable informed 
decision on open access.  
Standby arrangement for open access consumers  
- by levying  retail tariff as applicable for respec tive 
consumer categories only for the period during whic h 
such standby support is requested. 
• The cross-subsidy surcharge needs to be calculate d as per 
the formula given in the Tariff Policy unless there  are valid 
reasons for deviation.  
 
Subsequently, model regulations on distribution ope n access 
were evolved by the Forum. The model seeks to addre ss several 
critical issues like processes and procedures, noda l agencies for 
seeking open access, various charges including tran smission and 
wheeling charges and surcharge, imbalance settlement, metering, 
billing etc. This Ministry has also written to Stat es/SERCs for 
coming out with similar regulations.”  
 
1.8.17  On being asked by the Committee about the s low implementation of 
Open Access, the CERC informed that some of the Dis coms are resistant to give 
open access to industrial consumers (bulk consumer category) since industrial 
tariffs are usually high. This impasse is one of the biggest hurdles for open access 
implementation. SLDCs play an important role in imp lementation of open access. 
Instances of their non-impartial action in granting  consent for open access have 
been observed. Ring fencing of SLDCs from Utilities  and empowerment of Load 
dispatch centres would remove the hurdles from Open Access Implementation. 
 

 
50 
 
1.8.18  It was further stated that some States invo ked section 11 of the 
Electricity Act to disallow open access to the gene rators within the State. As per 
the Electricity Act 2003, section 11 is meant to be  invoked only in extraordinary 
circumstances (e.g. threat to security of state, pu blic order, natural calamity etc) 
and is not meant to restrict open access. CERC has raised the issue in its 
statutory advice to the Government and requested th e Government to engage 
with the States and also address the issue legally.  Accordingly, the Ministry of 
Power has also filed SLPs in the Supreme Court against such orders by State and 
the matter is sub-judice before the Supreme Court. 
 
  

 
51 
 
IX . PROMOTION OF RENEWABLE ENERGY  
 
 
1.9.1  The preamble of the Electricity Act, 2003 st ates that one of the key 
objectives of the law is to promote environmentally  benign policies. Section 
                 
86(1) (e) of the Act mandates the State Electricity  Regulatory Commissions to 
promote, inter alia , generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy by 
providing suitable measures for connectivity with t he grid and sale of electricity to 
any person, and also specify, for purchase of elect ricity from such sources, a 
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a distribution 
licensee. Further, section 61 of the Act provides t hat the Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions, while specifying the terms and conditi ons for the determination of 
tariff, shall be inter-alia guided by the imperativ es of the promotion of generation 
of electricity from renewable sources of energy. 
 
1.9.2 The CERC informed that several regulatory ini tiatives have been taken in 
this direction by them since the enactment of the A ct. A number of SERCs have 
already specified such percentage of the electricity to be procured in the area of a 
distribution licensee and have also notified cost p lus tariff for different 
technologies of renewable energy exploitation. Thes e measures have resulted in 
faster capacity addition of renewable energy in our  country. As per one estimate 
about 3.9% of the electricity generated in India co mes from renewable sources of 
energy.  
 
1.9.3 However, the level of Renewable Energy Purcha se Obligation (RPO), i.e. 
the percentage of electricity to be procured from s uch sources varies significantly 
in various States. States like Tamil Nadu and Karna taka have already achieved a 

 
52 
 
RPO level of more than 10%, there are number of Sta tes which have not even 
touched RPO level of 2%. 
 
1.9.4 The Central Government published the National  Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC) in year 2008. The Plan envisages the  RPO to be 5% in year 
2010 and thereby increasing 1% every year to reach 15% in year 2020. The 
CERC have further informed that while the estimated  impact of enhanced RPOs 
on tariff in terms of paisa per unit is not signifi cant, it would require the distribution 
utilities to claim and get approved higher Annual R evenue Requirements (ARRs) 
before their respective Electricity Regulatory commissions.  
 
1.9.5 The Committee was informed that the experienc e with most of the 
Government owned distribution utilities shows reluc tance on their part in claiming 
higher ARR even for passing on the increased power purchase costs for 
electricity from conventional sources. A number of SERCs have expressed this 
apprehension during discussions in the Forum of Reg ulators. Therefore, keeping 
in view the facts that electricity is a concurrent subject and most of the utilities are 
owned by State Governments, attainment of national goals for enhancing RPOs 
would require cooperation of the States. 
    
1.9.6 In regard to introduction of Renewable Energy Certificates, the Chairman, 
CERC, during the oral evidence before the Committee deposed as under:  
“Another important area for consumer benefits is gr een power. 
Green power is something, which is very important.  If, you see 
India’s energy security and the long-term future, w e do not have 
to really worry about climate change issues. Of cou rse, that will 
become important.  I would like to add one last thi ng that we are 
introducing Renewable Energy Certificates.  I would  like to say 
about Delhi.  Delhi is not using any green energy.  Under the law, 
each State Electricity Regulatory Commission has to  prescribe 

 
53 
 
the percentage.  Today, you will find that Tamil Na du is using 11 
per cent green energy because they have a good wind  potential 
whereas Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission has  prescribed 
two per cent.  In Mumbai, 6 per cent of the power c omes from 
green energy today. How do we really get this elect ricity here?  It 
is very difficult to do the scheduling in respect o f wind potential.  
So, we came out with the mechanism called Renewable  Energy 
Certificates, which is the green part of the electr icity.  Like Tamil 
Nadu has a shortage, they do not mind buying more e lectricity, 
whether it is generated from coal or from wind.  Th ey will buy that 
electricity.  But in case of other electricity sour ces, Renewable 
Energy Certificates can be purchased and Delhi can meet its 
requirement.  In the context of the market, this is  something, 
which is very important.” 
*** 
  

 
54 
 
Part - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
Mandate vis-a-vis Performance of CERC  
2.1 The Committee note that the Electricity Act 200 3 has given the CERC 
a renewed mandate vis-à-vis its status emanating fr om Regulatory 
Commission Act, 1998. After 2003, it was expected to make the power sector 
modern, vibrant efficient, responsive and productiv e. To achieve this the 
Commission has been entrusted with the responsibili ties which among 
others include tariff determination, regulating int er-state transmission and 
grid code, regulating market development, licensing , adjudication and 
giving advice to the Government. These objectives a re sought to be 
achieved by notifying regulations, passing orders a nd tendering policy 
advices to the Government of India. The Mission Sta tement of the 
Commission intends to promote competition, efficien cy and economy in 
bulk power market, improve the quality of supply, p romotes investment and 
to advice the Government on the removal of institut ional barriers to bridge 
the demand supply gap and foster the interest of th e consumers. The 
Committee observe that despite given mandate for tr ansforming the power 
sector, CERC has done precious little in discharge of its duties to achieve 
the objectives. The duties assigned in principle, a re efficacious to shape 
and revive the sagging sector into its new and idea l incarnation making it 
efficient, economic, energized and ebullient. Howev er, it is regretted that it 
is still a controlled, traditional and non-resilien t labyrinth confounding the 
consumers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recom mend that the CERC, 
adopting the true spirit of the Electricity Act 200 3 must shed its inhibition, 

 
55 
 
laid back approach and be in the forefront of heral ding a new era in the 
Power Sector. The importance this Sector hold to th e development of this 
Country, its economy, people, agriculture, industry  etc. cannot be over-
emphasized and hence it dwells more on CERC to func tion in an efficient 
and responsive manner. The Commission cannot ignore  the fact that while 
developing the Sector in a competitive manner it ha s to protect the large 
sections of the society and hence its action should  be guided not only by 
the letter and spirit of the Act but also by the in visible yet important element 
of the welfare of the poor of the Country.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.1, Para No.2.1) 
 
 
2.2 The Committee note that regulatory provisions u nder the Electricity 
Act 2003 are being implemented through of the CERC.  Functions of CERC 
relate to important areas of power sector, viz. reg ulating tariff of generating 
companies owned and controlled by the Central Gover nment, of such 
companies having composite scheme for generation an d sale of the 
electricity in more than one States, regulating inter-state transmission of the 
electricity, determining tariff for inter-state tra nsmission of the electricity, 
issuing licenses to transmission licensees and the electricity traders with 
respect to their inter-state operations, specifying  grid code, levying fee, 
specifying and enforcing quality, continuity and re liability of services by the 
licensee, fixing inter-state trading margin etc. Th e Commission is also 
responsible for balancing consumer interest and pro moting investments 
besides being responsible for oversight of the mark et. In pursuit of these 

 
56 
 
objectives, the CERC has taken steps for formulatin g an efficient tariff 
setting mechanism, improving the operations and man agement of the 
regional transmission centers, facilitating open ac cess in inter-state 
transmission, facilitating inter-state trading, pro moting development of 
power market, facilitating technological and instit utional changes required 
for development of competitive market in bulk power  and transmission 
services, advising on removal of barriers to entry and exit for capital and 
management etc. The Commission has also adopted cer tain guiding 
principles which inter-alia include protection of t he interest of the society 
including the consumer and supplier, remaining equi table in conflict 
resolution, maintaining regulatory certainty, adopt ing participative process 
in formulation of its regulation etc. The Committee  feel that had these 
activities been taken to their logical conclusion a nd been implemented in 
letter and spirit, the consumers/citizens of the co untry would have been in a 
better position than the prevailing situation in te rms of cost and availability 
of the electricity. Similarly, open access to the c ommon consumer is a far 
cry. The Committee are of the strong view that with  more effective role of 
CERC the scenario could have been transformed phenomenally. Further, the 
collapse of Northern Grid on July 30, 2012 affectin g 7 States and again total 
breakdown of Northern, Eastern and North-Eastern Gr id on July 31, 2012 
affecting 22 States across the Country has exposed the ineffectiveness of 
CERC as national electricity regulator. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommend that the Commission should introspect and  identify as to why 
the optimal results are not coming forth. Such a de tailed analysis should 
identify whether there are legislative limitations,  functional constraints, 
absence of entrepreneurship, lack of resources, dea rth of qualified 

 
57 
 
manpower or un-enabling environment, which jointly or severally, are 
hampering the growth of the Sector. The Committee a lso strongly 
recommend that reasons so identified be followed up  with remedial 
measures with utmost promptitude. The Government sh ould not shy away 
from bringing amendment to the Electricity Act, 200 3 if such measures are 
required to improve the efficacy of CERC. The Commi ttee also recommend 
that the Government should take necessary steps to appoint an 
independent Committee of experts to review the func tioning of CERC and 
identify the areas which require improvements in th e working of the 
organization and limitations of the autonomy and le gislation. Needless to 
emphasize such an exercise should be conducted in a  time-bound manner 
and followed up with necessary action wherever required. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2, Para No.2.2) 
 
Establishment of CERC 
 
2.3  The Committee find that the evolutionary proce ss of CERC dates 
backs to early 1980s when the National Development Council recommended 
the constitution of independent professional tariff  Boards at the regional levels 
for regulating the tariff policies of public and pr ivate utilities. The need was 
further reiterated in 1996 in the Conference of Chi ef Ministers which felt that 
reforms and restructuring of State Electricity Boar ds are urgent and must be 
carried out in definite time frame and identified t he creation of regulatory 
commission as a step in this direction.  In 1998 wi th the enactment of the 
Regulatory Commission Act, way was paved for the cr eation of regulatory 
commissions at Centre and in the States with the ob jective to distance the 

 
58 
 
Government from tariff regulation which was later r eplaced by the Electricity 
Act, 2003. 
 The Commission functions in a quasi-judicial manne r and consist of a 
Chairperson, three full time Members and the Chairp erson of Central Electricity 
Authority as ex-officio Member. Owing to the effici ent functional requirement 
the Act mandates that Chairperson and the Members s hall be persons having 
adequate knowledge and experience in Engineering, L aw, Finance, 
Management, Commerce etc. The Chairperson and the M embers are appointed 
by the President of India on the recommendation of a Selection Committee as 
prescribed under the Act. The Act also provides for  the appointment of a 
Secretary of the Commission whose powers and duties  are defined by the 
Commission.  
 The Committee find that given the functions of the  Regulatory Commissions 
to transform the electricity sector, the constituti on of a Board was enshrined in 
the Act itself to make these Commissions the proper  bodies with adequate 
powers to develop and regulate the sector. However,  over the years it has been 
found that the spirit of the Act has not been carri ed in the right perspective. 
Most of the Regulatory Commissions have become the refuge for the 
superannuated but influential officials. Their prim ary objective is to remain in 
employment rather than making any meaningful contri bution with regard to the 
activities of the Commissions in the pursuit of the ir objectives. Hence these 
bodies have lost sheen and the authority, which the y were designed to 
represent. In the process they have also lost the a utonomy, which the Act has 
provided them for functional purposes. Had these Co mmissions acted as 
mandated under the Act, there would have been hardl y any justification for 

 
59 
 
languishing electricity sector in the Country. The Committee is inclined to infer 
that Regulatory Commissions have squarely failed in performing their assigned 
duties. The Committee, therefore, recommend that wi th a view to revolutionize 
the Sector it has become imperative to recast these  Commissions at Board 
level. These establishments should not become the s anctuaries for senior 
citizens to secure sinecure positions without any a ccountability and stakes. 
Hence, these positions should be manned by the seni or technical brains of the 
respective areas who are alive in services, having sense of accountability.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.3, Para No.2.3) 
 
 
2.4 The Committee find that there is shortage of ad equate manpower in the 
Commission. As of now the sanctioned staff strength  of CERC is 80 only and 
almost all of these post are required to be filled up through deputation from 
other Government Departments. The pay structure, se rvice conditions and 
other amenities available to CERC employees are als o discouraging. Certain 
benefits which are available to the Central Governm ent employees are denied 
to the officials of the CERC. These benefits among others include pensions, 
CGHS facilities and Government accommodations etc. Independent regulation 
is an emerging concept and to make it a reality ade quate manpower with 
required qualification and skill have to be arrange d for making CERC more 
dynamic and result oriented. The certainty of servi ce with career progression 
on a regular basis is an essential motivating facto r in any organization to 
succeed. The Committee, therefore, strongly recomme nd that the personnel 
policy of the organization should be well laid down  having its own cadre with 

 
60 
 
adequate promotional prospects and better amenities  to the officials of the 
Commission corresponding to the job profile to ensu re the high standards of 
professional approach and dedication in the accompl ishment of the task cut 
out for the Commission. Needless to emphasize, depu tation should be an 
exception rather than the main source of meeting man power needs of CERC. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4, Para No.2.4) 
   
Forum of Regulators (FOR)  
2.5  The Committee note that The Forum of Regulator s (FOR) was 
constituted vide  the Ministry of Power’s Notification dated 16 th  February, 2005 
in pursuance of the provision under section 166(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 
with the primary objective of harmonization of regu lation in the power sector. 
The Forum consists of Chairperson of CERC and Chair persons of SERCs. The 
Chairperson of CERC is the Chairperson of the Forum . The Committee were 
informed that FOR provides a platform for the regul ators at the Centre and 
State level to exchange ideas and best practices. Issues of importance (at inter-
state level or intra-state level) are discussed and  consensus is evolved in FOR. 
In order to encourage uniformity of regulations amo ng SERCs, the Forum has 
evolved several Model Regulations which can be adop ted by the State 
Regulatory Commissions. The Committee were also inf ormed that the FOR has 
issued various guidelines/ regulations for implemen tations of Open Access, 
reduction of AT&C losses, Grid Discipline, rationalization of tariff etc.  
The Electricity being the concurrent subject, the C ommittee find FOR a vital 
instrument to bring all the State Regulatory Commis sions at a platform where 
consensus can be built for smooth and effective imp lementation of regulations 

 
61 
 
meant for bringing reforms, restructuring and revit alizing of power sector of 
the Country. However, to the agony of the Committee , the FOR has miserably 
failed to achieve the desired result due to some or  other reasons.  The 
Committee find that in regard to implementation of model regulations on 
various issues viz. open access, rationalization of  tariff, reduction of AT&C 
losses etc. there is great disparity in States as s ome have done well while the 
others’ performances are far from being satisfactor y. It is matter of concern 
that even regulations made with consensus are eithe r not being implemented 
satisfactorily or not being implemented at all. The Committee are surprised that 
FOR has failed to enforce even the decisions/regula tions arrived at through 
consensus among SERCs. The present situation someho w indicates to the 
ineffectiveness of the Forum as it has reduced itse lf to a platform of 
unsubstantive deliberations with executive power to give a new orientation and 
definite direction to power sector. The area which require utmost attention of 
FOR is area of reduction of AT&C losses where there  is hardly any progress 
across the country. This single issue has damaged t he sector most and has 
blurred the reforms. And here FOR has done precious little to make any impact. 
This has raised questions about the usefulness of t his body itself. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that that the Gover nment should come up 
with some orders/regulations providing much needed teeth to the Forum to 
make it effective in enforcing the model regulation s/ guidelines prepared by 
FOR itself in all the participant States in a time bound manner. The Committee, 
further desire that the FOR should meet more freque ntly to discuss 
issues/obstacles coming in way to implementation of regulations/ guidelines of 
FOR in respect of promotion of open access, impleme ntation of R-APDRP to 
reduces the distribution losses, grid discipline, t ariff regulations etc. so that 

 
62 
 
the remedies for their speedy and effective impleme ntation can be chalked out. 
The Committee also desire that the SERCs should be given due autonomy as 
envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003 enabling them to discharge their 
mandated duties effectively without any pressure fr om respective State 
Governments.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.5, Para No.2.5) 
 
 
2.6  The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2 003 empowers the 
State/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SER Cs / JERCs) to fix tariffs 
for consumers. The Act also stipulates under sectio n 61 that the SERCs while 
fixing the tariff should be guided by the factors w hich inter-alia include that 
tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of  electricity and also, reduces 
cross-subsidies in the manner specified by the Appr opriate Commission. The 
Committee were informed that Model Tariff Regulatio ns have been formulated 
by Forum of Regulators which inter -alia  address the major issues responsible 
for financial distress of the distribution companie s. The Model Tariff 
Regulations have been designed to arrive at a set o f uniform practices that the 
various State Electricity Regulatory Commissions co uld adopt. The major 
objective of these model regulations is to standard ize the process of 
determination of tariff for a distribution utility and which smoothens the cost 
transfer in retail tariff appropriately. The Committee note that under section 131 
of Electricity Act 2003, it has been mandated to re organize the State Electricity 
Boards in the country to separate entities of Gener ation, Transmission and 
Distribution segments with the purpose of making th em self sustaining. A 

 
63 
 
study conducted by the Indian Institute of Public A dministration (IIPA) on the 
impact of reorganization of the State Electricity B oards has revealed that 
despite some shortcomings, the overall impact of re structuring has been 
positive and in the right direction. The Committee have been informed that so 
far 18 SEBs have been reorganized.  Out of the rema ining States, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Kerala are in the process of formulat ing schemes for 
reorganization of their SEBs.  
Against this backdrop the Committee note that over the years, owing to 
factors such as very high Transmission and Distribu tion losses, irrational 
tariffs and several shortcomings on the distributio n side, the financial health of 
the SEBs have deteriorated. Also the 13 th  Finance Commission has projected 
the losses of the SEBs, which are now the Discoms, to the tune of Rs.70,000 
crore. The Secretary of the Ministry of Power while  explaining this situation 
stated that there are State Commissions which have not rationalized tariff for 
seven to eight years.  All this has contributed to the State Electricity Boards 
coming back to the situation which they were in 200 1 and probably getting 
even worse. The Committee are aghast to note the cr itical financial situation of 
the State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/ Discoms. More surprisingly, the precarious 
financial positions of the Discoms were known and n eed for rationalization of 
tariff was felt for a very long time. Nonetheless, any concrete remedial efforts in 
this regard have been delayed for reasons which are  not known to the 
Committee. The losses have been allowed to accumula te to the extent that it 
cannot be cleared by the Discoms themselves. The Co mmittee are concerned 
that due to negligence and non-performance of conce rned organizations 
ultimately the common man has to bear the brunt of these huge losses either in 

 
64 
 
the form of increase in tariff or taxes or surcharg es.  The Committee believe 
that delay in taking corrective measures will only exacerbate the issue. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the followings: 
(i) Work related to reorganization of SEBs in remai ning States should be 
expedited as it is an important strategy in the pur suit of reforms for 
encouraging competition, promoting greater efficien cy by streamlining 
operations of distribution, transmission, generatio n and trading, while 
promoting transparency and accountability.  
(ii) FOR should ensure that adequate steps are take n by every State’s 
Regulatory Commission and Discoms to rationalize th eir tariff annually by 
taking into account all the aspects including distr ibution losses and their 
management inefficiency. The endeavor should be tha t the price of 
inefficiency of Discoms in the form of distribution  losses should not be 
passed on to the common man in the form of increase  in tariff. Also a target 
should be fixed to reduce the AT&C losses in a time  bound manner failing 
which this component should be dealt within a manne r wherein DISCOMs 
are made accountable for their inefficiency without  passing it on to the 
consumers. 
(iii) Energy audit of each and every Discoms should  be mandatorily by 
third party, which should invariably be taken into account for tariff 
rationalization purposes.  
(iv) The Government, CERC and FOR should come up wi th some 
innovative ideas to overcome the menace of huge los ses incurred by 
various SEBs, which in the view of the Committee is  nothing but the result 
of inefficiency, lack of vision and will power of t he Government on this 

 
65 
 
issue. The Committee would like to be apprised of t he sincere efforts taken 
by the Government/CERC/FOR in this regard.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.6, Para No.2.6) 
 
 
Tariff Regulation  
2.7 The Committee note that provisions of section 7 9 read with 61 and 62 
of the Electricity Act 2003 empowers the CERC to de termine the tariff as per 
the provisions of the Act for supply of the electri city, transmission of the 
electricity, wheeling of the electricity and retail  sale of the electricity. With a 
view to discharge this task the Commission notified terms and conditions of 
tariff initially for a period of three years with e ffect from March 2001. After 
the enactment of the Electricity Act 2003 new terms  and conditions of tariff 
were notified in March 2004 for a period of five ye ars providing for 
determination of generation tariff, station-wise an d transmission tariff line-
wise. The terms and conditions contain financial as well as technical norms. 
Capital cost of the projects being starting point for tariff calculation is called 
cost plus tariff. Introduction of Availability Based Tariff (ABT) and Multi Year 
Tariff (MYT) are also implemented by the CERC based  on certain principles. 
ABT mechanism allows a generator to recover the fixed cost only if it is able 
to make its capacity available for use. The Committ ee find that the 
parameters which form basis for determining annual fixed charges and 
energy charges are not uniform and have been changi ng from time to time. 
Tariff regulation 2004-09 provided for computation of base energy charge 
rate by the Commission based on preceding three mon ths price and Gross 
Calorific Value (GCV) of fuel and also provided fue l price adjustment 

 
66 
 
formula for month to month variation in fuel price and GCV of fuel. However, 
tariff regulation 2009 has provided a formula for e nergy charge rate 
calculation on month-to-month basis based on specif ied operational norms 
and monthly price and GCV of fuel. However, specifi ed operational norms 
have not been illustrated and it has also not been stated as to what 
prompted the change in formula adopted in the year 2004. It has also not 
been clarified whether the latter formula is more c onsumer friendly. 
Similarly, regarding energy charge rate, the Commit tee have been apprised 
that the energy charges depends on scheduled genera tions, gross stations 
heat rate, auxiliary energy consumption, gross calo rific value of fuel and 
price of fuel. Simultaneously, it has also been sta ted that the Central 
Commission does not have control over the quality a nd price of the fuel 
used for power generation and the fuel prices are p assed through in tariff. 
The Committee are amazed at the gear sifting about the norms laid down for 
determination of tariff. Though, it is technical an d relatively complex issue 
for common man yet the bottom line theory is the co st (inclusive of all 
factors of fixed cost and energy charges) of the project including the trading 
or profit margin that should form the parameter for  determination of the 
tariff. Despite the so-called elaborate formula laid down for tariff fixation, the 
general perception about it reflects that it is an extremely mystifying 
exercise devoid of transparency and accountability.  Reported involvement 
of the common people, NGOs, Resident Welfare Associations in the process 
is superficial cover and therefore needs to be take n in meaningful and 
realistic manner. The Committee, therefore, strongl y recommend that the 
tariff fixation is an exercise having pervasive con sequences about the 
sector to the extent of exploiting larger segment o f stakeholders whereas 

 
67 
 
enriching or thriving the minuscule percentage of s takeholders and hence 
requires to be undertaken in a truly participatory and transparent manner 
leaving no scope for any apprehension as to the gen uineness of the 
exercise about the tariff fixation. All the stages and various constituents 
involved in the process should be clearly spelt out  with a view to allay any 
misgiving in the mind of the people for an objectiv e handling of the entire 
process.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.7, Para No.2.7) 
 
2.8 The Committee find that Multi Year Tariff (MYT)  regime are meant for 
generating companies and transmission licensees. Th is kind of tariff is 
determined as per the terms and conditions based on  financial and 
technical norms. This tariff is usually called the cost plus tariff because the 
capital cost of the project is the starting point f or the tariff calculation. In 
this formula except for the actual capital expendit ure most of the financial 
and technical parameters adopted for tariff are nor mative and not actual.  
The tariff calculations are quite elaborate as various elements going into the 
tariff are computed to arrive at full tariff. This tariff is different for each 
generating station depending on its admitted capita l cost, base fuel price, 
gross calorific value and applicable norms for the efficient operation. This 
exercise is done to ensure that the utilities do no t misuse their dominant 
position to strike the high price from the buyer be sides making them 
function in an efficient and economic manner. The M YT implies that various 
financial and operational norms specified by the Co mmission would remain 
valid and unchanged during the controlled period du ring the MYT regime. 

 
68 
 
The principle of Availability Based Tariff has been  adopted by the 
Commission for adoption in MYT period since its int roduction. Thus ABT 
principles are like any other principle that remain s in force during the 
currency of MYT period.  The Committee are surprise d to find that normally 
the terms and conditions of the tariff for five yea r period remains the same 
but in some exceptional cases the same may be revie wed also. Similarly, it 
is also not convincing that whereas the tariff prin ciples and their 
applications generally remains same during the tari ff period, the annual 
fixed charges and the energy charges do not remain static and vary from 
year to year and month to month respectively on acc ount of inflation and 
increase in O&M cost, changes in interest rate and due to variation in 
quality and price of fuel. It is self-contradictory  that various financial and 
operational norms specified by the Commission would  remain valid and 
unchanged during the controlled period of MYT regim e and the factors 
responsible for these norms have been stated to be changing on monthly 
and yearly basis. This incoherence provides the sco pe for tweaking in the 
tariff structure without any justification. More so when the ABT principle has 
also been included in it. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that 
the concept of MYT should be re-evaluated with a view to provide stability in 
tariff regime and consistency to its different tariff structure.   
(Recommendation Sl. No.8, Para No.2.8) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that prior to the Electricit y Act 2003 there was no 
concept of competitive bidding or tariff discovery through competitive 
bidding. The Electricity Act 2003 has brought in th e concept of tariff 

 
69 
 
discovery through completive bidding process and th e Commission is 
required to adopt the tariff so discovered. Section  63 of the Act provides 
that the CERC has to adopt the tariff if such tarif f has been determined by 
the completive bidding process in accordance with the guidelines framed by 
the Central Government in this regard.  In response  to Committee’s inquest 
whether any study has been carried out to find out as to which category of 
tariff is cheaper between the two i.e. tariff throu gh competitive bidding or 
through cost plus process, it was informed that in the year 2011 CERC had 
carried out a study of 14 competitively bid power p lants with commercial 
date of operation between 2011 and 2014 comparing t he bids with cost plus 
approach and the prices under cost plus approach we re found higher in 
respect of 11 of the 14 projects.  In 3 plants (2 i n Maharastra and 1 in 
Madhya Pradesh) tariff for competitive bids were fo und higher than the cost 
plus approach. It was concluded that in general com petitive bid can lead to 
lower tariff. The Committee have also been apprised  that “however, these 
were levelized prices and actual payments over the years depends on bid 
structure (particularly proportion of variable part  in tariff) and how the 
parameters really vary in future. While replying to  a specific question of the 
Committee whether 85% tie up of power through biddi ng will not stall the 
process of development of thermal power projects by  private power 
developers, the Committee were informed that “the p rovisions of 85% tie up 
of private power through competitive bidding is to ensure availability of 
power to the distribution licensee at a relatively cheaper rate in power 
shortage condition. The 85% tie up of power would n ot stall the 
development of thermal power stations by the projec t developers because 
by this, the developer would be assured of the cust omer for his 85% output 

 
70 
 
and balance 15% power could be sold by him based up on prevailing power 
merchant rate.” The Committee find that the exercis e of tariff determination 
through competitive bidding is not akin to reality.  The comparison between 
the two systems of tariff determination with the pr ojects whose COD are 
between 2011-14 with the running plants is nothing but chimera. The 
justification of tariff discovered thorough competitive bidding being lower in 
11 plants is specious for the fact that despite tar iff being quoted for these 
plants none of these plants are operational, neither there is any likelihood of 
them becoming operational as scheduled. It is a nea r certainty that most of 
them will be mired with the several issues includin g tariff for final decision 
or adjudication before concrete action is taken for  them becoming a reality. 
The contention of the Ministry that 85% power tie-u p will not stall the 
development of the plants as it assures developers the market of their 
product is also not sustainable on the ground that the situation in the 
Country regarding availability of power is still fa r from the satisfactory 
leading to scarcity and hence any prior tie-up of s ale is not going to 
reassure developers to keep pace of the plant as pl anned particularly when 
they find the tariff uneconomical due to several fa ctors. The Committee as 
such are not averse to idea of competitive bidding per se but definitively 
have inhibition about the shoddy manner in which it  has been done and 
projected thereafter. The Committee, therefore, str ongly recommend that 
entire process of competitive bidding for determina tion of tariff has not 
been tested on the touchstone of the system and hen ce there is nothing to 
cheer about this policy. It should be framed in suc h a way so as to 
encompass the future variables also of the various constituents within the 

 
71 
 
policy otherwise it is not going to fructify as con ceived and projects 
attained through this process are highly unlikely to reach their logical stage.     
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9, Para No.2.9) 
 
Grid Discipline/Transmission 
 
2.10 The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2 003 has entrusted CERC 
the responsibility of regulating Inter-State Transm ission System and also 
notifying Grid Code for smooth conveyance of electr icity across States. In 
discharge of this responsibility CERC issued the re vised Regulation on 
Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) in April, 2006.   IEGC brings together a 
single set of technical rules, encompassing all the  utilities connected to or 
using the Inter-State Transmission System. The Comm ittee further note that 
in respect of regulation for Unscheduled Interchang e (UI) the concept of 
Availability Based Tariff (ABT) which primarily has two components, namely 
fixed cost and variable cost has been introduced by  the Commission.  
Under ABT a generator is allowed to recover the fix ed cost only if it is able 
to make its capacity available for use, whereas, th e energy charge is 
recoverable as per the pre-committed schedule of su pply. This mechanism 
also provides for charges of Unscheduled Interchang e (UI) which are 
imposed when a generator generates less or benefici ary overdraws power 
than the schedule thereby decreasing the normal fre quency of 50Hz. The 
Committee find that though this mechanism has been helpful in containing 
the problem of UI to some extent but the scrutiny b y the Committee of the 
data as provided by the CERC regarding grid frequen cy leaves much to be 

 
72 
 
desired. The minimum frequency of Grid has dropped even below 49.Hz 
during all the three years i.e. 2009-10 to 2011-12 putting the smooth 
functioning of the Grid at stake.  The scrutiny of the Committee have 
revealed that UI charges for the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative 
value of Rs. 74,181 crore which itself indicates to  the degree of problem of 
Unscheduled Interchange and misuse of the mechanism . The UI charges 
system has perhaps failed to enforce the desired gr id discipline as it is 
found to be an easy alternative of short term elect ricity trading by 
overdrawing power from the grid by Discoms at the c ost of lesser power 
supply to the actual beneficiary and also resulting  in lowering of frequency 
endangering the safety of the grid. This set up als o indicate  to the 
possibility of gaming - an intentional mis-declarat ion of declared capacity 
by any generating station or seller to make an undu e commercial gain 
through UI charges. The Committee strongly feel that the safety and smooth 
functioning of the Grid is of utmost importance so that the legitimate 
beneficiaries and generators should not suffer due to malpractices indulged 
by some Discoms/Generators. The Committee also noti ce that there is no 
uniformity in realization of UI charges due to seve ral reasons like stay 
granted by the Court, petition for waiver of penalt y, setting aside of penalty 
by APTEL and also without any genuine reasons. Sinc e 2005, 46 cases of 
indiscipline were reported of which in 24 cases pen alties were imposed and 
only in 17 cases the penalty were paid. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommend that necessary changes may be effected in  Indian Electricity 
Grid Code (IEGC)/ and the UI charges/ penalty shoul d be increased to the 
extent that it effectively deter Discoms/ Generator s from Unscheduled 
Interchange and this practice should be resorted to  only under emergency 

 
73 
 
and unforeseen circumstances rather to be misused a s ill-practice of 
gaming and short term electricity trading. For repe ated offences of 
overdrawing and putting the grid safety at risk, pe nal provisions, apart from 
hefty financial penalty, should be made harsh enoug h to pose as 
deterrence.  The required amendments to provide mor e authority to 
CERC/FOR for effective realization of financial pen alty imposed for the 
offenses should also be made in the regulation. Sim ultaneously, the 
Government should also explore the possibility of a ncillary market for the 
purpose of ensuring strict grid discipline as prevalent in Western Countries.    
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10, Para No.2.10) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that it is difficult to dis pense with UI mechanism 
as there is deficit in generation of electricity vi s-à-vis it demand. Surplus 
electricity is a distant dream and may take decades  before becoming a 
reality. Hence, the UI System will be in place till  the time the generation 
outpace the demand. As it involves financial transa ctions, a relative degree 
of transparency with regard to fixation of such cha rges, the process of their 
realization from overdrawing and under-injecting en tities, disbursement of 
these charges to entitled entities (under-drawing a nd over-injecting entities) 
and upkeep of the amount so collected, will go a lo ng way to ensure the 
seemly fairness of the affairs. In reply to a quest ion about the amount 
collected by CERC through UI charges, the Committee  have been informed 
that cumulative amount of Rs.74,181 crore from the year 2002-03 till 
October, 2011 has been charged under this head. Aft er the capping of UI 
rates for generator, some funds are available which  are maintained as 

 
74 
 
Regional Unscheduled Interchange Pool Account Fund maintained by 
respective Regional Load Dispatch Centre. Subsequen tly, the UI charges 
standing to the credit of Unscheduled Interchange P ool Account Fund has 
been credited to the Power System Development Fund.  As on May 2012, the 
surplus amount of UI charges is Rs. 3404 crore as d eposited in PSDF. The 
utilization of this amount for the purposes identif ied by CERC in PSDF 
Regulation 2010 is yet to be notified as the consul tation with the Ministry of 
Finance are on. The Committee, therefore strongly r ecommend a final 
decision with regard to the utilization of money ma y be taken at the earliest 
in the best interest of this sector and it should b e in consistent with the 
concept of public money with regard to its deposit and usage. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11, Para No.2.11) 
 
2.12 The Committee note that provisions under Secti on 63 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 and the guidelines of Nationa l Electricity Policy, issued 
by the Ministry of Power, on 13-4-2006 aim at layin g down a transparent 
procedure for facilitating competition in the trans mission sector through 
wide participation in providing transmission servic es and tariff 
determination through a process of tariff based com petitive bidding. They 
further note that since 6.1.2011, all the ISTS transmission schemes are to be 
implemented through Tariff based Competitive Bidding as given in the Tariff 
Policy. Selection of transmission service provider (TSP) for implementation 
of the transmission project is through the bidding process. The Committee 
were informed that 8 transmission projects have bee n awarded through the 
process of competitive bidding. 3 projects have bee n awarded to Sterlite 

 
75 
 
Grid Limited, 1 project to Consortium of M/s Patel Engineering Limited, M/s 
Simplex Infrastructures Limited & M/s BSTransComm L imited, while 
Reliance Power Transmission Limited and Power Grid Corporation of India 
Limited bagged 2 projects each. 
When enquired by the Committee as to why any of the  awardees have 
approached Government/ CERC expressing their inabil ity to carry out the 
work on terms and conditions agreed to at the time of competitive bidding / 
award of work, it has been informed that three awar dees have approached 
the CERC due to one difficulty or the other which i ncludes inordinate delay 
in the issuance of approval under section 164 of th e Electricity Act, 2003 by 
the Ministry of Power, cost escalations of various component, delay in 
notification of suitable sponsoring authority etc.  The Committee feel that 
the work related to construction of transmission pr ojects will play a vital 
role in evacuation of electricity from the surplus to deficient regions and are 
disappointed to note that it is not progressing sat isfactorily. It is well known 
that the upcoming power stations generation capacit y will be of no use if 
required transmission lines for transmission of ele ctricity to the designated 
regions are not put in place in time. Thus augmenta tion of transmission 
lines proportionate to capacity addition in generat ion of power is of equal 
importance. The Committee feel that the problems pl aguing the 
transmission projects are neither unexpected nor in surmountable. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in the cases of c ompetitive bidding, the 
issues like approvals and notification of sponsorin g authority are 
automatically taken care of. Any delay in this rega rd will enable the bidders 
to take the plea of cost escalation and thus abando n the project. This 

 
76 
 
nullifies the entire exercise and process come to a  naught. The Committee 
are unhappy to note response on specific issues rai sed such as alternative 
course of action, action proposed against the defau lters or any contingency 
plan and future event have been intentionally evade d. The Committee 
observe that in most of the cases of competitive bi dding, the successful 
lower bidder, starts complaining about the non-viab ility even before the 
start of the project. The Committee, therefore, rec ommend that the 
Government should ensure that necessary clauses should be inserted in the 
terms and conditions of projects meant for award th rough competitive 
bidding to the effect that this problem of projects  becoming economically 
unviable due to cost escalation or other reason can  be taken care of at the 
time of bidding itself. Further, the Committee also  recommend the Ministry 
to expedite the process of issue of approval under section 164 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 to the concerned transmission  companies.  They also 
desire the progress of the above mentioned transmis sion projects as well 
as 9 High Capacity Tower Transmission Corridors pro jects involving 
investment to the extent of Rs.58,000 crores approv ed by CERC, should be 
closely monitored and appropriate remedial action s hould be taken to 
overcome the impediments being faced, if any.  The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Gove rnment with regard to 
progress of three transmission projects which have been held up following 
the inability of the successful bidder to carry on the work.  
(Recommendation Sl. No.12, Para No.2.12) 
 
 
 

 
77 
 
 
Trading of Electricity  
 2.13 The Committee note that Electricity Act, 2003  has recognized the 
transaction involving purchase and sale of electric ity as a distinct licensed 
activity. Prior to that the electricity industry re cognized generation, 
transmission and supply as the three principal activities. The SEBs/Discoms 
who have the obligation to provide electricity to their consumers mainly rely 
on supplies from long-term contracts. However, it i s neither feasible nor 
economical to meet short term, seasonal or peaking demand through long-
term contracts. Be it a deficit scenario or otherwi se, power trading is 
essential for meeting the short-term demand at an a ppropriate cost. 
Similarly, power trading is essential for distribution utilities for selling short-
term surpluses in order to optimize the cost of pro curement. A few captive 
generating plants participate in trading in order t o optimize their operating 
cost and in the process, supply electricity to the grid.  
 The responsibility of developing the market in ele ctricity has been vested 
with the Regulatory Commissions. CERC grants inter- state trading license, 
which is mandatory under the provisions of the Elec tricity Act, 2003, to 
electricity traders and registration with the power  exchanges. It constantly 
monitors the function of these institutions through  regular reporting of 
transactions undertaken by them. In case of traders , the trading margin 
charged by them is also monitored. The Committee were informed that there 
are two Power Exchanges operational presently namel y Indian Energy 
Exchange and Power Exchanges of India Limited. Thes e are operational 
from June, 2008 and October, 2008 respectively.  Re garding benefits of 

 
78 
 
electricity trading the Committee were apprised tha t the power prices in the 
short term market have decreased in the last three years and the volume 
has increased. Both Discoms and open access consume rs, who participate 
in this market actively, have benefited due to the price decrease in this 
market. The Committee express their satisfaction ov er the fact that trading 
has helped bringing down the power price. However, the Committee feel 
that the electricity trading in the Country is stil l at rudimentary stage, 
characterized by low volume and fewer number of tra nsactions limited to 
specific section of society and absence of favourab le rule and regulations 
attracting more traders to take part in the process . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government/CERC shoul d take steps in 
framing such set of rules and regulations that shou ld prove not only 
conducive for electricity trading and invite more a nd more players in this 
field to make it more competitive but also effectiv ely prevent/ tackle any 
malpractices by big players of the Sector. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13, Para No.2.13) 
 
 
Open Access  
2.14 The Committee observe that the concept of open  access is central to 
bring about competition in distribution power. Afte r de-licensing of 
generation a generator can sell its power anywhere in the country. For 
consumers also it is beneficial to have a choice to  procure power from a 
reliable and efficient source. This can be achieved  through open access 
besides facilitating flow of power from surplus to deficit areas. National 

 
79 
 
Electricity Policy states that non-discriminatory o pen access shall be 
provided to the competing generators supplying powe r to licensees. As a 
result, during last five years the share of private  sector in total generation 
has increased from 11% to 23%. In the last two year s alone 12000 MW 
generation has come up from private sector.  
Open access in transmission has helped make generat ion more 
competitive and has provided choice to Discoms as w ell as open access 
consumers. This is helping many captive generators as well as open access 
consumers to buy and sell electricity in the short- term market. Over 1000 
open access consumers are buying power through Powe r-Exchanges. 
Electricity traders and Power Exchanges have starte d functioning. Short 
term trading in electricity through traders and power exchange has provided 
an alternative market for electricity other than lo ng term PPA. This has 
reduced the Discom default risk for generators sign ificantly. However, 
problems are also staring the system. They have been identified as difficulty 
of market access for buyers and seller of electrici ty, problems of evacuation 
infrastructure for seamless flow of electricity and  safe and secure operation 
of Grid etc. These bottlenecks have been attempted to be resolved through 
regulations and orders for short-term open access i n transmission and the 
regulations of “grant of connectivity, long-term ac cess and medium term 
open access in inter-state transmission”. CERC has also provided for the 
deemed concurrence of SLDCs for open access if their decision is not given 
within a specified time frame. Short-term open acce ss provides generators 
and open access buyer access to transmission corrid ors for period upto 
three months while the long-term and medium-term op en access regulation 

 
80 
 
provide upcoming generators grid connectivity to in ter-state transmission 
grid to a period from 12 years to 25 years and medi um-term from 3 months 
to 3 years respectively. The short-term open access  regulation has 
facilitated development of short-term power market where trader, power 
exchange are allowed to indulge in electricity tran sactions. Also in medium-
term and long-term frame work the generator is allo wed access to the 
national market and sell power to any buyer across the country. The 
Committee feel that all these developments are welc ome sign but the entire 
frame work of open access is of limited significanc e to the majority of the 
consumers in the country. So long as the generation  does not out pace the 
demand in the Country, the benefits of open access will be a distant dream 
to an ordinary consumer. Presently, the mechanism o f open access does 
not provide any safety to common man from exploitat ion from high tariff of 
electricity. It is only the power exchanges, electr icity traders, generators 
who have been benefited by the exercise of open acc ess and its 
achievements so far. Although distribution licensee s and Discoms are also 
within the periphery of the open access but the gap  between the demand 
and supply nullifies the benefits to common consume rs that may have 
possibly accrued to them due to the presence of the  multiple distribution 
licensees. Besides the network of distribution lice nsees wherever it exist is 
mostly monopolized and hence to conceive the situat ion of consumer 
having options of choosing a distribution company o f his own choice at a 
competitive rate will remain a far cry in coming de cades. While 
acknowledging the efforts made by the CERC to ease the system in 
electricity sector the Committee express their diss atisfaction over the fact 
that no strategy has been thought of to assess the possibility whether this 

 
81 
 
sector can be developed on the lines of telecommuni cations sector 
providing multiples options to consumers.  The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommend that despite the inherent bottlenecks, efforts should be made to 
strategize the sector in such a fashion wherein this could be developed with 
the objective of benefiting the common consumer hav ing option to choose 
the agency of his preference amongst the multiple distribution companies. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14, Para No.2.14) 
  
2.15 The Committee note that the function of Centra l Commission in 
accordance with section 79 of the Act is to regulat e the inter-state 
transmission of electricity and other role of the C ommission (under section 
66 of the Act) is development of market in power in cluding trading. For 
power market development, it is necessary that open  access is facilitated 
through regulations. Hence Commission brought out O pen Access 
Regulation 2004 and later Open Access in Inter-stat e Transmission 
Regulation, 2008 was issued. Also, Grant of Connect ivity, Long Term 
Access and Medium term open Access, 2009 was issued . Open Access 
regulations also provide DISCOMs and eligible consu mers the choice of 
contracting powers to meet demand on long term medi um and short term 
basis. However, regulation provides that the concur rence of States load 
dispatch center for open access can be denied only when surplus 
transmission capacity is not available in the State  network or metering 
infrastructure is not available for energy metering  and accounting in 
accordance with the Grid Code. The Committee are of  the opinion that it will 
take a long time before the concept of Open Access,  as envisaged, become 

 
82 
 
a reality for common consumer. Presently, it is ava ilable in a limited 
manner, to generators giving them certain perceived protections with regard 
to evacuation of electricity, default payment, operation and liquidity risk etc. 
and also to certain extent in the inter-state trans mission of electricity. The 
short term transaction of electricity facilitated t hrough Open Access during 
the last three years is 9 per cent, 10 per cent and  11 per cent respectively of 
the total electricity generated. This amplifies tha t even at the market level 
the concept of Open Access is yet to bloom. As if, this was not enough, 
some States have issued orders under section 11 or section 108 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 for restricting the sale of s urplus power of the State 
thereby, prohibiting the sale to the consumers and utilities outside the 
State. They have also fixed the price for sale of p ower to the distribution 
licenses in the State. This has been done despite t he ruling of the CERC on 
the matter which is contrary to the stand taken by these States. This 
exercise by some States negates the very concept of  Open Access. The 
Committee feel that such issues can be settled only  through bodies like 
FOR having enough power to deal with such issues. T he action by some 
States is well within the foreseeable possibilities  and cannot be handled by 
invoking section of the Electricity Act. It has to be dealt with within the 
ambit of ground realities and making the electricity sector a competitive and 
commercially viable entity. The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommend 
that the limited scope of Open Access which has dev eloped hitherto should 
be ensured to grow as conceived. It cannot be allowed to be mired into legal 
wrangling sending disappointing signals to stakehol ders and efforts should 
be made to resolve the issues without invoking legal devices.   
(Recommendation Sl. No.15, Para No.2.15) 

 
83 
 
Promotion of Renewable Energy  
2.16 The Committee note that section 86(1) (e) of t he Electricity Act 
mandates the State Electricity Regulatory Commissio ns to promote, inter 
alia , generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy by providing 
suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any 
person, and also specify, for purchase of electrici ty from such sources, a 
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a 
distribution licensee. The Committee were informed that a number of SERCs 
have already specified such percentage of the elect ricity to be procured in 
the area of a distribution licensee and have also n otified cost plus tariff for 
different technologies of renewable energy exploita tion. However, the 
Committee found that the level of Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation 
(RPO), i.e. the percentage of electricity to be pro cured from such sources 
varies significantly from State to State. A few Sta tes like Tamil Nadu and 
Karnataka have already achieved a RPO level of more  than 10%, but there 
are number of States which have not even touched RP O level of 2%. 
Further, the Committee were informed that though De lhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission has prescribed two per cent b ut actually Delhi is 
not using any green energy.  To overcome the issue of mismatch between 
availability of RE Resources in a State and the req uirement of the obligated 
entities to meet the renewable purchase obligation (RPO), the Secretary of 
CERC stated that they have come up with a mechanism of renewable energy 
certificates under which States endowed with abunda nt renewable energy 
potential generates more power than required under RPO and can sell the 
certificate of excess generation to States bereft  of renewable energy source 
so that they can fulfill their RPO. The Committee w hile endorsing this 

 
84 
 
concept feel that it is a step in the right directi on to promote the optimum 
utilization of renewable energy as it incentivises the production of energy 
from renewable sources and will encourage the endow ed States to fully 
utilize their renewable sources. The Committee, the refore, recommend that 
RPO should be fixed uniformly for each State at 7% for the year 2012 and 
thereby increasing 1% every year to reach 15% in ye ar 2020 as envisaged 
under National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC ) in year 2008. The 
Committee expect that the Government will take sinc ere and prompt action 
in this regard under their intimation.   
(Recommendation Sl. No.16, Para No.2.16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         MULAYAM SINGH YA DAV 
August 22, 2012,                                                                     Chairman,  
Shravana 31, 1934 (Saka)                       Stan ding Committee on Energy 
  

 
85 
 
Annexure-I 
 
STANDING COMMITEE ON ENERGY  
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2011-12) HELD ON 9 TH  NOVEMBER, 2011 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’ 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1245 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
                Shri Motilal Vora              -      in the Chair 
 
Members  
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Baliram Jadhav 
3.  Shri Gurudas Kamat 
4.  Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
5.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
7.  Shri C.Rajendran 
8.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
9.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
10.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
11.  Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
12.  Shri Makan Singh Solanki 
RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Govindrao Adik 
14.  Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia 
15.  Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
16.  Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Director 
3. Shri N.K. Pandey   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
  

 
86 
 
List of Witnesses  
 
Ministry of Power  
 
Sl. No.  Name     Designation 
1.  Shri P. Uma Shankar   Secretary (Power) 
2.  Shri Ashok Lavasa   Addl. Secretary 
3.  Shri I.C.P.Keshari   Joint Secretary 
4.  Smt. Rita Acharya,    Joint Secretary 
 
Central Electricity Authority  
 
1.  Shri A.S.Bakshi   Chairperson, CEA 
2.  Shri Ravinder    Member, CEA 
3.  Shri K.P.Singh    Member, CEA 
4.  Shri K.K. Agarwal   Member, CEA 
 
Public Sector Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies  
1.  Shri Arup Roy Choudhury  CMD, NTPC 
2.  Shri A.B.L. Srivastava   CMD, NHPC 
3.  Shri R.N. Nayak   CMD, Powergrid 
4.  Shri H.D. Khunteta   CMD, REC 
5.  Shri R.P.Singh   CMD, SJVNL 
6.  Shri R.S.T. Sai   CMD, THDC 
7.  Shri P.C. Pankaj    CMD, NEEPCO 
8.  Shri R.N.Sen    Chairman, DVC 
   
 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  
 
1.  Dr. Pramod Deo   Chairman, CERC 
2.  Shri Rajiv Bansal   Secretary, CERC 
3.  Shri Pankaj Batra   Chief (Engg.) 
4.  Dr. V.M. Deshpande   Chief Advisor (Eco.) 
 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee ch ose Shri Motilal Vora, a 
Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in accordance with Rule 258 
(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  

 
87 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the member s of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Power and Centra l Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) and other PSUs/Organizations to the sitting of the Committee and emphasized 
the need for effective functioning of the Central E lectricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) for the benefit of the common man. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Power/CERC made a brief 
power-point presentation on 'Functioning of Central  Electricity Regulatory Commission' 
followed by a briefing on the subject.              
5. The Committee inter-alia discussed with the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Power and CERC on the following important points: 
 i) General functioning of CERC; 
ii) Roles and responsibilities of CERC vis-à-vis th eir performance; 
iii) Regulation of tariff in connection with inter- state electricity transmission and 
trading and the extent to which it has benefitted the consumers. 
iv) Issuing license for inter-state transmission an d trading and setting 
performance standards for the licensees; 
v) Promotion of competition in electricity transmis sion and trading and 
promotion of open access; and 
vi) Coordination between Centre and States as also CERC and SERCs with 
regard to electricity regulation. 
vii) Regulation of the regulator. 
 
The Members sought clarifications on various issues  relating to the subject and 
the representatives of the Ministry/CERC responded to the same. The Committee 
directed the representatives of the Ministry to fur nish written replies to the queries which 
could not be responded to immediately. 

 
88 
 
6. The Committee decided to have further evidence o f the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power and CERC on the subject on a later date. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitt ing of the Committee has been 
kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
89 
 
Annexure-II  
 
STANDING COMMITEEE ON ENERGY  
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 12 TH  JUNE, 2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’ 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. 
 
PRESENT  
 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav                -      Chairman 
 
Members  
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
3.  Shri Baliram Jadhav 
4.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
6.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
7.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
8.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9.  Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10.  Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
11.  Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
12.  Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
13.  Shri D.P. Tripathi 
14.  Shri Moti Lal Vohra 
15.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Director 

 
90 
 
List of Witnesses  
 
Ministry of Power 
 
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar  - Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa  - Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhary - Addl. Secretary 
4. Shri I.C.P. Keshari  - Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Arora  - Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Rita Acharya  - Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Rakesh Jain  - Joint Secretary & F.A. 
 
Central Electricity Authority 
 
1. Shri A.S. Bakshi  - Chairperson 
 
Public Sector Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies  
1. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury - CMD, NTPC 
2. Shri R.N. Nayak  - CMD, PowerGrid 
3. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - CMD, REC 
4. Shri R.N. Sen   - Chairman, DVC 
5. Shri M.K. Goel   - Director (Commercial), PFC 
 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
 
1. Dr. Pramod Deo   - Chairman, CERC 
2. Shri Rajiv Bansal   - Secretary, CERC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman on behalf of the Com mittee welcomed the 
representatives of the Ministry of Power/CEA/PSUs a nd Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission to the sitting of the Committee and appr ised them of the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Sp eaker regarding confidentiality of 
proceedings.   
3. After introduction of the witnesses to the Commi ttee, with the approval of the 
Chairman, the representatives of the Ministry of Po wer/CERC made a power-point 
presentation on the role and Functioning of Central  Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC).  

 
91 
 
4.  The Committee inter-alia  discussed with the representatives of the Ministry  of 
Power/CERC, the following important points:- 
i) Role of CERC in tariff regulations and mechanism  for tariff determination in 
Introduction of Availability Based Tariff (ABT), Mu lti-year tariff principles 
and competitive bidding for generating companies an d transmission 
licensees regulated by CERC. 
ii) Role of CERC in ensuring reliability of Grid Op eration – Impact of 
Regulatory Intervention on frequency in new grid an d realization of 
penalties imposed by CERC on drawing entities or ge nerators deviating 
from the norms. 
iii) Work done by CERC in respect of development of  Power Market – license 
to electricity traders, power exchanges, open access etc. 
iv) Approval by CERC for investment of Rs. 58,000 c rore to CTU for Nine High 
capacity transmission corridors and its funding. 
v) Promotion of Renewable Energy by CERC – preferen tial tariff, renewable 
purchase obligation, grid integration etc.   
  
The Members sought clarifications on various issues  relating to the subject and 
the representatives of the Ministry/CERC responded to the same. The Committee 
directed the representatives of the Ministry to fur nish written replies to the queries which 
could not be responded to. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitt ing of the Committee has been 
kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
92 
 
Annexure-III  
 
 
STANDING COMMITEEE ON ENERGY 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 16 th  AUGUST, 2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’ 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Motilal Vora                -      (in the Chair) 
2.  Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
4.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
5.  Shri C. Rajendran 
6.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
7.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
8.  Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia  
9.  Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari  
10.  Shri Jesudasu Seelam  
11.  Shri Mohammad Shafi  
12.  Shri D.P.Tripathi  
13.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Director 
3. Shri N.K.Pandey   - Additional Director 
 
2. In the absence of the the Chairman, the Committe e chose Shri Motilal Vora, a 
member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in accordance with Rule 
258(3) of the Rule of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 

 
93 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee.  
 X X X X X X X X X X X 
 X X X X X X X X X X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the  following draft reports:- 
i) 29 
th  Report on Availability of identified non-conventio nal resources of 
energy – their potential vis-à-vis utilization. 
ii) 30 th  Report on Functioning of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission. 
 After discussion, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports without any 
change. 
5. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to fi nalize the above-mentioned 
Reports taking into consideration consequential cha nges arising out of factual 
verification, if any, by the concerned Ministries a nd also to present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 