MINISTRY OF POWER 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty First 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Implementation of 
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)'} 
THIRD REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 


THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2009-2010) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty First 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Implementation of 
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVYYJ 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2009 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2009lAgrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 


C.O.E. No. 184 
Price : Rs. 38.00 
© 2009 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Mis. The 
Indian Press, Delhi-110 033. 


CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2009-10 (iii) 
INIRODUCTION............................................................................................................. (v) 
CHAPTER I Report................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government................................................ 12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
replies ·............................................................................... 19 
CHAPTER IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration..................................... 23 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited....... 29 
ApPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
14 December, 2009.................................................................... 30 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
31st Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Energy.............................................................. 32 


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2009-2010) 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sablia 
2. Mohammad Azharuddin 
3. Shri S.K Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri P.c. Chacko 
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Arjun Munda 
9. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
13. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
14. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
15. Shri K Chandrasekhar Rao 
16. Dr. KS. Rao 
17. Shri Ganesh Singh 
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
20. Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
21. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhade 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Motilal Vora 
23. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
(iii) 


24. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
25. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
26. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
27. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
28. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav 
*29. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
30. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik 
31. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt 
2. Shri Shiv Singh 
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
4. Shri Manish Kumar 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
Deputy Secretary 
Executive Assistant 
'Passed away on 6th November, 2009. 
(iv) 


INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this 3rd Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in 31st Report of the 
Standing Committee on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana 
(RGGVY)'. 
2. The 31st Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 18th February, 2009. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 15th June, 
2009. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 14th December, 2009. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the 
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 31st Report of the Committee is given 
at Appendix-H. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report. 
NEW DELHI; 
16 December, 2009 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 25 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
(v) 


CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Thirty-First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject 'Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana 
(RGGVY)' of the Ministry of Power. 
2. The Thirty-First Report was pre~ented to Lok Sabha on 
18th February, 2009 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the 
same day. The Report contained 9 Observations/Recommendations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7 and 9 
Total - 05 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Serial Nos. 6 and 8 
Total - 02 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. t and 5 
Total - 02 
Chapter-IV 
1 


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil 
Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that 
require reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Facets of Village Electrification under RGGVY 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
6. The Committee in their Thirty-First Report had brought out 
that the Ministry of Power had adopted new definition of village 
electrification in February, 2004. However, the Ministry were not able to 
obtain the updated data as per the new definition. The number of 
uri-electrified villages in the country had been estimated to be 1,25,000 
as on 31st March, 2004 based on data pertaining to 1991 census. The 
Committee further noted that the data available with the Ministry 
regarding household electrification was based on 2001 census. The 
Committee also noted that non-availability of authentic lists of BPL 
households of villages covered under RGGVY had marred the execution 
of RGGVY projects. The Committee had, therefore recommended that the 
Ministry should take immediate steps to obtain state-wise data on 
unelectrified rural villages as per new definition on village electrification 
effective from 2004-05 and data on uri-electrified rural households 
including BPL households for proper planning and implementation of 
the RGGVY under which all the uri-electrified villages were envisaged 
to be electrified covering at least 10 percent of uri-electrified rural 
households in those villages. 
2 


7. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have 
inter-alia stated:- 
"Under RGGVY, all villages (as per census 2001) both un-electrified 
as well as already electrified have been considered for electrification 
of rural households including BPL households. Under the scheme, 
all un-electrified villages are to be electrified as per new definition 
of village electrification effective from 2004-05. Besides, villages 
which are considered electrified as per old definition will be taken 
up for intensive electrification." 
8. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry under the 
Scheme intend to electrify all uri-electrified villages as per new 
definition of village electrification effective from 2004-05 and have 
agreed to take up for intensive electrification of all the villages which 
were considered electrified as per old definition. However, the 
Committee feel that the reply given by the Ministry is too general 
in nature and does not reflect the specific efforts made by the 
Ministry so far to obtain necessary updated State-wise data on 
un-electrified villages as per new definition and data on un-electrified 
rural households including BPL households for proper planning and 
implementation of the RGGVY as specifically recommended by the 
Committee in their Thirty-First Report. Further, the Ministry have 
chosen to be silent on the issue as to how the electrification of both 
uri-electrified as well as already electrified villages (as per old 
definition) and also providing electricity to BPL households would 
be possible without obtaining latest updated State-wise data on 
uri-electrified villages and uri-electrified rural households including 
BPL households-beforehand. As the new definition of village 
electrification has broaden the concept of village electrification, many 
villages deemed earlier to be electrified as per old definition may. 
also be included in the list of un-electrified villages, thus increasing 
the number of un-electrified villages for electrification. Unless the 
required data is obtained, the Ministry would not be able to achieve 
intended results as envisaged in RGGVY. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the Ministry should take all the necessary steps to 
ensure that the requisite updated lists and data are readily available 
3 


for proper planning and time bound implementation of the RGGVY 
Projects. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
B. Rural Electrification Plans 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
9. Under the RGGVY, the States were required to finalize their 
Rural Electrification Plans in consultation with the Ministry of Power and 
notify the same within six months. The prescribed time limit for 
notification of Rural Electrification Plans by the States was August, 2008. 
According to the Ministry of Power as on 19th September, 2008, only five 
States i.e. Gujarat, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal had 
notified their Rural Electrification Plans and five other States namely, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Punjab had 
finalised their Rural Electrification Plans. The Ministry had further 
informed that the States which had not finalized their Rural Electrifica­ 
tion Plan, were again requested to finalize the same by October, 2008. 
The Committee, taking into account the importance of rural electrification 
PlanJn the implementation of RGGVY, had recommended that the 
RGGVY Monitoring Committee of the Ministry of Power should look into 
the matter and all concerned States who had not finalised or notified their 
Rural Electrification Plans as yet should be extended all possible 
assistance to finalise and notify their Rural Electrification Plans without 
any further loss of time. 
10. The Ministry of Power, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
stated as under:- 
II All States have agreed to finalize and notify the RE Plan for their 
State under RGGVY. All possible assistance is being extended to 
the States to finalise and notify RE Plan. Out of 27 States 
participating under RGGVY 9 States have notified RE Plan so far. 
4 States have finalised RE Plan which is yet to be notified. 3 States 
have prepared the draft of RE plan. The status of RE Plan in States 
will be reviewed by the Monitoring Committee on RGGVY in their 
next meeting." 
4 


11. During the course of examination of the subject by the 
Committee, it came out that only five States had notified and five 
other States had finalized their Rural Electrification Plans while all 
the States were expected to finalize Rural Electrification Plan in 
consultation with the Ministry of Power by the extended period of 
October, 2008. Keeping in view the tardy progress made by the States 
in preparation of Rural Electrification Plans, the Committee had 
recommended that RGGVY Monitoring Committee of the Ministry 
of Power should extend all possible assistance to remaining States 
to finalize and notify their Rural Electrification Plans without any 
further loss of precious time. From the Government's reply, it is 
observed that in between September, 2008 and June, 2009 only 
3 additional States have taken conclusive action in regard to 
finalization/notification of Rural Electrification Plans. The Committee 
are not at all satisfied with the progress as outcome is not impressive 
and more sincere efforts are needed to be done in this regard. 
Needless to point out that the RGGVY Monitoring Committee needs 
to play its effective role by asking the remaining States to accomplish 
the task. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to accord 
utmost importance to the issue and coordinate with the remaining 
States in every possible manner and pursuade them to finalise and 
notify the RE Plans in fixed timeframe. 
C. Implementation of RGGVY 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
12. The Committee in their Thirty-First Report recommended that 
the RGGVY Monitoring Committee should stipulate fixed timeframe for 
the States and other implementing agencies for the submission of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of RGGVY projects and for the 
implementation of the same. The Committee also desired that the Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC) should process the DPRs of the projects 
and obtain sanction of RGGVY Monitoring Committee in a fixed time 
frame. 
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated inter-alia as 
under: 
/I All projects identified for implementation during Xth Plan and 
Phase-I of XIth Plan have already been approved by the Monitoring 
5 


Committee. As on 01.05.2009, 562 projects (235 of Xth Plan and 327 
of XIth Plan) have been sanctioned for implementation. The projects 
of Phase-II of XIth Plan shall be considered for approval as and 
when approval of Competent Authority is available." 
14. While appreciating the fact that all projects identified for 
the implementation during Xth Plan and Phase-I of XIth Plan have 
already been approved by the Monitoring Committee, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry have not paid much heed to their 
recommendation of stipulating fixed time frame for approval of DPRs 
at each and every level for speedy approval of the remaining projects. 
Implementation of this recommendation would put an obligation on 
all the agencies concerned to act in a time bound manner, ensuring 
the avoidance of unnecessary delay. Therefore, the Committee would 
like to re-emphasize the need to stipulate time frame for the States 
and other implementing agencies for the submission of DPRs and 
their implementation. The Committee would like REC to process 
the DPRs of the projects and obtain approval of RGGVY Monitoring 
Committee in a fixed timeframe. In Committee's view only sincere, 
systematic and timebound efforts can help in finalization and 
implementation of the schemes during the remaining part of 
XIth Five Year Plan. 
D. Targets and achievements under RGGVY 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
15. The Committee had noted that during the Xth Plan period 
Rs. 4500 crore was allocated and utilised against the approved outlay 
of Rs. 5000 crore. In the XIth Plan, although an outlay of Rs. 28,000 crore 
was approved, allocation of Rs. 9,444 crore only was made for RGGVY 
in the first two years of the XIth Plan. It was observed that allocation 
of insufficient funds for RGGVY was one of the main constraints causing 
slow progress of implementation of the scheme. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry and REC should reactivate 
themselves in implementation of RGGVY and make sincere efforts to 
prevail upon the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to get 
adequate fund allocation for the programme. 
6 


16. The Committee had noted that a total of 558 projects were 
sanctioned by the Government as on 31st August, 2008. Six of the 
235 projects sanctioned during the Xth Plan and 190 of the 323 projects 
sanctioned in the XIth Plan period were, however, not awarded for 
execution. Out of the total 558 sanctioned projects, the number of projects 
reported to be under implementation were 362 for which the Ministry 
had released capital subsidy to the tune of Rs. 8777.71 crore as on 31st 
August, 2008 from the total allocation of Rs. 13,944 crore. The Committee 
had further noted that as on 31st August, 2008, 50717 un-electrified 
villages were electrified against the overall target of 1.16 lakh villages 
shown in the State-wise list provided by the Ministry, 59,337 electrified 
villages were covered for intensive electrification against the target of 
3.5 lakh electrified villages and 32,79,487 BPL households were provided 
free electricity connections against the target of 2,43,74,672 BPL 
households and the total sanctioned cost was Rs. 25651.44crore. Against 
this backdrop, the Committee were of the view that the Ministry had 
failed to visualize and implement the scheme effectively as even the 
half-way mark of the set target of 100 per cent rural village electrification 
and provision of electricity access by 2010 had not been achieved even 
after more than three years of implementation of the scheme. While 
deploring the lackadaisical approach in implementation of projects under 
RGGVY, the Committee had recommended ,that the Ministry should 
expedite award of contracts in respect of 196 un-awarded projects 
including 6 projects sanctioned during the Xth Plan. The Committee had 
also desired to be informed of the revised targets and time frame for 
completion of the whole scheme as also the details of the selection of 
un-electrified villages for electrification, electrified villages for intensive 
electrification and BPL households for providing free electricity 
connections along with the progress made, sanctioned cost and cost 
incurred so far in this regard, district-wise and project-wise in different 
phases of the implementation of the scheme. 
17. The Committee had observed in particular that in the States 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Tripura, none of the 
sanctioned RGGVY projects had been completed till 31st May, 2008. The 
Committee had recommended that a new impetus be given for 
implementation of the projects in these States by taking all the necessary 
corrective steps and the progress be intimated to the Committee. 
7 


18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated:- 
"The allocated funds under RGGVY have been effectively utilized 
for implementation of the scheme. During 2009-10, the Budget 
Estimate for RGGVY is Rs. 6000 crore. Planning Commission has 
been requested to enhance the funds from Rs. 6000 crore to Rs. 9000 
crores. 
As per RGGVY guidelines all unelectrified villages as per Census 
.2001 are to be considered for electrification, electrified villages for 
intensive electrification and all BPL households for free service 
connections. 
As on 30.04.2009, 61209 uri-electrified villages have been completed 
and connections to 59.19lakh BPL households have been provided. 
During 2009-10, target of electrification of 17000 uri-electrified 
villages and 45 lakh BPL households has been fixed in view of 
availability of capital subsidy of Rs. 6000 crore for 2009-10. If the 
fund is enhanced from Rs. 6000 crore to 9000 crore, the targets 
would be electrification of 19,000 unelectrified villages and release 
of connections to 50 lakh BPL households. 
In the implementation of RGGVY priority is being given to 
electrification of uri-electrified villages as compared to intensive 
village electrification of electrified villages. 
The projects sanctioned during Xth Plan and Phase-I of XIth Plan, 
are normally those which have more number of uri-electrified 
villages and are within the benchmark cost. 
As on 30.04.09, works in 61209 (51.80%) uri-electrified villages have 
been completed out of 1,18,146 uri-electrified villages covered in the 
approved DPRs. While in respect of electrified villages, works in 
111936 (31.67%) electrified villages have been completed out of total 
3,53,428 electrified villages. This also indicates that priority has been 
given to uri-electrified villages over the electrified villages. 
All 235 projects sanctioned during Xth Plan. have been awarded 
for execution ... 327 projects have been sanctioned for execution 
8 


-- 
during Phase-I of Xlth Plan. Out of 327 projects, 284 projects have 
been awarded so far. The project execution period is normally 18 
months from the date of award. 
19. While observing the slow pace of implementation of 
RGGVY, the Committee had desired to be informed of the revised 
targets and time frame for completion of the whole scheme. The 
Committee had also sought the details of the selection of 
unelectrified villages for electrification, electrified villages for 
intensive electrification and BPL households for .providing free 
electricity connections along with the progress made sanctioned cost 
and cost incurred so far in this regard, district-wise and project-wise 
in different phases of the implementation of the scheme. To utter 
surprise of the Committee, the Ministry in their Action Taken Reply 
have merely stated that as per RGGVY guidelines, all un-electrified 
villages as per Census 2001 are to be considered for electrification, 
. electrified villages for intensive electrification and all BPL households 
for free service connections. The Committee are dismayed to note 
that the Ministry have not made any efforts to supply the Committee 
the required information in desired format. Moreover, the information 
supplied by the Ministry is incomplete as well. The Committee 
expect the Ministry to work out and supply them the desired 
information at the earliest. 
20. The Committee had recommended the. Ministry to strive 
for allocation of balance amount of Rs. 19,056 crore against the outlay 
of Rs. 33,000 crore (Rs. 5000 crore for X Plan + Rs. 28000 crore 
for the XIth Plan) approved for the purpose and make sincere efforts 
to complete the 558 projects sanctioned till then by 2009-10. The 
Ministry have, however, informed that during 2009-10, the Budget 
Estimate for RGGVY is Rs. 6,000 crore and Planning Commission 
has been requested to enhance the funds from Rs. '6,000 crore to 
9,000 crore. The Committee note that as on 30th April, 2009, works 
in only 61,209 unelectrified villages had been completed out of old 
estimation of 1,25,000 unelectrified villages - the original target set 
under the RGGVY and free electricity connections to only 59.19 lakh 
BPL households had been provided against the target of 2.34 crore 
9 


BPL households. In view of the fact that the Ministry are still way­ 
behind their original target, they were supposed to increase the pace 
of electrification of villages but the data in their Annual Report for 
the year 2008-09 states otherwise. While as many as 28,706 villages 
were electrified during 2006.07, the number was drastically reduced 
to 9,301 and 12,056 during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively. 
Now, as per the Ministry, target of electrification of only 17,000 
unelectrified villages and providing connections to 45 lakh BPL 
households has been fixed during 2009-10 in view of availability of 
capital subsidy of Rs. 6,000 crore for 2009-10. The Committee are 
surprised to find that the Ministry's targets for rural electrification 
for the 2009-10 are much below than the achievements made during 
2006-07. Resultantly, the Ministry are only seeking a modest increase 
of funds i.e. Rs. 3,000 crore from the Planning Commission to cover 
additional 2,000 unelectrified villages and 5 lakh BPL households 
during the year. It appears to the Committee that the Ministry lost 
both focus and initiative much before even reaching the half-way 
mark to achieve the goal set under the National Common Minimum 
Programme (NCMP) for providing access to electricity to all 
households in five years under the RGGVY from the launch of this 
scheme i.e. April, 2005. Moreover, as per the information made 
available by the Ministry, out of 327 projects sanctioned for execution 
during Phase-I of 11th Plan, 43 projects are yet to be awarded. The 
Committee further note that in the 10th Plan the gap between the 
date of sanction and the date of award of the projects was too high 
and in several cases it was more than two years. Considering that 
the 11th Plan is already half-way, the Committee feel that the 
Government should act fast to plan for the remaining target by 
strengthening monitoring mechanism and by taking initiative to 
extend all possible help to States which are lagging behind, even 
by entrusting more responsibilities on Central PSUs like Powergrid 
as implementing agencies. Further the Committee reiterate that the 
Ministry and REC should make sincere efforts to prevail upon the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to secure adequate 
fund allocation with sufficient justification required for early 
completion of the scheme and also to gear up themselves for speedy 
10 


implementation of the scheme. This in the considered oprruon of 
the Committee, is only possible - if both the Ministry and REC 
sit together and rework the revised targets etc. and timeframes for 
completion of the whole scheme. 
21. After going through the data furnished by the Ministry 
of Power, the Committee find the Ministry are still silent over the 
achievements made in the States of Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab and 
Sikkim and nil achievement is shown in Tripura. The Committee 
have been left with no choice but to infer that either there is no 
achievement at all in the said States or the Ministry have failed 
to obtain requisite data in this regard. The Committee, therefore, 
again like to reiterate that the Ministry should accelerate the pace 
of implementation of the RGGVY projects in these States by taking 
all the necessary corrective steps and ensure completion of the 
projects which have already been awarded and are incomplete. 
11 


CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
Under the RGGVY, the States were required to finalize their Rural 
Electrification Plans in consultation with the Ministry of Power and 
notify the same within six months. The prescribed time limit for 
notification of Rural Electrification Plans by the States was August, 
2008. However, as per latest information furnished by the Ministry 
of Power on 19th September, 2008, only five States i.e. Gujarat, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have notified their 
Rural Electrification Plans and five other States namely, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Punjab have finalised 
their Rural Electrification Plans. The Ministry further informed that the 
States which have not finalized their Rural Electrification Plan, have 
again been requested to finalize the same by October, 2008. The 
Committee, taking into account the importance of rural electrification 
Plan in the implementation of RGGVY, had recommended that the 
RGGVY Monitoring Committee of the Ministry of Power should look 
into the matter and all concerned States who had not finalised or 
notified their Rural Electrification Plans as yet should be extended all 
possible assistance to finalise and notify their Rural Electrification 
Plans without any further loss of time. 
Reply of the Government 
All States have agreed to finalize and notify the RE Plan for their 
State under RGGVY. All possible assistance is being extended to the 
States to finalise and notify RE Plan. Out of 27 States participating under 
RGGVY 9 States have notified RE Plan so far. Four States have finalised 
RE Plan which is yet to be notified. Three States have prepared the draft 
12 


of RE plan. The status of RE Plan in States will be reviewed by the 
Monitoring Committee on RGGVY in their next meeting. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.-44/13/2008 dated 15.06.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter ~ of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
In order to formulate and execute rural electrification projects, the 
implementing agencies of the States are required to prepare Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) in accordance with the guidelines issued by the 
Rural Electrification Corporation. These DPRs with recommendations of 
the respective State Governments are submitted at the concerned project 
office of the REC for their field appraisal of the projects. The DPRs along 
with recommendations of the REC's concerned Project office, are then 
considered by the RGGVY Division of REC and on getting the approval 
of the competent authority, the project-proposals are submitted to the 
RGGVY Monitoring Committee in the Ministry of Power for sanction. 
The Committee recommend that the RGGVY Monitoring Committee 
should stipulate fixed time frames for the States and other implementin~ 
agencies for the submission of DPRs of RGGVY projects and for the 
implementation of the same. The REC should also process the DPRs of 
projects and obtain sanction of RGGVY Monitoring Committee in a fixed 
time frame. , 
The Committee note that once a rural electrification project is 
sanctioned by the Ministry of Power the subsidy component is released 
in instalments to REC against claims raised by it. The REC releases 
subsidy to the implementing agency(ies) in four instalment of 30 per 
cent, 30 per cent, 30 per cent and 10 per cent on fulfilment of laid down 
conditions. The first instalment is released when the implementing 
agency is ready to award the contract. The Committee observe that 
capital subsidy for two RGGVY projects sanctioned during the 10th 
Plan and two more projects sanctioned in the 11th Plan for the State 
of Sikkim has not been released so far. Similarly, capital subsidy for 
eight projects in respect of the State of Bihar has also not been released. 
13 


The Committee while concurring with the view of the Ministry of Power 
that there shall be no parking of funds released for effective rural 
electrification in the country, a more decentralized approach is required. 
In particular, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should look 
into the causes for the delay and coordinate with the State/State 
implementing agencies to ensure immediate release of capital subsidy 
for RGGVY projects. 
Reply of the Government 
All projects identified for implementing during Xth Plan and phase­ 
I of XIth Plan have already been approved by the Monitoring Committee. 
As on 01.05.2009, 562 projects (235 of Xth Plan and 327 of XIth Plan) 
have been sanctioned for implementation. The projects of Phase-Il of XIth 
Plan shall be considered for approval as and when approval of 
Competent Authority is available, 
Capital subsidy under RGGVY for the approved projects of 
Sikkim and Bihar has been released. For release of subsidy (Ist 
instalment), the project has to be brought to the award stage i.e. ready 
for award. In case of Sikkim, State has taken a long time to bring the 
project to award stage. Similarly, in Bihar, Bihar State Electricity Board 
(BSEB) could not bring the eight projects at award stage within the bid 
validity period and projects were required to be re-tendered, evaluated 
and brought to award stage. However the subsidies have since been 
released. This Ministry has already asked all States to constitute a 
Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary of 
the States to remove bottlenecks in implementation of schemes and 
speedy completion of projects. The Ministry and REC are also ensuring 
timely release of capital subsidy. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
According to the Ministry of Power electrification of remote villages 
in certain States and a few Union Territories, where grid connectivity was 
14 


costly and not feasible, was to be carried out under RGGVY by way of 
the Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply Projects. The 
Committee note that even though an amount of Rs. 540 crore has been 
specifically earmarked in the 11th Plan towards capital subsidy for DDG 
Projects, no such project has so far been formulated, approved and 
sanctioned. Further necessary guidelines in respect of DDG Projects were 
not issued by the Ministry of Power even after the lapse of more than 
three years of launch of the scheme. It was only in January, 2009 that 
the Ministry choose to issue the necessary guidelines in this regard, after 
the Committee started examination of the subject. While deprecating the 
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry in issuing the necessary 
guidelines, the Committee hope that these would be followed in letter 
and spirit and execution of DDG and Supply Projects would be completed 
in a fixed time frame The Committee in particular, desire that creation 
of the proposed implementation Support Ground (SG) and finalization 
of list of villages/hamlets for electrification through DDG and Supply 
Projects as per guidelines issued, should be done at the earliest. The 
Committee should be apprised of the action taken and progress achieved 
in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
DDG guidelines have been finalized and the Implementation 
Support Group (ISG) under DDG have been constituted by this Ministry 
on 22.05.2009. As per para 10.2(1) of guidelines list of villages/hamlets 
to be electrified through DDG is to be finalized by State Renewable 
Energy Development agency/departments promoting renewable energy 
. in consultation with State utilities and MNRE. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/200B, dated 15.06.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
In order to ensure effective implementation of RGGVY, there exist 
three-tier quality monitoring mechanism and District Electricity Commit­ 
tees. However, the Committee find that there are many constraints at the . . 
field level in the execution of RGGVY Projects and the implementing 
agencies face difficulties in resolving issues relating to timely award of 
contracts, availability of contractors, supply of material, availability of 
15 


BPL lists, forest clearance, way-bills, allotment of land for sub-station, 
safety against theft particularly, the theft of transformers and electric 
wires and rendering of village electrification certificates by Village 
Panchayats, etc. The fact that out of 47,826 villages electrified as on 31st 
May, 2008, the REC have received panchayat certificates in respect of 
27,426 villages only is a vivid example of the existing state of affairs. 
The Committee also observes that the Ministry of Power have requested 
all the States to ensure regular conduct of meetings of the District 
Electricity Committees and to constitute a Coordiriation Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to review the progress of RGGVY 
every month. The Committee expect that all the aforesaid issues which 
are reported to be the main hindrances in the implementation of RGGvY 
would be effectively redressed by State Coordination Committees. 
Nevertheless, the Committee recommend that the role and responsibilities 
of State Coordination Committee/State/State Utility may be clearly 
defined and necessary powers be given to them for effective implemen­ 
tation of RGGVY. The Committee hope that the Ministry will come out 
with stricter norms in consultation with the concerned States/UTs for 
providing free electricity connection to BPL households under RGGVY 
in order to remove constraints in obtaining authentic list of BPL 
households. The Committee would like to know the outcome of the efforts 
of the Ministry to speed up implementation of RGGVY through 
Coordination Committees. 
The Ministry of Power have informed that they have been making 
best efforts to get necessary financial, technical and material resources 
to accelerate pace of implementation of RGGVY. The Committee observe 
that against the Ministry's proposed total requirement to Rs. 42,000 crore 
for RGGVY in the 11th Plan, an outlay of Rs. 28,000 crore was approved 
for the first two years of the 11th Plan. However, the Ministry could 
envisage utilization. of Rs. 9,444 crore only during the first two years of 
the 11th Plan and the outlay ofRs. 28000 crore is now reported to be 
adequate for next 2-3 years. As regards the efforts to marshal the required 
technical and material resources, the Committee find that despite efforts 
of Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority and the REC by 
interacting with various industrial associations/groups across the 
. country, the implementing agencies are reportedly experiencing shortage 
of supply to material and problems arising out of sub-contracting in the 
16 


execution of RGGVY projects. Constraints caused by sub-contracting of 
work for RGGVY projects are envisaged to be resolved through tight 
monitoring programme of the REC as well as that of the Central 
Government. Against this backdrop, the Committee, expect the Ministry 
to draw an action plan concerning all the problems areas and take 
necessary steps to accelerate implementation of RGGVY. The Committee 
also recommend that problems arising out of sub-contracting of the 
works under RGGVY should be effectively dealt with by incorporating 
appropriate provisions in the terms and conditions of the contracts. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Ministry 
along with implementation status thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
The role of various stakeholder have been defined under the 
concerned bi-partite/tri-partite/quadri-partite agreements executed 
amongst REC, State, State Power Utility and CPSU (if involved). Efforts 
is made that each party stick to their commitments and play their roles 
effectively. The role of State Coordination Committee has been clearly 
prescribed which inter-alia includes resolution of inter departmental 
issues within the State. 
Regular meetings of Coordination Committees have also helped in 
expediting the progress of implementation of RGGVY. 
Sub-contracting clause has been incorporated in the RGGVY 
Procurement Guidelines based on the experience of CPSUs to get similar 
works done on turnkey basis and is being effectively dealt within the 
terms and conditions of the contract. For a national roll out of programme 
of this size, implementation capacity will become a constraint if this 
flexibility is not permitted. However, regular monitoring and review is 
being undertaken by REC and MoP to ensure that this does not hamper 
the quality and speed of execution. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Power and the REC have 
failed by properly assess requirement of manpower and material for the 
implementation of the RGGVY in time and as a result the employment 
17 


---- ~ ---- --------- 
generation potential of the RGGVY programme has not been exploited 
fully. During evidence, the Committee were also informed that the REC 
was reactivating itself for the implementation of the RGGVY and if 
necessary extra personnel would be recruited by REC for the purpose. 
In the light of the above, the Committee would like to be apprised about 
the impact of shortfall of personnel, if any with REC, and measures taken 
to address the issue. 
The Committee note that the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) 
is responsible for complete supervision of the programme from concept 
to completion. Although the Ministry have praised the performance of 
the nodal agency for implementation of RGGVY, the agency has always 
fallen short of the targets set for the programme both in physical and 
financial terms, Non-availability of funds, lack of initiatives by States, 
non-availability of local contractors and some construction materials and 
non-availability of BPL lists, etc. are stated to be some of the factors which 
caused shortfalls in achieving the physical and financial targets set for 
the implementation of RGGVY. In view of the foregoing, the performance 
of the nodal agency in the implementation of RGGVY, has not made the 
Committee to feel satisfied. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry and REC in particular should multiply their efforts and take 
all the necessary corrective measures to overcome the problems identified 
in the implementation of the programme. 
Reply of the Government 
Considering the requirement of additional personnel of effective 
implementation of RGGVY, the required manpower has been deployed 
on contract basis and some of the activities like 2nd tier quality 
monitoring has been outsourced. Ministry had organized a National 
Seminar on Supply of Material for RGGVY in collaboration with Indian 
Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers Association (lEEMA) and 
industry was advised to ramp up capacity to meet the projected 
requirements. 
The recommendations have been noted and all efforts shall be made 
for smooth and speedy implementation of the scheme. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
18 


CHAPTER III 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA "nONS wmcn THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
In response to the Committee's earlier recommendation (25th 
Report, 14th Lok Sabha) to revisit and to suitably modify the cost norms 
for village electrification taking into account the local conditions, the 
Ministry had replied that the cost norms had already been approved by 
the Cabinet and as such modification was not feasible at that stage. The 
Committee, having taken note of the fact that the cost norms for electricity 
connections to BPL households, electrification of un-electrified villages 
and intensive electrification of already electrified villages RGGVY were 
revised in January, 2008, do not accept the reply of the Ministry in this 
regard. The Committee again recommends that the cost norms should 
be reviewed by the Ministry periodically taking into account the general 
rise in price level and the cost of the project be fixed after taking into 
account the terrain, local conditions and other hindrances/risk factors. 
The Committee also recommends that the Standard Rates which the States 
have in their PWD Department should be verified at the time of 
submission of DPRs so as to avoid subsequent delays in awarding the 
projects. 
The Committee note that during the 10th Plan period, a capital 
subsidy of Rs. 1500/- per connection was granted for providing free 
electricity connection to BPL households under RGGVY. The Committee 
have also been informed that although the cost norms for giving 
free electricity connection to BPt households has been revised to 
Rs. 2,200/- with effect from January, 2008, the old rate of Rs. 1500/- per 
connection is permissible in respect of projects sanctioned prior to 
January, 2008. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommend that 
19 


capital subsidy of Rs. 2,2001- per connection be granted for providing 
free electricity connection to BPL, households irrespective of date of 
sanction of RGGVY projects excluding the RGGVY projects, which were 
completed on 31 December, 2007. 
Reply of the Government 
In case, the estimated project cost exceeds the cost norms, the 
concerned implementing agency is advised to either provide appropriate 
justifications or to modify the project. 
The Monitoring Committee, while considering sanction of projects, 
also considers the local conditions in the projects areas based on the 
justification provided by the concerned implementing agency and the 
State to arrive at appropriate project cost to be sanctioned. 
While revising the cost norms of BPL from Rs. 1500 to Rs. 2200, 
components of BPL kit were also reviewed. CFL and Electronic meters 
were included in _place of Incandescent Lamp and electromechanical 
meter. 
Xth Plan Projects which were sanctioned with Rs. 1500 subsidy 
were awarded with contractual commitment of Rs. 1500/-. Accordingly, 
subsidy of Rs. 22001- shall be applicable for new projects. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
The Committee observe that adoption of franchisee system for 
distribution management has been made mandatory under the RGGVY. 
State Government can also encourage the Panchayati Raj Institutions to 
take on responsibility of franchisee if they are capable of entering into 
commercial agreements. Moreover, Panchayati Raj Institutions have also 
an important role of overseeing, in advisory capacity, the delivery of 
service by the franchisees. The Committee also note that the REC is to 
arrange training programme to franchisees and to the personnel at village 
20 


panchayat level. The Committee having taken note of these provisions, 
recommend that as far as award of franchisee for rural distribution is 
concerned, preference may be given in the order of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions, user associations, cooperatives, Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) in comparison to private entrepreneurs. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government as well as REC in this regard. 
The Committee note that the objectives of development of 
franchisees are reduction of Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses, 
maintenance of the infrastructure and to provide uninterrupted supply 
of quality power. The Committee have also been informed that input 
based franchisee is preferable to revenue collecting franchisee as it will 
be accountable for loss and theft in the system. The Committee, however, 
on studying the franchisee system already under operation in 14 States, 
find that a major part of the franchisee system developed by different 
States/UTs/Utilities are based on Revenue Collection models rather than 
input based system. Moreover, the Com:rpitt_;~ in their earlier Report (14th 
Report of 14th Lok Sabha) had also recommended for review of 
development of franchisees system under RGGVY to ensure non­ 
escalation of cost of electricity supplied. Going by the action taken reply 
to the Ministry on the recommendation of the Committee on this issue, 
the Committee feel that the issue has not been suitably addressed and 
have genuine apprehensions that there are grounds for increase in 
electricity tariff in the franchisee areas in those States/UTs where 
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity is mostly held by 
the State/State Utilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry should review all aspects of development of franchisee system 
based on feedback obtained from functioning and performance of 
various models of franchisees and necessary remodeling of the franchisee 
system should be undertaken in order to make it more effective. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this direction 
alongwith the outcome thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
Deployment of franchisees is the responsibility of the concerned 
State. All States have been advised accordingly by REC. 
21 


---------- ---- ---- 
As per RE policy 2006, Panchayati Raj Institutions would have a 
supervisory/advisory role in RE and electric supply. Subject to 
commercial viability and revenue sustainability of rural electricity supply 
business not being affected, the State Governments may assign larger role 
and responsibilities to Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
At present States have deployed revenue collection franchisees 
which can be upgraded to input based franchisees. The tariff is fixed 
by DISCOM/SERC. These revenue based franchisees can be feeder based 
franchisee or distribution transformers based franchisee. However the 
tariff to be charged from the consumer would continue to be determined 
by DISCOM/SERC. Therefore, there is no cause of any apprehension that 
franchisees would increases the tariff for the area allotted to them. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44/13/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
22 


CHAPTER IV 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
The definition of village electrification was made more encompass­ 
ing in February, 2004. The Committee in their subsequent Reports 
(1st and 3rd Reports, 14th Lok Sabha had recommended to the Ministry 
to update the State-wise rural electrification statistics on the basis of new 
definition on village electrification. However, the Ministry have not been 
able to obtain the updated data as per the new definition. The number 
of un-electrified villages in the country has been estimated to be 1,25,000 
as on 31st March, 2004 based on data pertaining to 1991 census. Besides, 
the data available with the Ministry regarding household electrification 
was based on 2001 census. The Committee also take note that non­ 
availability of authentic lists of BPL households of villages covered under 
RGGVY causes hindrances in the execution of RGGVY projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take 
immediate steps to obtain state-wise data on unelectrified rural villages 
as per new definition on village electrification effective from, 2004-05 and 
data on un-electrified rural households including BPL households for 
proper planning and implementation of the RGGVY under which all the 
unelectrified villages are envisaged to be electrified covering at least 
10 percent of un-electrified rural households in these villages. 
As per 2001 census, the total number of rural households and 
un-electrified rural households in the country were. 13,8271,559 and 
7,80,90,874 respectively. The number of un-electrified BPL h~useholds in 
the rural areas of the country was estimated to be 2.34' crore 
i.e. approximately 17 per cent of total number of rural households. 
23 


However, the new definition of village electrification inter-alia provides 
that a village will be deemed to be electrified if the number of electrified 
households in the village is at least 10 per cent of the total number of 
households in that village. The Committee feel that the implementing 
agencies of RGGVY projects shall experience difficulties in implementing 
the provision of free electricity connection to BPL households in case of 
villages where the number of unelectrified BPL households is more than 
10 percent. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, while 
sanctioning a rural electrification project, should examine the feasibility 
of 100 per cent electrification of BPL households to obviate different type 
of problems relating to electrification of BPL households. The Committee 
would also like to know about the action taken by the Ministry to electrify 
the left out BPL households in villages already electrified under RGGVY. 
Reply of the Government 
Under RGGVY, all villages (as per census 2001) both un-electrified 
as well as already electrified have been considered for electrification of 
rural households including BPL households. Under the scheme, all 
uri-electrified villages are to be electrified as per new definition of village 
electrification effective from 2004-05. Besides, villages which are 
considered electrified as per old definition will be taken up for intensive 
electrifica tion. 
As per new definition, a village is deemed to be electrified if at least 
10% of households are electrified in addition to access of electricity to 
community/Government buildings and a separate provision of distribu­ 
tion transformer in Dalit Basti. However, this does not imply that only 
10% of households will be taken up for providing free electricity 
connections to BPL households. 100% coverage of BPL households has 
been sanctioned in all the villages, whether being electrified for the first 
time or being taken up for intensive electrification. 
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No.-44113/2008, dated 15.06.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
.. 
24 


Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
The Committee observe that at the time of launch of the RGGVY 
in April, 2005, the Ministry had set out for themselves a target of 
electrification of 1,25,000 un-electrified villages, electrification of 
2.34 crore BPL households and intensive electrification of the already 
electrified 4.62 lakh villages in a period of five years involving 
expenditure of subsidy component of Rs. 14,750 crore. As per the 
information made available by the Ministry as on 31st May, 2008, the 
Government had sanctioned 551 RGGVY Projects at a total cost of 
Rs. 25275.63 crore. The award cost of these projects is, however, estimated 
to be Rs. 32,850 crore involving subsidy of Rs. 29,565 crores (@90 per 
cent). The Committee also note that the villages covered in 235 projects 
sanctioned in X Plan are targeted to be completed by March, 2009 and 
connections to BPL households covered in these projects are likely to be 
released by March, 2010. 323 projects sanctioned in the 11th Plan are 
likely to be completed in 18 months from the date of award. Achievement 
of these targets is subject to availability of required funds. The Committee 
also note that for a comprehensive rural electrification of the country, the 
estimated fund requirement is about Rs. 52,000 crores for which the 
component of capital subsidy required would be to the tune of Rs. 47,000 
crore. Further, the number of identified un-electrified villages and 
households in the country so far are not complete and absolute. At this 
backdrop, the Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Ministry 
have lost sight of their target of 100 per cent rural electrification due of 
unrealistic planning and poor programme implementation capacity. The 
Committee while deploring the poor implementation of the RGGVY, 
expect the Ministry to review all aspects of implementation of RGGVY, 
to make realistic planning in future and to speed up the pace of 
implementation of the programme. 
The Committee observe that there has been poor utilization of 
approved outlay in the implementation of RGGVY. During the 10th Plan 
period Rs. 4500 crore was allocated and utilised against the 
approved outlay of Rs. 5000 crore. In the 11th Plan, although an outlay 
of Rs. 28,000 crore was approved, for the first two years. allocation of 
Rs. 9,444 crore only was made for RGGVY in the first two years of the 
11th Plan. The Committee, in particular, have taken serious note of the 
fact that for the year 2008-09 against the projected requirement of funds 
to the tune of Rs. 24000 crore, an allocation of Rs. 5500 crore has been 
25 


made even though the requirement was Rs. 13000 crore to complete the 
projects sanctioned during the 10th Plan period only. The Committee 
observe that allocation of insufficient funds for RGGVY is one of the 
main constraints causing slow progress of implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry and REC should 
reactivate themselves in implementation of RGGVY and make sincere 
efforts to prevail upon the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission 
to get adequate funds allocation for the programme. The Committee also 
desire that the Government should take up the case for allocation of 
balance amount of Rs. 19,056 crore in the year 2009-10 against the outlay 
of Rs. 33,000 crore approved for the purpose and make sincere efforts 
to complete the 558 projects sanctioned so far i.e. by 2009-10. The 
Committee may be informed of the steps taken by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
The Committee are given to understand that a total of 55 projects 
were sanctioned by the Government as on 31st August, 2008. The 
Committee observe that six of the 235 projects sanctioned during the 10th 
Plan and 190 of the 323 projects sanctioned in the 11th Plan period have 
not been awarded for execution. Out of the total 558 sanctioned projects, 
the number of projects reported to be under implementation are 362 for 
which the Ministry have released capital subsidy to the tune of 
Rs. 8777.71 crore. As on 31.08.2008, 50,717 un-electrified villages and 
32,79,487 BPL households were reported to be electrified and intensive 
electrification of 59,337 electrified villages were completed. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee feel that the Ministry has so far failed to 
visualize and implement the scheme effectively as even the half-way 
mark of the set target of 100 per cent rural village electrification and 
electricity access by 2010 has not been achieved even after three years 
of implementation of the scheme. While deploring the lackadaisical 
approach in implementation of projects under RGGVY, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should, expedite award of contracts in 
respect of 196 uri-awarded projects including 6 projects sanctioned 
during the 10th Plan. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
revised targets and time frame for completion of the whole scheme. The 
Committee would also like to have the details of the selection of un­ 
electrified villages for electrification, electrified villages of intensive 
electrification and BPL households for providing free electricity 
connections along with the progress made, sanctioned cost and cost 
incurred so far in this regard district-wise and project-wise in different 
26 


phases of the implementation of the scheme. The Committee further 
recommend that in the implementation of RGGVY, electrification of 
un-electrified villages be accorded higher priority as compared to 
intensive village electrification of electrified villages to facilitate early 
achievement of the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) 
goal of providing electricity access to all households by the way of 
electrifying all the villages. 
The Committee had observed that out of the 235 rural electrification 
projects sanctioned in the 10th Plan period, six projects in respect of the 
States of Sikkim, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram and Tripura, which fell 
in the North East region and Border areas, had not been awarded for 
execution. The Committee had further noted that in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Tripura, none of the 
sanctioned RGGVY projects had been completed till 31st May, 2008. The 
Committee therefore, had recommended that a new impetus be given for 
implementation of the RGGVY projects in these States. by taking all the 
necessary corrective steps and had desired to be intimated about the 
progress made. 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme is being implemented by the implementing agencies 
of the concerned State and active support from the State and State power 
utilities is desirable in order to ensure smooth and speedy implemen­ 
tation. 
The States have also been requested to constitute a Coordination 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to resolve the 
bottlenecks in implementation of RGGVY. 
Ministry of Power has also addressed States to activate the District 
Electricity Committees and to ensure that the meetings of these 
Committees are held regularly every month. It is expected that regular 
meetings of the Committee shall accelerate the implementation of 
RGGVY. 
The allocated funds under RGGVY have been effectively utilized 
for implementation of the scheme. During 2009-10, the Budget Estimate 
for RGGVY is Rs. 6000 crore. Planning Commission has been requested 
to enhance the funds from Rs. 6000 crore to Rs. 9000 crores. 
27 


As per RGGVY guidelines all unelectrified villages as per Census 
2001 are to be considered for electrification, electrified villages for 
intensive electrification and all BPL households for free service 
connections. 
As on 30.04.2009, 61209 uri-electrified villages have been completed 
and connections to 59.19 lakh BPL households have been provided. 
During 2009-10, target of electrification of 17000 un-electrified 
villages and 45 lakh BPL households has been fixed in view of 
availability of capital subsidy of Rs. 6000 crore for 2009-10. If the fund 
is enhanced from Rs. 6000 crore to 9000 crore, the targets would be 
electrification of 19,000 unelectrified villages and release of connections 
to 50 lakh BPL households. 
In the implementation of RGGVY priority is being given to 
electrification of uri-electrified villages as compared to intensive village 
electrification of electrified villages. 
The projects sanctioned during X Plan and Phase I of XI Plan, are 
normally those which have more number of uri-electrified villages and 
are within the benchmark cost. 
As on 30.04.09, works in 61209 (51.80%) uri-electrified villages have 
been completed out of 1,18,146 uri-electrified villages covered in the 
approved DPRs. While in respect of electrified villages, works in 111936 
(31.67%) electrified villages have been completed out of total 3,53,428 
electrified villages. This also indicates that priority has been given to un­ 
electrified villages over the electrified villages. 
All 235 projects sanctioned during X Plan, have been awarded for 
execution. The progress as on 30.4.2009 of RGGVY projects sanctioned 
during 10th Plan in the States mentioned by Standing Committee is 
attached herewith at Annexures I and II. 327 projects have been 
sanctioned for execution during phase-I of 11th plan. Out of 327 projects, 
284 projects have' been awarded so far. The project execution period is 
normally 18 months from the date of award. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.-44/13/2008 dated 15.06.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please sec Paras 19, 20 & 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
28 


CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
-NIL- 
NEW DELHI; 
16 December, 2009 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 25 Agralzayana, 1931 (Saka) 
29 


--- ----- 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2009- 10) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 14th December, 2009 from 
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room 62, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia-in the Chair 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Mohammad Azharuddin 
3. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
6. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
7. Shri Ganesh Singh 
8. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhade 
Rajya .Sabha 
9. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
10. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
11. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
12. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
13. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik 
14. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt Joint Secretary 
Deputy Secretary 2. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
30 


2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose 5hri 
Santosh Bagrodia, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for 
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, 
3. *** ***" *** *** 
*** *** *** *** 
*** *** *** *** 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the following 
draft Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the 
Ministry of Power. 
(ii) Draft Report on the Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 31st Report (14th Lok 
5abha) on the subject 'Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi 
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana'. 
The Committee adopted the draft Reports without any change(s)/ 
modifications. 
5. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalize the 
above-mentioned Reports taking into consideration consequential changes 
arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministries and 
also to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
31 


APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
ON THE OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE 31st REPORT (14th LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 9 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government: 
S1. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7 and 9 
Total: 
Percentage 
5 
55.55% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government's replies: 
S1. Nos. 6 and 8 
Total: 
Percentage 
02 
22.22% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
S1. Nos. 1 and 5 
Total: 
Percentage 
02 
22.22% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Total: 
Percentage 
00 
00% 
32 


/I All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, 
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website 'www.parliamentofindia.nic.in'. 
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available 
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for 
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are 
available on the website mentioned above." 
