STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy Sector]
FORTY SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
42

FORTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on International Cooperation in New and
Renewable Energy Sector]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

COE No. 246
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14) ........................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 26
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and require reiteration ................. 27
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 32
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held
on 11th December, 2013 ................................................ 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
36th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................... 35

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
10. Shri A. Raja
11. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
16. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
17. Shri Jagadanand Singh
18. Smt. Pratibha Singh
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
20. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
22. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
23. Shri Y.S.Chowdary
24. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
25. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
26. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
27. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
28. Shri Birender Singh
29. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 42nd Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 36th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy on “International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector”.
2. The 36th Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25th May ,
2013 and to Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2013 and was laid in Rajya Sabha
on the same day. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 4th November, 2013.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th December, 2013.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 36th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Thirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
“International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy Sector”.
2. The Thirty-Sixth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on
25th May, 2013 and to Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2013 and was laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 14
Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total-11
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 2, 4 and 8
Total-03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
- Nil -
Total-00
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report. In reply to some of the vital recommendations
of the Committee, the Ministry has stated that these have been noted
for future action. The Committee would await conclusive action in all
such cases in due course.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Policy/framework on Renewable Energy Sector
(Recommendation Serial No. 2, Paragraph No. 2.2)
6. The Committee had noted the energy supply imbalances in the
country and that economic growth requires the fulfilment of the energy
needs. To sustain the growth, serious efforts are required to ensure the
requisite energy supply. Rise in per capita consumption and spread of
energy access has also strained the demand – supply gap of the energy.
The Committee had felt that conventional sources of energy have their
own limitations and that renewable energy can make substantial
contribution in meeting our energy requirements. Our country has huge
potential for power generation through renewable sources such as wind,
solar, bio-mass, small hydro etc. For sustained development of this sector,
vigorous and concerted efforts will have to be made for the New and
Renewable Energy sector. Of late, renewable energy has become an
important component of our energy planning process and the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been facilitating the implementation
of broad spectrum programmes including harnessing of renewable power,
R&D in renewable energy sector, renewable energy to rural areas for
lighting, use of renewable energy in urban, industrial and commercial
applications etc. The Committee had also felt that the country have the
potential to play a leading role globally in the renewable sector. They
had, therefore, recommended that a proper policy framework on
renewable energy sector should be brought out keeping in view our

3
strengths and weaknesses with regard to various aspects of renewable
energy such as proper assessment of potential resource-wise, wind and
solar mapping, taking forward the initiatives in thermal and tidal energy ,
testing and certification, investment for infrastructure, development to
attain long term goal of sustainable and inclusive energy for future. They
had also recommended that such areas should be prioritized for harnessing
in a time bound manner and that our weaknesses should be analyzed
with a view to rectify them so as to ensure the maximum harnessing of
various sources of renewable energy during off season and not so suitable
conditions.
7. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action
Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The estimated renewable energy resource assessment carried out
by the Ministry in various renewable energy sources is being further
assessed especially for Wind and Solar Energy based on the advance
tools and available technological options involving international
institutions/agencies. The Centre for Wind Energy Technology
(CWET), Chennai is assessing off shore wind power potential with
the help of institutions/agencies capable to estimate such potential.
Similarly, The Solar Energy Centre, now re-named National Institute
of Solar Energy (NISE), is associated with development of solar
radiation maps for the country.”
8. The Committee note that the reply of the Government has not
addressed the Committee’s recommendation to have a proper policy
framework on renewable energy sector keeping in view our strengths
and weaknesses with regard to various aspects of renewable energy
resources. The Ministry has merely stated that the resources assessment
is being carried out in the area of wind and solar energy by C-WET
and NISE respectively. Besides wind and solar energy, the Committee
would like to be updated about the initiatives taken/being taken or
strategy adopted by the Ministry or by C-WET, NISE and other
Institutions regarding potential assessment in other renewable energy
resources as well. The Committee also would like to reiterate their
recommendation that a proper policy framework on renewable
energy sector should be brought out keeping in view our strengths
and weaknesses with regard to various aspects of renewable energy
such as proper assessment of potential resource-wise, wind and
solar mapping, taking forward the initiatives in thermal and tidal
energy, testing and certification, investment for infrastructure,
development to attain long term goal of sustainable and inclusive energy
for future.

4
B. Memoranda of Understanding/Agreements/Cooperation
(Recommendation Serial No. 3, Paragraph No. 2.3)
9. The Committee had noted that Memoranda of Understanding/
Agreements/Cooperation in renewable energy sector were signed with
various countries which were of standard nature and lays the framework
of co-operation between India and the signing country. They had also
found that cooperation was also done with many other countries without
any specific MoUs in renewable energy sector. The Committee were also
informed that active interest has been taken under some of the MoUs,
while in case of others, not much progress has been made for want of
initiative by the concerned countries. The Committee had further been
apprised that generally Memorandum of Understanding is only an
intention to do something and is not legally binding whereas, under
agreements/cooperation, it is enforceable legally where both parties agree
on implementing specific work/task. The Committee had found the
position stated by the Government with regard to MoUs/Cooperation/
Agreements was not conclusive as International Cooperation inherently
assumes some concrete action with regard to the object of the cooperation.
They were not impressed by plea of the Government that these MoUs
are not legally binding. The Committee, had therefore, recommended
that MoUs, Cooperation or Agreements with any of the foreign country
or entity abroad with regard to promotion of renewable energy in the
country should be signed with utmost sincerity and purpose and not as
a ritual. They had also recommended that transparency should be
maintained and concrete initiatives should be taken by the Ministry to
follow up their implementation as also to link their progress and
achievements with reference to signing fresh MoUs/renewal of MoUs, if
required, with these countries in consultation with the Ministry of External
Affairs.
10. The MNRE in their Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and fresh MoUs
are being taken up with specific task and objects in mind and in
consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs.”
11. The Committee are more concerned about the effective
implementation of the MoUs/Agreements/Cooperation signed with
various countries than the number of such MoUs/Agreements/
Cooperation signed. The objective behind the recommendation of the
Committee is to ensure achievement and progress out of the MoUs/
Agreements/Cooperation signed. The Committee are happy that the
MNRE are in the process of signing fresh MoUs with specific task and

5
objects. However, the Committee would like to stress their
recommendation that MoUs, Cooperation or Agreements with any
foreign country or entity abroad with regard to promotion of renewable
energy in the country should be signed with utmost sincerity of purpose
and not as a ritual.
C. Commercial Cooperation
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Paragraph No. 2.4)
12. The Committee had noted that bilateral and multilateral
co-operation frameworks has been established for co-operation and
knowledge sharing in renewable energy technology and projects and that
the focus of interaction for co-operation has been on exploring
opportunities for exchange of scientists, shares experiences and take up
joint research, design, development, demonstration and manufacture of
new and renewable energy systems and devices. The Committee were
informed that interests have been shown by many South-East Asian
countries for strengthening/revival of MoUs and co-operations in
renewable energy sector. The Committee had felt that while making efforts
for collaboration with the developed countries for achieving technological
excellence and cost efficiency, it was also important to collaborate with
the developing/under-developed countries, where our expertise in
technological advancement for harnessing the New and Renewable energy
resources should be shared so that the commercial linkages could extend
to the Indian domestic producers/exporters. Such International
co operations would open doors for Indian manufacturing companies for
supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable energy products,
systems and devices specially in the wind, solar and hydro power sectors.
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Ministry of New
and Renewable energy to focus on commercial cooperation in renewable
energy through MoUs/Agreements/joint ventures with developing/under-
developed countries also to allow them to take advantage of the linkages
in India such as manufacturing of renewable energy systems, devices,
equipments, spare parts etc., while sharing their technological know-how
as well.
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been interacting with several developed
and developing countries for cooperation in new and renewable energy
sector in close associations with central and State PSUs, industrial

6
associations etc, with a view to establish commercial cooperation for
supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable energy products,
systems and devices.
In this context it may be noted that a “Joint Declaration of Intent”
between Germany and India on Indo-German Development
Cooperation regarding the “Establishment of Green Energy
Corridors” was signed on 11th April 2013. The German Financial
Institution namely kfW has agreed to provide Euro 1 billion loan.
The first line of loan is expected to be delivered shortly. In addition,
under India-USA Energy Dialogue, a MoU has been signed recently
for “Promoting Energy Access through Clean Energy” (“PEACE”).
Under this initiative, Export-Import Bank of the USA intended to
mobilize up to US$ 250 million EXIM Bank Financing for clean
energy access. Similarly, DFID and EU are helping C-WET, Chennai
to estimate off-shore wind power potential and identify most
suitable sites for establishment off-shore wind farms in India. The
Ministry also established cooperation for initiating “Energy Access”
in rural areas and promote “ Access to Clean Energy” in association
with UNDP , World Bank, GIZ and USA. Such cooperation would
help Indian industries to get benefits.
The Ministry also helps and supports many developing countries
in Africa, Asia, Egypt, etc. for resource estimation and installation
of various Renewable Energy systems/devices. Indian manufacturing
industries are executing and supplying various renewable energy
systems/devices. The Ministry also provides support to developing
countries for capacity building and imparting training etc. So far
more than 900 participants were trained from over 81 countries by
the Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon, C-WET, Chennai and AHEC,
IIT, Roorkee under Indian Technological and Economic Cooperation
(I-TEC) programme with Ministry of External Affairs under solar,
wind and small hydro sectors”.
14. The recommendation of the Committee was to focus on
commercial cooperation in renewable energy through MoUs/
Agreements/joint ventures with developing/under-developed countries
so as to allow them to take advantage of the linkages in India such
as manufacturing of renewable energy systems, devices, equipments,
spare parts etc. The Ministry, however, in their reply have highlighted
the cooperation with only the developed and developing countries but
none with the under-developed countries. It is encouraging to learn

7
that so far 900 persons from over 81 countries have been trained in
India by our Institutes involved in various activities of renewable
energy. While the Committee take note of the cooperation with the
developed and developing countries, they would like to reiterate their
recommendation that the Ministry should focus on commercial
cooperation in renewable energy through MoUs/Agreements/joint
ventures with under-developed countries to allow them to take
advantage of the linkages in India such as manufacturing of renewable
energy systems, devices, equipments, spare parts etc.
D. International Cooperation for cost effectiveness
(Recommendation Serial No. 6, Paragraph No. 2.6 )
15. The Committee had noted that India’s renewable energy installed
capacity has grown at an annual rate of 23% rising from about 3900 MW
in 2002-03 to about 28000 MW in 2012-13 (up to March, 2013). They had
also found that the increasing opportunities in the emerging market of
India is bound to provide a strong impetus to the development of
renewable energy sector. India, with a large proportion of its population
in rural areas that have limited access to electricity creates to a big
opportunity for the deployment of renewable energy projects through
solar, wind, biomass, biogas and small hydro power sources of energy.
Though, renewable energy technology has relatively high installation cost
but its operating cost is quite low. In many countries, some renewable
energy technologies are already competitive compared to conventional
energy sources, for instance, biomass or biogas applications in Thailand.
The Committee had felt that a strong backup support is required for
undertaking Research and Development, popularization of successful R&D
activities among the masses, diligent deployment of skilled manpower,
availability of the required finances at competitive rate rationalizing the
inputs leading to lowering of cost for development of renewable energy
sources. The success story of renewable energy largely hinges on the cost
reduction and continued sustainability of its sources or which international
cooperation will have to be resorted to with those countries who have
successfully made a mark in the technological excellence as well as
reduction in cost of power from various kind of renewable energy sources.
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that sincere efforts should
be made to enter into collaboration with the countries of proven in
technology advancements with cost effectiveness in renewable energy
sectors having technological excellence and competitive cost with a view
to bring down the cost of various renewable energy devices in the country.

8
16. In their reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has
stated as under:—
“ The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been interacting with several
developed and developing countries for cooperation in new and
renewable energy sector in close associations with central and State
PSUs, industrial associations etc. with a view to establish commercial
cooperation for supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable
energy products, systems and devices.
In this context it may be noted that a Joint Declaration of Intent
between Germany and India on Indo-German Development
Cooperation regarding the Establishment of Green Energy Corridors
was signed on 11th April 2013. The German Financial Institution
namely kfW has agreed to provide Euro 1 billion loan. The first
line of loan is expected to be delivered shortly. In addition, under
India-USA Energy Dialogue, a MoU has been signed recently for
“Promoting Energy Access through Clean Energy” (“PEACE”).
Under this initiative, Export-Import Bank of the USA intended to
mobilize up to US$ 250 million Exim Bank Financing for clean
energy access. Similarly, DFID and EU are helping C-WET, Chennai
to estimate off-shore wind power potential and identify most
suitable sites for establishment of off-shore wind farms in India.
The Ministry also established cooperation for initiating “Energy
Access” in rural areas and promote “ Access to Clean Energy” in
association with UNDP , World Bank, GIZ and USA. Such
cooperation would help Indian industries to get benefits.”
17. The Committee’s concern is about the high installation cost
of renewable energy technologies in our country compared to many
countries, where some renewable energy technologies are already
competitive vis-a-vis conventional energy sources. The Committee had
felt that International cooperation have to be resorted to with those
countries who have successfully made a mark in the technological
excellence as well as reduction in cost of power from various kinds
of renewable energy sources. In their reply, the Ministry has stated the
Indo-German Development Cooperation regarding the “Establishment
of Green Energy Corridors” and Indo-USA dialogue for “Promoting
Energy Access through Clean Energy”, but they have not mentioned
how these collaborations would help in bringing down the cost for
production of renewable power in the country. The Committee are
aware that the Financial Institutions of Germany and USA are providing
loans to Government of India for promotion of Indian renewable energy
under various programmes. While acknowledging the initiatives taken

9
by the Ministry, the Committee would like to re-emphasize that cost
effectiveness should be kept in mind while entering into collaboration
with countries in renewable energy sectors and sincere efforts should
be made to enter into collaboration with the countries of proven
technology advancements with cost effectiveness having technological
excellence and competitive cost with a view to bring down the cost
of various renewable energy devices in the country.
E. International Cooperation in Geo-thermal and Tidal Energy
(Recommendation Serial No. 8, Paragraph No. 2.8)
18. The Committee had noted that the geo-thermal energy potential
as well as tidal energy potential in India has not been systematically and
scientifically assessed or utilized. They found that the Government has
practically done very little to harness this potential. The Committee had
also found that the MNRE has signed a Memorandum of Understanding
with the Government of Iceland for scientific cooperation and research
in renewable energy and to explore potential of geo-thermal in India in
October, 2007. They also found that the State Government of Gujarat has
signed a Memorandum of Understanding in January, 2011 with UK and
Singapore companies for setting up of 250 MW tidal power plants in
Gulf of Kuchh. The Committee had felt that these MoUs were too few
to harness the full potential. The Committee had also felt that such vast
potential for electricity generation are being left almost unattended. Even
the projects in which Memorandum of Understanding has been signed
have not reported any significant progress. The Committee had
recommended that the MNRE should focus on importing technologies
from such advanced countries or wherever it is available would provide
scientific cooperation and research to assess and utilize the potential of
tidal and geo-thermal energy in India within a reasonable time frame.
They had also recommended that the projects taken up in the MoU with
concerned countries should be properly evaluated and regularly monitored
to ensure that the objective for which these MoUs have been signed are
achieved. The Committee had also recommended that the MNRE should
keep themselves well abreast of the latest innovations or upcoming
technologies world over so that the same could be imported and adapted
for domestic production and harness the vast potential of renewable
energy.
19. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their reply has
stated as under:—
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for future
action.”

10
20. The Committee intended to be apprised about the initiatives
taken in the areas of geo-thermal and tidal energy with respect to
International Cooperation in the field. They expect the Ministry to
enlighten them the progress made in the MoUs signed in this aspect
viz. MoU signed with the Government of Iceland for scientific
cooperation and research in renewable energy and to explore potential
of geo-thermal in India in October, 2007 and the MoU signed between
State Government of Gujarat with UK and Singapore companies for
setting up of 250 MW tidal power plants in Gulf of Kachh. However,
the Ministry simply stated that they have noted the suggestions of the
Committee. The Ministry’s reply merely stating that the suggestions
of the Committee have been noted for future action is not acceptable
to them. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
the MNRE should focus on importing technologies from such advanced
countries which would provide scientific cooperation and research to
assess and utilize the potential of tidal and geo-thermal energy in
India within a reasonable time frame and also that the projects taken
up in the MoU with concerned countries should be properly evaluated
and regularly monitored to ensure that the objective for which these
MoUs have been signed are achieved. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Serial No. 1, Paragraph No. 2.1)
The National electricity Policy was notified on 12th February, 2005
which, inter alia,  provided that the National Electricity Plan for the
ongoing Tenth Plan period and Eleventh Plan and perspective Plan for
10th, 11th and 12th Plan periods would be prepared and notified after
revising the existing Power Plan by CEA. It was also stipulated that the
Perspective Plans would take into consideration the rural electrification,
generation, energy conservation, environmental issues, etc. The Policy
also, inter alia , provided promotion of non-conventional energy sources
and purchase of electricity from such sources by the States. The Committee
are not very sure that such an exercise has been done in respect of
non-conventional energy sources. The Committee, therefore, would like
that a Perspective Plan is prepared exclusively for energy from
non-conventional sources for the Twelfth Five Year Plan in synchronization
to similar Plan for energy from conventional sources.
Reply of the Government
The Central Electricity Authority prepares National Electricity Plan
after taking into account electricity demand projections by different sectors
of the economy including in rural areas. Demand projections are
technology agonistic. However, the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy has prepared a plan to install 30 GW generation capacity based
on renewable energy sources during 12th Five Year Plan period. This
includes 15 GW from Wind, 10 GW from solar and the remaining from
biomass and small hydro power.
The 12th Five Year Plan proposes installation of 88.5 GW capacities
from conventional energy sources. Thus the share of renewable energy
in the electric installed capacity addition during the plan period would
be around 25%.

12
Further, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) in the Green
Energy Corridor Study prepared a plan for renewable power evacuation
and transmission infrastructure for the planned renewable power capacity
addition up to 2017.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
International Co-operation
(Recommendation Serial No. 3, Paragraph No. 2.3)
The Committee are informed that Memoranda of Understanding/
Agreements/Cooperation in renewable energy have been signed with
various countries. The MoUs signed are of standard nature which lays
the framework of co-operation between India and the signing country.
These MoUs provide for constitution of Joint Working Groups (JWG) to
formulate specific project proposals for implementation and for monitoring
of implementation of various activities. The Committee also find that
cooperation is also done with many other countries without any specific
MoUs in renewable energy sector. The Committee have also been informed
that active interest has been taken under some of the MoUs, while in case
of others, not much progress has been made for want of initiative by the
concerned countries. The constraints in this regard have been stated to
be associated with advance resource assessment, mapping of wind, solar
and biomass, promoting off-shore wind power projects, testing and
certifications, etc. Although, these constraints have been cited for
hampering the progress of the sector, yet the Committee find them to
be of routine nature only. The Committee have further been apprised that
generally Memorandum of Understanding is only an intention to do
something and is not legally binding whereas, under agreements/
cooperation, it is enforceable legally where both parties agree on
implementing specific work/task. The Committee find that the position
stated by the Government with regard to MoUs/Cooperation/Agreements
is not conclusive as International Cooperation inherently assumes some
concrete action with regard to the object of the cooperation. They are not
impressed by plea of the Government that these MoUs are not legally
binding. It reflects on the seriousness of the Ministry for signing such
MoUs and should not be resorted to if no concrete action is likely to
emerge from this kind of general MoUs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that MoUs, Cooperation or Agreements with any of the
foreign country or entity abroad with regard to promotion of renewable
energy in the country should be signed with utmost sincerity and purpose

13
and not as a ritual so that precious time and money can be fruitfully
utilized within the sector. They also strongly recommend that transparency
should be maintained and concrete initiatives should be taken by the
Ministry to follow up their implementation as also to link their progress
and achievements with reference to signing fresh MoUs/renewal of MoUs,
if required, with these countries in consultation with the Ministry of
External Affairs.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and fresh MoUs
are being taken up with specific task and objects in mind and in
consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendation Serial No. 5, Paragraph No. 2.5)
The Committee find that technological advancement has
important role in various fields of renewable energy to facilitate them
to develop, operate and maintain various systems and devices apart
from developing collaborative R&D programmes. Therefore, rapid
advancement instead of gradual improvement in the renewable energy
technology is the only way to optimally harness the available potential.
Renewable energy systems are still in a relatively nascent stage of
development. But they offer the country potentially huge primary
energy sources, sustainable in perpetuity and available in one form or
another. India is an active participant in the international dialogue
on energy and the environment. The Committee feel that our country
could benefit from increased cooperation with International experts,
which will help Government, policy makers, industry and consumers to
learn from relevant experiences and best practices from other
countries who successfully use large amount of renewable
energy applications. The Committee strongly recommends that the
Government besides focusing on increasing the installed capacity
should also focus on technological advancement through increased
cooperation with international experts and technologically advanced
countries. Steps should be taken towards the aggregation and sharing of
information on adaptation of relevant technologies and knowledge.
Needless to emphasize these steps will take the goal of 2050 by which
renewable share is expected to reach about 77% of total energy
requirements globally .

14
Reply of the Government
Ministry is primarily focussing on technical collaborations required
for initiating research and development, training and creating
manufacturing bases with the advanced/developed countries especially
US, Europe, Japan etc. It is to be mentioned that the ongoing international
collaborations facilitated by the Ministry, helped in overcoming some of
the technical constraints such as:—
(i) Firming up of Resource Assessment of solar and wind energy
using advanced techniques developed by the NREL, USA,
GIZ, Germany; RISO Denmark.
(ii) T esting and Certification of Wind Turbines with RISO
Denmark and NREL, USA.
(iii) Off-shore wind power development in India with Scottish
Development International (SDI), Scotland and off-shore wind
resource assessment off the Tamil Nadu Coast, using SAR
(Synthetic Aperture Radar) analysis of Satellite imagery with
RISO-DTU, Denmark.
(iv) Solar Radiation resource mapping with German International
Zussamenarbeit (GIZ).
(v) Hydrogen Fuel Cell – R&D Project with IIT-M and Imperial
College, London.
(vi) R&D project on “Development of a Modular Central Receiver
Concentrated Solar Power Plant for Decentralized Power
Generation” in cooperation with (i) University of South
Florida, USA, (ii) IMDEA Energy, Spain, and (iii) Institute of
Energy Technology, Zurich.
(vii) To accelerate and sustain the Solar Water heating market
growth through UNDP/GEF Global Solar Water Heating India
Project.
(viii) Removal of Barriers to “Biomass Power Generation in India”
under UNDP/GEF assisted Project.
(ix) Access to Clean Energy under UNDP Project.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]

15
(Recommendation Serial No. 6, Paragraph No. 2.6)
The Committee note that India’s renewable energy installed capacity
has grown at an annual rate of 23% rising from about 3900 MW in 2002-03
to about 28000 MW in 2012-13 (up to March, 2013). As far as wind energy
is concerned, it dominates India’s renewable energy sector accounting for
70% of installed capacity (19051 MW) followed by biomass power
(3695 MW), small hydro power (3632 MW) and solar power (1686 MW)
that has just started registering its presence. The Committee find that the
increasing opportunities in the emerging market of India is bound to
provide a strong impetus to the development of renewable energy sector.
India, with a large proportion of its population in rural areas that have
limited access to electricity creates to a big opportunity for the deployment
of renewable energy projects through solar, wind, biomass, biogas and
small hydro power sources of energy. Though, renewable energy
technology has relatively high installation cost but its operating cost is
quite low. In many countries, some renewable energy technologies are
already competitive compared to conventional energy sources, for instance,
biomass or biogas applications in Thailand. The Committee feel that a
strong backup support is required for undertaking Research and
Development, popularization of successful R&D activities among the
masses, diligent deployment of skilled manpower, availability of the
required finances at competitive rate rationalizing the inputs leading to
lowering of cost for development of renewable energy sources. The
success story of renewable energy largely hinges on the cost reduction
and continued sustainability of its sources or which international
cooperation will have to be resorted to with those countries who have
successfully made a mark in the technological excellence as well as
reduction in cost of power from various kind of renewable energy
sources. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that sincere
efforts should be made to enter into collaboration with the countries of
proven in technology advancements with cost effectiveness in renewable
energy sectors having technological excellence and competitive cost with
a view to bring down the cost of various renewable energy devices in
the country.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been interacting with several developed
and developing countries for cooperation in new and renewable energy
sector in close associations with central and State PSUs, industrial

16
associations etc. with a view to establish commercial cooperation for
supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable energy products,
systems and devices.
In this context it may be noted that a Joint Declaration of Intent
between Germany and India on Indo-German Development Cooperation
regarding the Establishment of Green Energy Corridors was signed on
11th April, 2013. The German Financial Institution namely kfW has
agreed to provide Euro 1 billion loan. The first line of loan is expected
to be delivered shortly. In addition, under India-USA Energy Dialogue,
a MoU has been signed recently for “Promoting Energy Access through
Clean Energy” (PEACE). Under this initiative, Export-Import Bank of the
USA intended to mobilize up to US$ 250 million Ex-Im Bank
Financing for clean energy access. Similarly, DFID and EU are helping
C-WET, Chennai to estimate off-shore wind power potential and identify
most suitable sites for establishment off-shore wind farms in India. The
Ministry also established cooperation for initiating “Energy Access” in
rural areas and promote “ Access to Clean Energy” in association with
UNDP , World Bank, GIZ and USA. Such cooperation would help Indian
industries to get benefits.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendation Serial No. 7, Paragraph No. 2.7)
The Committee note that there have been technological and
commercial collaborations with advanced countries in wind energy, solar
energy and biomass sector. In wind energy sector there are projects with
14 wind turbine manufacturers (with international cooperation or are
100% subsidiary of foreign cooperation) and co-operation projects with
NREL (New and Renewable Laboratory) in aero-structural design of
wind turbines. In solar energy there are tie ups with various countries
for solar thermal systems, cookers, water heater, SPV module testing
amorphous silicon technology photo voltaic module reliability Industrial
Process heat application and pilot projects in textile, pulp and paper,
pharmaceutical and food processing sectors. The Committee are unaware
any evaluation done by the MNRE or other Ministries with the objective
to assess the extent to which projects under these international
collaboration/agreement have benefited domestic manufacturing of
equipments/implements and to provide conducive infrastructure in
New and Renewable sector source-wise. They feel that regular

17
assessment of the projects under various MoUs/Agreements should be
critically carried out so as to give clarity on the extent of technology
import and technology transfer. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the projects under various collaborations should be evaluated on
regular basis by the MNRE so as to assess the extent of technology
absorption/adaptation after the technology has been imported through
these international cooperations/collaborations/agreements. They
emphasize that the Ministry should also take necessary steps to assess
the extent to which manufacturing sector in India is being strengthened
in terms of in-house production and commercial applications of these
international collaborations.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and
necessary steps such as Joint Working Group meetings are being
organized to review the progress and take suitable steps to
strengthen the collaboration with various countries with MoUs etc. have
been signed.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendations Serial No. 9, Paragraph No. 2.9)
The Committee find that Solar Energy Center (SEC), Centre for
Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Alternate Hydro Energy Centre
(AHEC), are the prominent and main technical arms of the Government
engaged in research and development of the various kinds of renewable
energies in the country. The exchange of technical personnel working
there and in various other technical institutions abroad has helped in
acquiring advance technical knowledge and capacity building. The areas
which have been dwelt upon are aero-structural design, inter-laboratory
comparisons on power performance measurements in case of wind energy,
off-shore wind source assessment, wind power forecasting training and
application, wind energy technology training, data quality checking and
algorithm, development for solar radiation resource assessment. The
Committee feel that exchange of technical information and close
coordination is essential for advancement of renewable energy to ensure
an organized and orderly energy transition and to give the necessary
support at required places. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that institutional mechanism and stable structure should be put in place
for the purpose of international technological cooperation. This becomes

18
all the more necessary as renewable energy is still a developing and
growing sector and more than 2/3 of its identified and available potential
is yet to be harnessed. The identified available potential of various
kinds of renewable energy is variable and never a finality and hence
technical innovations will certainly open new avenues and vistas of the
sector.
Reply of the Government
As stated earlier, the Ministry is primarily focussing on
technical collaborations required for initiating research and development,
training and creating manufacturing bases with the advanced/
developed countries especially US, Europe, Japan etc. It is to be
mentioned that the ongoing international collaborations facilitated by
the Ministry , helped in overcoming some of the technical constraints
such as:—
(i) Firming up of Resource Assessment of solar and wind energy
using advanced techniques developed by the NREL, USA;
GIZ, Germany; RISO, Denmark.
(ii) T esting and Certification of Wind Turbines with RISO,
Denmark and NREL, USA.
(iii) Off shore wind power development in India with Scottish
Development International (SDI), Scotland and offshore wind
resource assessment off the Tamil Nadu Coast, using SAR
(Synthetic Aperture Radar) analysis of Satellite imagery with
RISO-DTU, Denmark.
(iv) Solar Radiation resource mapping with German International
Zussamenarbeit (GIZ).
(v) Hydrogen Fuel Cell – R&D Project with IIT-M and Imperial
College, London.
(vi) R&D project on “Development of a Modular Central Receiver
Concentrated Solar Power Plant for Decentralized Power
Generation” in cooperation with (a) University of South
Florida, USA, (b) IMDEA Energy, Spain, and (c) Institute of
Energy Technology, Zurich.

19
(vii) To accelerate and sustain the Solar Water heating market
growth through UNDP/GEF Global Solar Water Heating India
Project.
(viii) Removal of Barriers to Biomass Power Generation in India
under UNDP/GEF assisted project.
(ix) Access to Clean Energy under UNDP Project.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendation Serial No. 10, Paragraph No. 2.10)
The Committee are happy to note that about 168 participants from
60 countries were given training in Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon and
107 participants from 42 countries were given training in Centre for Wind
Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai during last 4 years. 652 participants
from 62 countries have been given training at Alternate Hydro Energy
Centre (AHEC), Roorkee during last 15 years. It shows that these institutes
have faculty and know how to attract professionals from a large number
of countries for training.
Scientists and senior officers of MNRE, SEC, C-WET, AHEC, IITs,
etc. also undertake visits to various countries for advanced training
programmes in areas of renewable energy. During last 3 years as many
as 130 such foreign visits were undertaken. The Committee would like
the Ministry to ensure that study Reports of these visits are compiled/
submitted and copies placed in MNRE/SEC/C-WET for use and reference.
This will ensure that visits undertaken are meaningful and are not
repetitive in nature.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry facilitates scientists and senior officials of MNRE
and its institutions to visit various countries for advanced training
programme, participate international conferences etc. The study reports
are compiled and circulated to the concerned groups/divisions of the
Ministry for action.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]

20
Collaboration for Financing and Credit
(Recommendation Serial No. 11, Paragraph No. 2.11)
The Committee observe that besides problems of assessing the
renewable energy potential, steps for their promotion, testing and
certifications, financing and credit lines are also very important issues
impending fast growth of the sector. Strong technical collaborations for
research and development, training and creating manufacturing basis is
not possible without financial resources. The Committee note that
significant steps have been taken with regard to firming up of resource
assessment of solar and wind energy, testing and certification of wind
turbines by using advance techniques developed in USA, Germany and
Denmark, off shore wind power development, hydro fuel cell – R&D
Project, removal of barriers on bio-mass power generations in
collaborations with foreign countries and international organizations.
However, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need for augmented
and increased financing and credit lines from various international/
multinational funding agencies. Such collaboration should be energy
source based rather than project-based as it will help in giving thrust to
the entire segment of specific energy source for its expansion and
development. Such financial collaboration may be subjected to the
identified available potential, technological support, and scope for its
development wherever deemed necessary to promote the sector. Research
and Development activities should also be undertaken through such
financial tie-ups and credit lines. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that necessary steps should be taken up by doing necessary
spade work to impress upon international/multinational credit agencies
like World Bank, United Nations Development Programme, Asian
Development Bank, Global environmental facilities etc. to extend credit
facilities on agreeable terms for the holistic development of green energy
in the Country .
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. In this context
it is stated that a Joint Declaration of Intent between Germany and India
on Indo-German Development Cooperation Regarding the Establishment
of Green Energy Corridors was signed on 11th April, 2013. The German
Financial Institution namely kfW has agreed to provide Euro 1 billion
loan. The first line of loan is expected to be delivered shortly. Similarly,
under India USA MoU signed recently for “Promoting Energy Access

21
through Clean Energy” (PEACE), Export-Import Bank of the USA intended
to mobilize up to US$ 250 million EIM Bank Financing for clean energy
access.
[F.No.1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendation Serial No. 12, Paragraph No. 2.12)
The Committee note that MNRE provide support for installation
of various renewable energy systems/devices etc. both national and
international. To support these activities funds are provided from the
budget head of the Ministry for projects under implementation following
international cooperation under the separate categories of MoUs/
Bilateral/Trilateral/Multilateral agreements, various international and
multinational funding agencies like Word Bank, United Nations
Development Programme/global environment facility etc., provide project-
based assistance for Renewable Energy Programme in India. The
Committee also find that the International Financial Institutions
provide funds to the projects for harnessing the New and Renewable
energy resources which if properly implemented would in the long
term significantly enhance power generation and reduce power demand
gap. The Committee also note that the foreign investors can bring
innovations in business models and can complement domestic
developers/investors in implementing the RE projects and programmes
by investing in this sector. This would also lead to inclusive growth,
which is one of the important focal areas of the 12th Five Year Plan. The
Committee are, however, concerned that though the foreign investors
may avail of the concessions from the Ministry in terms of financial and
fiscal incentives yet they may not be prompt in implementing these
projects. The Committee are, therefore, apprehensive that the foreign
investors may not be able to provide long term support to the projects
in New and Renewable energy sector. The Committee are of the opinion
that to optimize implementation of renewable projects and programmes,
investors would expect long term financial support, conducive policy
and friendly regulatory framework as a pre-requisite. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the MNRE should bring out conducive policy
and regulatory framework for implementing the RE projects and
programmes. They also desire that financial and fiscal incentives should
be provided to draw investors and developers for long term support
besides bringing about innovation in business models that are entrepreneur
driven and delivery based for inclusive growth in new and renewable

22
energy sector. They also urge the Ministry to incorporate effective
regulatory mechanism for technological upgradation and quality
assurance clauses in the policy so as to ensure that the incentives given
for the purpose are used for growth of the Indian Renewable Energy
Sector.
Reply of the Government
Government offers fiscal and financial incentives to promote
renewable energy development in the country . Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) upto 100% under automatic route is permitted in renewable
energy generation and distribution project subject to the provisions
of electricity act 2003. There has been Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
inflow to the tune of Rs. 8569 crores (US Dollar 1756 million) in the
renewable energy sector during the last three years (2009-2012) as on
31.12.2012.
In addition, the Government has taken several steps to
encourage development of renewable energy sector. These include the
following:—
• Private sector companies are partnering with Government
and co-investing in R&D and technology development.
• Fiscal and financial incentives, such as, capital/interest
subsidies, accelerated depreciation, nil/concessional excise and
custom duties;
• Preferential tariff for grid interactive renewable power in most
potential States following the provisions made under the
National Electricity Policy 2005 and National Tariff Policy
2006, Uniform guidelines by CERC for fixation of such
preferential tariffs being issued every year;
• Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission launched to facilitate
large scale capital investment in solar energy sector, payment
Security Mechanism for grid connected solar power projects
under the Mission.
The Government also has a policy to encourage transfer of foreign
technologies, including those in renewable energy sector.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]

23
(Recommendation Serial No. 13, Paragraph No. 2.13)
The Committee are aware that UNDP/GEF assisted Projects on solar
water heating, project on market development and promotion of solar
concentrator based process heat applications, project on removal of barriers
to biomass power generation in India, UNDP Project on access to clean
energy, World Bank technical assistance for up-scaling deployment of
RET based innovative business model are some of the projects being
implemented with the financial cooperation/funding of global funding
agencies. The tangible benefit in terms of installed capacity through
multilateral/bilateral loans for various renewable energy sources have
been stated to be around 1,200 MW. The Committee find that the Capacity
Addition on this account is extremely low particularly when a number
of bilateral and multilateral financing agencies are involved. The
Committee are aware of the limitations with regard to the investment
in renewable energy power projects being the intermittent nature of
renewable energy sources, grid synchronization limitations, relatively
higher capital investment, difficulties in servicing and maintenance in
remote areas and non-availability of preferential tariff, yet the Committee
expect higher capacity addition from such collaborations. The Committee
strongly feel that the result achieved are in no way commensurate with
the efforts put in during the last three years. They therefore, strongly
recommend that international finances despite being project-based or
otherwise should be of such scale so as to give the desired thrust to the
sector for its proper development, otherwise these activities could be
financed domestically as the projects do not have higher financial stakes
and are beneficial to the common man. This can become a reality if these
projects are made commercially viable through appropriate research and
technological advancements.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the committee have been noted for future
action.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
(Recommendations Serial No. 14, Paragraph No. 2.14)
The Committee note that the main objective for providing training
to the scientists through international collaboration is to share technical

24
experiences acquired in various fields of renewable energy to facilitate
them to develop, operate and maintain various systems and devices apart
from developing joint R&D programmes. With regard to long term
strategy, it has been stated that Solar Energy Centre is focusing in R&D,
Testing and Training in solar energy technology and applications and
organizing short-term training courses on various aspects of solar energy.
Similarly, C-WET has also been providing specialized training in wind
energy sector. These trainings have significantly contributed in the growth
of renewable energy over the years. The Committee feel that the facilities
of existing training institutions are limited and requires expansion, besides
creation of new facilities with the cooperation of international
organizations. This will help in the development of indigenous skills for
negotiating and managing exploration and exploitation of renewable
energy sources. As of now, the scope and area of renewable energy
applications has not expanded in a manner wherein it could cater to our
domestic requirements and become an alternative energy option. It has
also its own limitations with regard to its magnitude and access by
commoner despite the fact that it is going to be more useful for the
common man given the nature of various sources and their availability
throughout the length and breadth of the country and their potential
convertibility into electricity. It will be opportune if skill/technical
knowledge is imparted to disparate groups wherein most people can be
trained for skillful harnessing of available renewable energy sources into
their respective areas as specialists. It can be feasible more so when it
does not involve higher technical training or enormous financial stakes
and can be useful in remote and inaccessible areas as well. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the fruits of international technological
cooperation should not remain confined within the four walls of technical
institutions of the Government or be limited to laboratory of the technical
institutions but should reach all possible corners of the country wherein
localized renewable energy sources are available. This can be made a
reality by imparting working training to the local people in developing,
handling and operating various devices based on their areas for which
financial requirements can also be sorted out through local Self Help
Groups, Local cooperatives, Grameen Banks and other agencies providing
small credits.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry actively involves business councils/forums such as
CII, FICCI etc. with International cooperation programme with

25
developed countries like Japan, U.K., Australia, China, U.S.A., Germany,
etc. where specific Energy dialogue have been established. Under these
Energy dialogues, business Council/forums actively involves Indian
manufacturers industries to accrue benefits from such International
collaboration.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]

26
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- Nil -

27
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Policy/framework on Renewable Energy Sector
(Recommendation Serial No. 2, Paragraph No. 2.2)
The Committee find that the energy supply imbalances is increasing
in the country. Economic growth requires the fulfillment of the energy
needs. To sustain the growth, serious efforts are required to ensure the
requisite energy supply. Rise in per capita consumption and spread of
energy access has also strained the demand – supply gap of the energy.
Conventional sources of energy have their own limitations and the country
cannot be solely dependent on them and will have to explore the
alternative sources of energy. Renewable energy can make substantial
contribution in meeting our energy requirements. In India there is huge
potential for power generation through renewable sources such as wind,
solar, bio-mass, small hydro etc. For sustained development of this sector,
vigorous and concerted efforts will have to be made for the New and
Renewable Energy sector. Of late, renewable energy has become an
important component of our energy planning process and the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been facilitating the implementation
of broad spectrum programmes including harnessing of renewable power,
R&D in renewable energy sector, renewable energy to rural areas for
lighting, use of renewable energy in urban, industrial and commercial
applications etc. Consequently, Indian “Renewable Energy Programme
has been recognized globally and the country have become second largest
in terms of installed biogas plants, fifth largest in wind installed capacity
and have attained fifth position in overall renewable energy capacity
installations with more than 6 million decentralized RE systems. The
Committee find it to be a modest beginning yet a firm step in the right
direction and the country have the potential to play a leading role globally
in the renewable sector. The Committee therefore, recommend that a
proper policy framework on renewable energy sector should be brought
out keeping in view our strengths and weaknesses with regard to various
aspects of renewable energy such as proper assessment of potential

28
resource-wise, wind and solar mapping, taking forward the initiatives in
thermal and tidal energy, testing and certification, investment for
infrastructure, development to attain long term goal of sustainable and
inclusive energy for future. Such areas should be prioritized for harnessing
in a time bound manner and our weaknesses should be analyzed with
a view to rectify them so as to ensure the maximum harnessing of various
sources of renewable energy during off season and not so suitable
conditions.
Reply of the Government
The estimated renewable energy resource assessment carried out
by the Ministry in various renewable energy sources is being further
assessed especially for Wind and Solar Energy based on the advance
tools and available technological options involving international
institutions/agencies. The Centre for Wind Energy Technology (CWET),
Chennai is assessing off shore wind power potential with the help of
institutions/agencies capable to estimate such potential. Similarly , The
Solar Energy Centre, now re-named National Institute of Solar Energy
(NISE), is associated with development of solar radiation maps for the
country.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report)
Commercial Co-operation
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Paragraph No. 2.4)
The Committee are aware that bilateral and multilateral co-operation
frameworks have been established for co-operation and knowledge sharing
in renewable energy technology and projects. The focus of interaction for
co-operation has been on exploring opportunities for exchange of
scientists, shares experiences and take up joint research, design,
development, demonstration and manufacture of new and renewable
energy systems and devices. The committee find that interests have been
shown by many South East Asian countries for strengthening/revival of
MoUs and co-operations in renewable energy sector. The Committee feel
that while making efforts for collaboration with the developed countries
for achieving technological excellence and cost efficiency. It is also
important to collaborate with the developing/under-developed countries,
where our expertise in technological advancement for harnessing the New

29
and Renewable energy resources should be shared so that the commercial
linkages could Extend to the Indian domestic producers/exporters. Such
International co-operations open doors for Indian manufacturing
companies for supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable energy
products, systems and devices specially in the wind, solar and hydro
power sectors. Hence, they recommend that the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy should focus on commercial co-operation in renewable
energy through MoUs/Agreements/joint ventures with developing/under-
developed countries also. This would allow them to take advantage of
the linkages in India such as manufacturing of renewable energy systems,
devices, equipments, spare parts etc., while sharing their technological
know-how as well.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the committee have been noted. The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy has been interacting with several developed
and developing countries for cooperation in new and renewable energy
sector in close associations with central and State PSUs, industrial
associations etc., with a view to establish commercial cooperation for
supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable energy products,
systems and devices.
In this context it may be noted that a “Joint Declaration of Intent”
between Germany and India on Indo-German Development Co-operation
regarding the “Establishment of Green Energy Corridors” was signed on
11th April 2013. The German Financial Institution namely kfW has agreed
to provide Euro 1 billion loan. The first line of loan is expected to be
delivered shortly. In addition, under India-USA Energy Dialogue, a MoU
has been signed recently for “Promoting Energy Access through Clean
Energy” (“PEACE”). Under this initiative, Export-Import Bank of the
USA intended to mobilize up to US$ 250 million EXIM Bank Financing
for clean energy access. Similarly, DFID and EU are helping C-WET,
Chennai to estimate off-shore wind power potential and identify most
suitable sites for establishment off-shore wind farms in India. The Ministry
also established cooperation for initiating “Energy Access” in rural areas
and promote “ Access to Clean Energy” in association with UNDP , World
Bank, GIZ and USA. Such cooperation would help Indian industries to
get benefits.
The Ministry also helps and supports many developing countries
in Africa, Asia, Egypt, etc. for resource estimation and installation of
various Renewable Energy systems/devices. Indian manufacturing
industries are executing and supplying various renewable energy systems/
devices. The Ministry also provides support to developing countries

30
for capacity building and imparting training etc. So far more than
900 participants were trained from over 81 countries by the Solar Energy
Centre, Gurgaon, C-WET, Chennai and AHEC, IIT, Roorkee under
Indian Technological and Economic Cooperation (I-TEC) programme
with Ministry of External Affairs under Solar, wind and small hydro
sectors.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report)
International Cooperation in Geo-thermal and Tidal Energy
(Recommendation Serial No. 8 Paragraph No. 2.8)
The Committee note that geo-thermal energy is heat stored in deep
interior of earth that can be effectively used for producing electricity as
also for direct heat applications. Reportedly Geological Survey of India
has identified about 340 geo-thermal hot springs with the potential of
10,000 MW of electricity in the country which are perennial with surface
temperature ranging from 37-90 degree Celsius which is suitable enough
for direct heat application. The Committee also note that India has a long
coast line of about 7,500 KM with estuaries and gulf where tides are
strong enough to move turbines for electric power generation. Estimated
potential of tidal energy of about 8,200 MW in the country including
7,000 MW in the Gulf of Kambay and 1,200 MW of Gulf of Kachh in
the State of Gujarat and about 100 MW in the Gigantic belt in Sunderban
region in the State of West Bengal. The Committee, however, observe that
the geo-thermal energy potential as well as tidal energy potential in India
has not been systematically and scientifically assessed or utilized. They
find that the Government has practically done very little to harness this
potential. The Committee find that the MNRE has signed a Memorandum
of Understanding with the Government of Iceland for scientific
cooperation and research in renewable energy and to explore potential
of geo-thermal in India in October, 2007. They also find that the State
Government of Gujarat has signed a Memorandum of Understanding in
January, 2011 with UK and Singapore companies for setting up of
250 MW tidal power plants in Gulf of Kachh.The Committee find that
these MoUs are too few to harness the full potential. The Committee feel
that such vast potential for electricity generation are being left almost
unattended. Even the projects in which Memorandum of Understanding
has been signed have not reported any significant progress. The Committee
recommend that the MNRE should focus on importing technologies from

31
such advanced countries or wherever it is available who would provide
scientific cooperation and research to assess and utilize the potential of
tidal and geo-thermal energy in India within a reasonable time frame.
They also recommend that the projects taken up in the MoU with
concerned countries should be properly evaluated and regularly monitored
to ensure that the objective for which these MoUs have been signed are
achieved. They further recommend that the MNRE should keep themselves
well abreast of the latest innovations or upcoming technologies world
over so that the same could be imported and adapted for domestic
production and harness the vast potential of renewable energy.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the committee have been noted for future action.
[F.No. 1/2/2013-IR, dated 4th November, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report)

32
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
- Nil -
NEW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

33
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2013-14) HELD ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2013 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’ PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Shri Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri Jagadanand Singh
10. Smt. Pratibha Singh
11. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
13. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
14. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahni
15. Shri Motilal Vora

34
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration of the following draft Reports:—
(i) 41st Report on ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana’.
(ii) 42nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 36th Report on
‘International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector’.
(iii) 43rd Report on ‘Development of Hydro Sector’.
(iv) 44th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 37th Report on
‘Development of National Grid’.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Report without any change.
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Report and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
5. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

35
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 14
(ii) Observ ations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total: 11
Percentage: 78.6%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
- Nil -
Total: 0
Percentage: 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2,4 and 8
Total: 03
Percentage: 21.4%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
- Nil -
Total: 0
Percentage: 0%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”