THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2012-13]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 232
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 20
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 50
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 55
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 65
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
11th December, 2012 .................................................................. 66
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
28th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................... 68
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Smt. Mausam Noor
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 32nd Report on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 28th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Power for the year 2012-13’.
2. The 28th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 03rd May, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
19th November, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th December, 2012.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 28th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
17 December, 2012 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendation
contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2012-13.
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
03rd May, 2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total-10
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial Nos. 8 and 10
Total-02
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 3, 5, 6 and 7
Total-04
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action T aken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. 11th Five Year Plan—Targets and Achievements
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
6. The Committee had expressed their concern about the poor
performance of Central Sector in regard to attainment of capacity
addition vis-à-vis States and Private Sector performance during the
11th Five Year Plan. Against the target of 36,874 MW, 26,783 MW and
15,043 MW, the achievements of Central, State and Private Sector had
been 15,220 MW, 16,732 MW and 23,012 MW which was 41%, 62%
and 153% respectively of their original targets. While the Committee
felt happy about the exceptional performance of Private Sector in
capacity addition, it was taken aback at the poor performance of the
Central Sector. The Committee also felt that the Central Sector having
giant companies with already laid out infrastructure such as NTPC,
NHPC, DVC etc. yet they had failed to achieve even half of their
targets put together. Had the Private Sector not performed exceptionally
well, the situation could have been worse in terms of capacity addition.
They also felt that if there were problems and hindrances for
Government's Power Sector PSUs so were they for Private Sector. The
fact that the Central Sector have unmatched financial and unstinted
support of the Government, hence their dismal performance compelled
the Committee to infer that all is not well so far as the Management
of the Power Sector PSUs and monitoring by the Ministry was
concerned. The Committee were of the strong view that if the power
projects are not being commissioned as per time schedule there is
fault either in planning process or in the execution of the plan. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended the Government to review
the working of all Power Sector PSUs with a view to analyse the
causes for their dismal performance during the 11th Plan as compared
to Private Sector. They had also desired the Government to urgently
look into the causes of the serious slippage in the target achievement
and take immediate corrective measures.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated:
“As per the Mid-term appraisal of the Planning Commission, the
capacity addition target of 21,222 MW was set for the Central
Sector for the 11th Plan against which 15220 MW of fresh capacity

3
was commissioned during the 11th Plan. Lower achievement of
CPSUs vis-à-vis the targets was mainly due to fact that certain
projects could not be commissioned due to agitation (Kudankulam),
decision to withdraw from the project at Lohari Nagpala,
contractual issues (Barh, Sipat), law & order, acquisition of land,
delay in placement of order (Nabinagar, Mouda, Bongaigaon), etc.
and in hydro sector, reasons like geological surprises, floods,
agitation. In addition Maithon RBC TPS (2x525 MW) which was
originally included in the target of Central Sector (DVC), was
subsequently excluded from Central Sector as this project was
commissioned in Private Sector, thereby reducing achievement of
Central Sector. In a statement annexed to the reply PSU-wise
reasons for shortfall in achieving the targets in 11th Plan have
been indicated.”
8. The Committee in their 28th Report had expressed their
concern over the poor performance of Central Sector in regard to
attainment of capacity addition vis-à-vis States and Private Sector
performance during the 11th Five Year Plan. They noted that against
the target of 36,874 MW, 26,783 MW and 15,043 MW, the achievements
of Central, State and Private Sector have been 15,220 MW, 16,732
MW and 23,012 MW which is 41%, 62% and 153% respectively of
their original targets. During the examination of the Demands for
Grants 2012-13, the Ministry had enumerated several reasons for the
slippages in achievement of targets. The Committee, being not
convinced of the reasons given, had recommended the Government
to review the working of all Power Sector PSUs with a view to
analyse the causes for their dismal performance during the 11th Plan
as compared to Private Sector and also to take immediate corrective
measures. The rationale behind the Committee’s recommendation was
to ensure that the under performance of PSUs in terms of
achievement of capacity addition targets is not repeated in the on-
going 12th Five Year Plan period commencing from April, 2012. The
Committee are also pained to note that instead of apprising the
Committee about the result of such review of the PSUs and the
action taken/proposed thereon or even assuring the Committee to do
so, the Ministry have chosen to repeat enumeration of factors
responsible for the slippages in achievement of targets. The
Committee have taken the poor performance of PSUs during the
11th Plan very seriously. Instead of Central Sectors PSUs playing
role of flag bearer for new entrants in the private sector, it seems
they are contended with status quo and ignoring the downslide in
their performance. Similarly, the Committee have not been apprised
about the weak areas of PSUs which could have been identified
through a thorough review of all power PSUs and concrete steps

4
taken to overcome the recurring problematic areas. The Committee,
therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation that working
of all Power Sector PSUs should be reviewed to analyze the causes
for their dismal performance during the 11th Plan as compared to
Private Sector and to take specific necessary corrective measures.
B. Spending Pattern
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
9. The Committee were disappointed to note that despite their
recommendation in 19th Report, 1st quarter fund utilization for the
year 2011-12 had further slipped to 1.67% against 8.15% for the
2010-11. The Committee in 28th Report had again emphasized that
poor spending pattern in 1st quarter has cascading effect which
definitely puts pressure on spending patterns of later quarters. The
Committee, had, therefore, reiterated the Government to review their
monitoring mechanism to ensure uniform quarterly spending.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that
recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Secretary (P) has
issued instructions to all concerned in the Ministry for even utilization
of Budgetary allocation.
11. The Committee express their satisfaction over the fact that
the Ministry of Power have complied to their well considered
recommendation of uniform quarterly utilization of funds particularly
during the first quarter of the financial year and issued necessary
directions/instruction to all concerned to comply the guidelines on
prudent expenditure management for effective implementation. Under
the guidelines it has been stipulated that the Secretary would review
the matter in the Senior Officers meetings. The Committee would
await outcome of the implementation of the guidelines in the matter.
C. Overall Capacity Targets for 12th Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
12. The Committee had recommended:
“The Committee note that a capacity addition target to the tune of
75,785 MW has been projected for the 12th Plan. The Committee,
considering the growing demand of energy in the country, find
the targets of 12th Plan very moderate. The Electric Power Survey
Report has forecasted that energy requirement and peak demand

5
in the country in 2016-17 will be 13,54,874 Million Unit and
1,99,540 MW respectively. Various reasons have been assigned by
the Government for poor performance during 11th Plan such as
delay in placement of orders, delay in supply of material for main
Plant, problems of land acquisition, contractual disputes, shortage
of fuel etc. The Committee apprehend that there are chances that
these reasons may further impede the progress of the work during
the 12th Plan curtailing the proposed capacity addition targets.
The Committee are unhappy to find that though the representatives
of the Ministry of Power have on several occasion, submitted
before the Committee that about a capacity addition target of
1,00,000 MW for the 12th Plan, have now submitted before the
Committee a target of 76,000 MW for 12th Plan, which happens to
be even lower than the original target of 78,700 MW set for the
11th Plan. The Committee are unable to accept this target mainly
because they are aware that the ambitious plans of implementation
of Ultra Mega Power Projects will alone provide a capacity addition
of 4,000 MW or above by each of these commissioned projects
during the 12th Plan besides the capacity addition from the already
existing Power Giant in Central, State and Private Sector
Companies. It is also pertinent to mention here that the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy have submitted before the
Committee that they alone will be able to achieve a capacity
addition of 30,000 MW with a meager allocation during the 12th
Five Year Plan. The Committee are not convinced with the extreme
conservative targets set by the Ministry of Power despite such
huge infrastructure and ambitious plans during the 12th Plan. They
recommend that they should revisit this area and revise their targets
after proper assessment of sector’s potential and resources and
apprise the Committee of the same.”
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated:
“The capacity addition requirement during the 12th Plan has been
estimated to meet the projected electricity demand and electrical
energy requirement at the end of the 12th Plan. Accordingly, the
Report of Working Group on Power for 12th Plan has
recommended a capacity addition of 75,785 MW during the
12th Plan based on the capacity addition of 62, 374 MW during
the 11th Plan. However, the actual capacity addition during the
11th Plan has been 54,964 MW as against the Mid Term Appraisal
(MTA) target of 62,374 MW.
While working out the capacity addition requirement for the
12th Plan, the Working Group had analyzed the reasons for
slippages of projects from the 11th Plan in order to avoid such

6
slippages during the 12th Plan. Accordingly, Working Group had
recommended that only those projects should be included in the
12th Plan capacity addition programme where all clearances had
been obtained, linkages were tied-up, and the project was under
construction. Further, adequate availability of coal was also
considered to decide the size of the 12th Plan capacity addition
programme.
The capacity addition target for the 12th Plan would be finalized
by the Planning Commission. Planning Commission will firm up
the capacity addition target after taking into account all relevant
factors including the fuel constraint, environmental, water and land
acquisition issues.”
14. The Committee had noted that the capacity addition target
for the 12th Plan has been projected to 75,785 MW which is even
lower than the original target of 78,700 MW for the 11th Plan. This
was despite the ambitious plans of implementation of Ultra Mega
Power Projects providing a capacity addition of 4,000 MW or above
by each of these commissioned projects besides the capacity addition
from the already existing power giant in the Central, State and Private
Sector Companies. They find that the Ministry had worked out the
capacity addition requirement for the 12th Plan based on the Report
of the Working Group on Power for 12th Five Year Plan. The
Committee were not convinced with the proposed targets for the
capacity addition by the Ministry and therefore, had recommended
about revisiting this area and revision of the targets upwardly. The
Committee are unhappy to note that no attempt has been made to
either revise their targets or make proper assessment of sector’s
potential and resources. The Committee, would therefore, like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Ministry to
make detailed assessment of the sector’s potential and resources and
revise their capacity addition targets.
D. Capacity addition targets for Central PSUs
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
15. The Committee found that the share of Central, State and
Private Sector in 12th Plan would be 19,858 MW, 13,796 MW and
42,131 MW, whereas, their target for 11th Plan had been 36,874 MW,
26,783 MW and 15,043 MW respectively. The Committee found it
surprising that the targets for 12th Plan in respect of Central and State
Sector have been fixed almost half of their target set for 11th Plan,
whereas, the Private Sector target has increased almost three times

7
from their target set for 11th Plan. The Committee were of the opinion
that the Central Sector undertakings already have huge infrastructure,
experience and skill and by virtue of these advantages should be able
to achieve much more than the relatively new entrant of private sector.
The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended the Government
to review the targets set for the 12th Plan with a view to increase the
share of Central Sector having big and established power sector PSUs.
16. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry have stated:
“As per the Report of Working Group on Power for 12th Plan, the
capacity addition recommended to Planning Commission is 75,785
MW comprising 19,858 MW in Central Sector, 13,796 MW in State
Sector and 42,131 MW in Private Sector. The recommended capacity
of 75,785 MW including the sectoral break-up would not undergo
major change as it has been estimated based on the capacity
addition requirement to meet the projected electricity demand and
electrical energy requirement at the end of 12th Plan and taking
into account the status of preparedness of various power projects.
It may undergo minor changes taking into account the projects
slipped from 11th Plan to 12th Plan. The exact figures of capacity
addition in Central, State and Private Sector will be known once
the capacity addition target for 12th Plan is finalized.
Several measures initiated by the Government has encouraged
private sector participation in the generation of electricity. These
include delicensing of thermal generation and small hydro projects,
100% FDI in power generation, Tariff Policy, Ultra Mega Power
Project initiative, Mega Power Policy etc. As a result of these
measures, the private sector has come up in a big way with a
number of private players showing keen interest in setting up of
power projects in the country. This led to increased capacity
addition by the private sector which also includes Ultra Mega
Power Projects.”
17. The Committee had noted that in 11th Plan the target for the
Central Sector was 36,874 MW and for Private Sector 15,043 MW out
of total capacity addition target of 78,700 MW, whereas, for
12th Plan it has been fixed as 19,858 MW and 42,131 MW respectively
out of total capacity addition planned i.e. 75,785 MW. In view of the
above, the Committee had strongly recommended the Government
to review the targets with a view to increase the share of Central
Sector. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that the
recommended capacity of 75,785 MW including the sectoral break-
up would not undergo major change as it has been estimated based
on the capacity addition requirement to meet the projected electricity

8
demand and electrical energy requirement at the end of 12th Plan
and taking into account the status of preparedness of various power
projects. In regard to the increasing share of Private Sector they
have stated that several measures initiated by the Government have
encouraged private sector participation in the generation of electricity
leading to increased capacity addition by the private sector including
Ultra Mega Power Projects. The Committee are satisfied to know
that the private players are coming up in a big way and giving
much needed thrust to power generation which will help in bridging
the gap between demand and supply of electricity in the country.
With the growth of private sector participation there is steep decline
in not only the performance but also the targets fixed in the
12th Five Year Plan for the Central Sector PSUs, which have led the
Committee to infer with concern that the growth of the private sector
is taking place at the cost of Central Sector's share. In any case, the
increase in private sector participation and higher generation
incentives by the Government should be supplementary and
definitely not regressive for the performance of CPSU in Energy
Sector. They do not approve of the laxity and complacency in the
performance of CPSU in Power Sector. They feel that the Central
Sector should aim for higher targets, share greater responsibilities,
enhance their performance and play a lead role in power generation
while the Private Sector contributes significantly. The Committee,
therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation to review
the capacity addition targets of Central Sector for 12th Plan with a
view to increase the share of CPSUs appropriately. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the same.
E. Funds requirement for 12th Five Year Plan for Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
18. The Committee had noted that the Working Group on Power
for the 12th Plan in its report has estimated fund requirement of
Rs. 12,37,480 crore for power sector during the 12th Plan excluding
renewable energy. In regard to availability of funds for the power
sector the Committee had been informed that the final report along
with the interim report of the Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship
of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission had since been considered
and adopted by the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on
29.10.2010. Recommendations relating to taxation and those pertaining
directly to the States had been segregated and taken up separately
with the Ministry of Finance and States concerned. Further, in respect
of tax exemption and incentives for the investors, it had been stated

9
that Power is included in the definition of infrastructure and sunset
clause under Section 80-IA and had been extended for one year i.e. till
31.3.2013 for power sector. In view of the above the Committee felt
that Rs. 12,37,480 crore is a huge amount and would not be easy to
arrange, therefore, they recommended the Government to take necessary
steps with utmost sincerity to ensure that the required funds for the
12th Plan are arranged so that the projects to be commissioned are not
delayed, stopped or abandoned for the want of funds. The Committee
had further recommended the Ministry of Power to take up the matter
at appropriate level to continue the sunset clause under Section 80-IA
which had been extended for one year i.e. 31.3.2013 for power sector
should be extended for entire 12th Five Year Plan so as to give much
needed thrust to power capacity addition in the country.
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The two issues mentioned above are fund requirement of the
power sector of Rs. 12,37,480 crore for the 12th Plan and
continuation of the sunset clause under section 80-IA which has
been extended for one year i.e. 31.03.2013 for the power sector, for
the entire 12th Plan. Regarding funding of power projects both in
the Public and Private sector; funds are generally raised through
the market mechanism  i.e. internal resource generation, issue of
fresh equity capital and market borrowing. Funding of power
projects through budgetary support is restricted to programmes
like RGGVY and R-APDRP to cater to service obligation of power
utilities for enhancing the access to electricity in the rural areas,
particularly for the people living below the poverty line.
The issue of extension of sunset clause under 80-IA for the power
sector for the entire 12th Five Year Plan was taken up with Ministry
of Finance, Department of Revenue as a part of pre-budget
consultations for financial year 2012-13.
Ministry of Finance has extended the said sunset clause u/s 80-IA
upto 31.03.2013. However, they have not made any commitment
for extension during the remaining period of 12th Plan.”
20. The Committee find that the Ministry of Finance has extended
sunset clause u/s 80(1) upto 31st March, 2012. The Committee would
like the Ministry to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance
for extending it to entire 12th Five Year Plan or may be on yearly
basis. In regard to the response of the Ministry for the
recommendation of the Committee for arranging the funds to the
tune of Rs. 12,37,480 crore for the 12th Plan. The Ministry’s reply

10
stating that the funds are generally arranged by public and private
sector through market mechanism is not acceptable to the Committee.
This approach of the Ministry may not help in growth of the power
sector. The Committee, accordingly, would like the Ministry to assess
the requirements vis-à-vis availability of funds for the power sector
for 12th Plan and provide necessary help in arranging the massive
funds.
F. Development of Hydro Power Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
21. The Committee had noted that despite hydro electric project
being most economically preferred source of green energy and
environment friendly, share of hydro power in the energy sector has
been steadily declining since 1963. The share of hydro power was 44%
in the year 1970 which has now declined to about 19% and as per
estimates submitted by the Ministry of Power, it has possibility of
further shrinkage by the end of the 12th Five Year Plan. When asked
about the reasons the Secretary of the Ministry had deposed before
the Committee that thermal sector is doing very well and by 2032
capacity addition would be to the tune of 8,00,000 MW and even if
we exploit the entire hydro potential of the country it will only be
20% of the thermal capacity. The Committee were astonished by this
version of the Ministry especially in view of the fact that about 75%
of the identified hydro capacity is yet to be exploited. The Committee
felt that the attitude of the Ministry was judgmental, justifying the
decline of hydro performance and giving an inkling of their thought
process with regard to their role and responsibility for hydro sector.
The Committee also found the reasons for poor performance during
11th Plan routine such as geographical surprises, natural calamities,
environment and forest issues, rehabilitation and resettlement issues,
land acquisition problems, law and order problem and contractual
problems. The Committee had recommended that instead of just
enlisting the programme as a perspective plan for future, the
Government should make serious efforts in the 12th and 13th Plans
wherein all out and concerted efforts should be made to harness the
identified hydro potential fully. The issues like environmental clearances,
resettlement of displaced persons and other anticipated problems could
be taken care of in the beginning itself.
22. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry have stated as under:
“The Government of India has accorded high priority to the
development of the hydro potential in the country. After the new
Hydro Policy, 2008 was notified on 31.3.2008, an impetus has been

11
given to the development of hydro power potential in the country
and about 77% of the hydro potential of the country has either
been developed or is under various stages of development. The
decline in percentage of hydro share in the total capacity addition
in the country is mainly attributed to the growth of thermal projects
outpacing the growth of hydro sector rather than due to slow
down in the hydro sector. The demand of power in the country
has increased manifolds in the past decade. This demand has been
mainly met through the thermal projects due to their low gestation
period. Since the hydro projects have long gestation, the ideal
hydro-thermal mix ratio of 40:60 is difficult to be achieved/
sustained. This ratio is likely to show a continued downtrend
against hydro-sector since the ever-increasing demand of power,
to sustain a high annual growth rate of the economy, would be
met primarily through the thermal sector. The hydro projects are
site specific and located in difficult/inaccessible sites. The projects
located at the approachable sites were developed first and the
new projects located at higher reaches/inapproachable areas suffer
from proper approaches to the project areas. Further, North-East
region has a high hydro potential, which is yet to be tapped. The
reasons for slow pace of growth in the region, besides the
inapproachability, is attributed to the fact that as the demand of
power in the region is low, the development of hydro power
potential was not taken up on a large scale. Now, with the
interconnection of regional grids, the power from N.E. Region could
be transported to other energy deficit regions of the country. Most
of the projects, which are under various stages of development,
are situated in the North-East. The development of infrastructure
like road, adequate transmission system evacuation of power etc.
is getting priority in the Region which would help in expeditious
harnessing of hydro potential.
The limiting factors enunciated above coupled with the fact that
hydro projects inherently have long gestation period, impacts the
development of hydro projects and a considerable time is taken
from its conception till its actual fructification on the ground. While
planning for hydro-power capacity addition target for a particular
5-year plan, only those hydro-projects are taken as candidate
projects where either the construction has started or at least the
works have been awarded for execution. Moreover, all the under
development projects are reviewed intensively on a periodic basis
in CEA as well as Ministry of Power, so that the bottlenecks, if
any, are appropriately attended to. As mentioned earlier, the projects
which are under development are likely to come up during the
13th Plan and beyond.

12
As regards taking care of the issues of resettlement of displaced
persons and environmental clearances in the beginning itself, it
may be mentioned that environment as well as forest clearance
and approval of R & R plan is a pre-requisite for starting any
hydro project and as such are taken care of in the beginning itself.
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) accords environment
and forest clearances based on Environment Impact Assessment
(EIA) Studies/Environment Management Plan (EMP), wherein
issues concerning the environmental impact, Rehabilitation &
Resettlement (R&R), etc. are adequately covered.
However, some of the issues like geological surprises, local agitation
and other law and order related problems cannot be foreseen in
advance, leading to delay in commissioning of some of the projects.
Whenever, such unforeseen problems are reported by the project
authorities in the Central, State or Private Sector, immediate
remedial steps are taken as per the requirement of each project on
a case to case basis e.g. for sorting out law and order problem,
the issue is immediately brought to the notice of the State law
enforcing agencies.”
23. The Committee in their Report had expressed their
apprehension over the falling share of Hydro Sector in total energy
mix. The Committee through their recommendation intended to point
out the fact that capacity addition in hydro sector has not kept pace
with that of thermal for various reasons. The Committee do
understand that hydro projects have longer gestation period, and are
located mostly in difficult and inapproachable terrains making it
unfavourable for private investment as well but they also insist that
little has been done to mitigate the situation, be it financial
provisions to attract private investment, resolving of local agitation
due to various reasons including resettlement and environmental
issues, minimizing the gestation period etc. The sector which should
have been given higher priorities in terms of generation of power
due to its inherent benefits has been forced to take a back seat. The
Committee while reiterating their recommendation expect that the
Government will try to replace the complacent and lackadaisical
approach with innovative and proactive efforts for optimal harnessing
of hydro power potential in the country.
G. Performance of DVC
G. Performance of DVC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
24. While reviewing the performance of Hydro Sector, the
Committee’s examination had revealed that the performance of
Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) has gone down substantially over

13
the years. Scrutiny of the data provided by the Ministry revealed that
the profit after tax pertaining to DVC has shown consistent decline
from Rs. 1,239 crore in 2006-07 to Rs. 300 crore in 2009-10 and fell into
negative side with a loss of Rs. 120 crore in 2010-11. Similarly physical
performance of DVC has been very dismal. The data regarding
generation exhibits a fluctuating trend showing total generation of
1,4136 MU in 2006-07, 15,554 MU in 2008-09, 14,720 MU in 2009-10
and 16,380 MU in 2010-11. At the same time, the dependency on import
had increased consistently over the last five years from 991 MU in
2006-07 to 1,114 MU in 2008-09 and 2,642 MU in 2010-11. The
Committee were surprised to find that the PLF of the thermal power
plants of DVC was hovering around 60 per cent during 2011-12,
whereas, it had not touched even 25 per cent in hydel plants. The
Committee had recommended to analyze the reasons for poor financial
and physical performance objectively, to fix responsibility and to take
suitable corrective and supportive measures with policy revamp, if
needed, to make the organization healthy, self reliant and performance
oriented.
25. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated:
(A) The main reason for decline in the profit and cash internal
resources of DVC is attributed to new tariff, fixed by CERC
which is in force after the implementation of Electricity Act,
2003. DVC in addition to Generation is also involved in
various social and economic development schemes as per
DVC Act, 1948. Hence the high cost which has already been
spent towards these activities cannot now be recovered fully
under the new tariff.
(B) Performance of Hydro Sector:
Performance of DVC Hydel Units during 2008-09 to 2011-12
is as under:
Financial Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Generation (MU) 432.09 198.114 115.611 303.45
Generation of Hydro Unit in 2009-10 and 2010-11 declined
due to decrease in reservoir level which is dependent upon
monsoon. Generation again increased in 2011-12. The total
generation of Hydel Power is dependent on the monsoon
water as well as direction of the Central Water Commission
(CWC), GOI, in respect of release of water through
generation units from reservoir. Hydel units of DVC most

14
of the times remained available for generation and also all
remedial measures were taken for keeping the machines
available throughout the year except preventive maintenance
in off-monsoon period.
In case of Hydro Power Units, availability is the main
performance criteria. The PLF of DVC Hydel Power Stations
is around 23.20%. The PLF of some other Hydel Projects
which are similar in nature to that of DVC are furnished
below:
Sl.No. Power Station PLF %
 1. Teesta Cannel Fall Hydel Project 18%
 2. Jal Dhaka Hydel Project Stage-I 28%
 3. Rinchington Hydel Project 13%
(C) Dependency on Import of Power:
DVC’s power import has increased in the previous year’s
mainly due to drawal of power through UI mechanism. Till
March 2009, DVC has supplied power to its consumers
almost as per its commitment and exported surplus power
to other regions beyond its command area. Acute problems
for shortage of power started from April, 2009 as DVC’s
generation went down drastically mainly due to frequent
forced outage of some vintage generating units and forced
outage of new units at DVC’s base Thermal Power Station-
Mejia Thermal Power Station (MTPS) (Gross Generation of
DVC slashed from 15554 MU in the FY 2008-09 to
14720 MU in the year 2009-10). DVC failed to generate
power as per its capability mainly due to shortage in supply
of coal and problem in its transportation. Side by side DVC’s
contractual demand (CD) has increased significantly from
2460 MVA in the FY 2008-09 to 2608 MV A in the FY 2009-10
leaving a huge gap between the available generation and
average system demand. ISGS help in the monsoon period
is less and share of DVC from the thermal units of NTPC
is negligible. Hence, to bridge the Gap DVC had two options
to follow:
(i) To impose load restriction/load shedding to all private
consumers including State Utilities to maintain grid
discipline.
(ii) To purchase power from external source.
Indian Railways is exempted from Load shedding as well
as load restrictions also. Load shedding to other core sector
consumers like SAIL, TISCO, Coal India were not possible
except load restriction to some possible extent.

15
Hence, DVC had been compelled to draw power from the
Eastern Region-Grid at a higher cost than its sale cost.
However, a detailed action plan is being drawn to minimize
import of power.
(D) Thermal Power Generation:
In FY 2011-12 DVC Old units (2710 MW) achieved a PLF of
68.35% whereas the PLF of DVC New units (1000 MW)
were 52%. Overall DVC PLF for FY 2011-12 was 65.33%.
An Action Plan to ensure sustained generation from old
Units is given below:
 • During 2006-09 DVC in association with NTPC PIE
group implemented comprehensive action plan for
performance improvement in a holistic manner. In
2006-07 & 2007-08 overall DVC Thermal PLF was 71.2%
& 75% respectively. But the noticeable turnaround in
PLF could not be sustained from 2008-09 onwards due
to acute coal shortage. DVC has already taken coal mine
development to overcome the constraints of coal
shortage.
• DVC has already taken up new O&M initiatives such
as implementation of performance improvement plan as
per Technical Audit and Gap Analysis Report of NTPC
in respect of Bokaro Thermal Power Station ‘B’ (BTPS'B'),
Chandrapura Thermal Power Station (1-3) (CTPS),
Durgapur Thermal Power Station (DTPS) & MTPS (1-6),
implementation of optimized O&M practices with new
O&M initiatives, implementation of 6 year overhauling
rolling plan to address the O&M issues in a holistic
manner and workshops on new O&M initiatives to
improve technical proficiency of technical personnel.
• Implementation of Integrated Computerization through
EBA (already started in CTPS & DTPS).
• Energy Efficiency has been taken up through CEA for
BTPS ‘B’ (3x210MW) Units.
• There is a programme of R&M for DTPS U-4 (1x210MW)
also.
New Units
• PLF of New Units at MTPS (500 MW) & CTPS (2X250
MW) was low in FY 2011-12 mainly due to initial
teething trouble after commissioning of these units. CTPS
U#8 suffered generation loss due to crack in Turbine
HP Stop valve (RHS) which was replaced by M/s BHEL

16
in Dec., 2011. MTPS U#7 suffered generation loss due
to melting of GT Bushing (Y-phase) in Oct., 2011 & hot
spot in Gen. Bus duct which was progressively
addressed by M/s BHEL.
• After stabilization of these New Units at MTPS
(500 MW) & CTPS (2X250 MW), 85.28 % PLF of these
new Units has been achieved in April, 2012 of
FY 2012-13.
Overall DVC PLF in April, 2012 was 70.91 % & a noticeable
turnaround in PLF has been achieved after stabilization of
these new units.
(E) Capacity Addition:
DVC has taken all out efforts to overcome the troubles faced
during construction, some of which are placed below:
• Constant persuasion with State Governments for
acquisition of land and to mitigate other law & order
issues.
• Monthly & periodical review meetings with EPC/Major
Contractors at DVC head office as well as their
manufacturing sites.
• Posting of DVC’s Engineers at BHEL’s different
manufacturing units for timely delivery of materials/
Equipments at site.
• Deployment of Project coordinators/Project Managers.
• Periodical visit to Vendors’ works towards timely
delivery of materials at site.
• Close monitoring of financial progress vis-à-vis physical
progress with realistic targets for execution of each
Project/Scheme.
• Persuading various L1, L2, L3 schedules etc. submitted
by BHEL/EPC Contractors and immediately bring it to
the notice in case of slippage/delay.
•V igorous persuasion with BHEL/Reliance Infrastructure
Ltd. and other agencies to make up the slippages in the
schedules.
• Bringing the matter of concerns to the knowledge of
Ministry of Power (MoP), GoI & Central Electricity
Authority (CEA) during HLMC, Quarterly Performance
Review (QPR) and Progress review meetings.
Keeping all above in consideration as well as the current
progress of works, DVC signs MoU with MoP , GoI for
various milestones for different projects/schemes.

17
(F) Restructuring of DVC:
With the restructuring of DVC Board through the enactment
of DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011, the existing strength of
the DVC Board has been increased from 3 Members to 10
Members. Instead of 3 Members, DVC Board will now
comprise of 4 Full Time Members and 6 Part-time Members.
The Part-time Members will consist of a representative from
Central Government, 2 representatives, one each from the
State of Jharkhand and West Bengal and 3 Independent
experts one each from the field of irrigation, water supply
& generation or transmission or distribution of electricity.
The above re-structuring has been done with the objective
of improving the overall functioning of the Corporation.
A series of new measures have been introduced to improve
the administrative & managerial functions of DVC at various
levels which are enumerated below:
(i) Eminent experts drawn from different fields have been
engaged by DVC to improve the knowledge base of its
working team.
(ii) A new training policy has been formulated and
introduced to take care of the skilled development of
its manpower so that their overall performance may be
improved.
(iii) It has been made mandatory to attend management
development programme for occupying the post of
Dy. Chief Engineer & above in the new training policy.
(iv) Undertaking mandatory training has been made a
prerequisite for giving promotion for higher
responsibility.
(v) Concepts of key result areas have been introduced to
evaluate the performance of its existing employees.
(vi) In addition to the above the functioning of DVC is also
monitored through the daily HODs meeting held at
Head Qtrs. under the Chairmanship of Chairman, DVC.
(vii) Quarterly Operational Performance Review Meetings are
also held at HQs to review the performance of
generating stations and T&D activities. Management
Committee Meeting and Committee on Management
Control also review the key performance areas on
regular basis. At plant level, daily meeting are held to
review the performance and other related issues of the
plant.

18
With the restructuring of DVC Board through the enactment of
DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011, coupled with the above mentioned
measures taken towards performance improvement the operating
efficiency of the Corporation is definitely going to improve and
which will be reflected both in physical and financial performance
in coming days.”
26. Concerned by the performance of DVC in physical and
financial terms the Committee had recommended to analyse DVC’s
performance (physical & financial) objectively and to take suitable
corrective and supportive measures with policy revamp, fix
responsibility, if needed, to make the organization healthy, self reliant
and performance oriented. The Ministry in their reply have stated
that a detailed action plan is being drawn to minimize import of
power by DVC. They have also stated that with the restructuring of
DVC Board through the enactment of DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011,
coupled with the several measures taken towards performance
improvement, the operating efficiency of the Corporation is definitely
going to improve, which will be reflected both in physical and
financial performance in coming days. The Committee expect the
Ministry to review the performance of DVC on regular basis to
ensure that DVC improves its performance in a big way. The
Committee would await visible results in this regard.
H. Recovery of DVC’s Dues
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
27. The Committee have found that the DVC has not been able to
collect regular dues from the stakeholders. It had been informed that
Jharkhand State Electricity Board (JSEB) was not paying full amount
of their dues and the total tentative dues in respect of JSEB has gone
up to Rs. 2,622 crore upto 17th February, 2012. They were compelled
to take recourse to the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of
Power for realization of dues through Central Plan Allocation as per
securitization scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommended the
Ministry of Power to take up the matter with concerned authorities at
highest level to help recover the dues.
28. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated:
“Dues as on 31.03.2012 in respect of JSEB is mentioned here under:
Principal Dues : Rs. 2820 Crs.
Delayed Payment Surcharge (DPS) : Rs. 1543 Crs.

19
2. Outstanding dues of JSEB have been accumulating every month
due to less/part payment. Their monthly power supply bill is
above Rs. 120 crore. whereas they are maintaining a Letter of Credit
(LC) of Rs. 52.88 Crs. resulting further accumulation of power
dues to the tune of Rs. 67 Crs. every month. Several Meetings for
liquidation of outstanding dues and enhancement of LC has been
held time and again. But till date no outcome has been emerged.
3. In terms of tri-partite agreement under Securitization scheme,
load regulation to JSEB has been imposed in steps w.e.f. 10.8.2011.
Load regulation has been enhanced to 15% w.e.f. 25.09.2011.
4. Ministry of Power has taken up the issue of recovery of JSEB
through Central Plan devolution with Ministry of Finance. Ministry
of Finance has raised queries regarding legality of the recovery
and has asked for seeking opinion of Ministry of Law. Based on
the advice of Ministry of Law the matter has again been taken up
with Ministry of Finance to recover through Central Plan.”
29. The Committee had recommended the Ministry of Power to
take up the matter relating to realization of over dues from Jharkhand
State Electricity Board to DVC and other stake holders at the highest
level. The Ministry in their reply have stated that they have taken
up the issue of recovery of JSEB through Central Plan devolution
with Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance has raised queries
regarding legality of the recovery and has asked for seeking opinion
of Ministry of Law. Based on the advice of Ministry of Law the
matter has again been taken up with the Ministry of Finance to
recover through Central Plan. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the final outcome of the matter.

20
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2 )
The Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2011-12
was presented to Parliament 17th August, 2011. The Action Taken
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in
the Report were received on 17th November, 2011. The Twenty-fifth
Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report was presented
to Parliament on 29th December, 2011. In the said Report, the
Committee had reiterated their three recommendations on Quarterly
Spending, Implementation of RGGVY and R-APDRP and had also
commented on the Supply of Coal to Power Sector and Renovation
and Modernization of Power Plants. The Final Action Taken Statements
on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report have
been received on 27th April, 2012 from the Ministry. However, the
Committee observe that more than six months have passed since the
presentation of the Nineteenth Report to the Parliament. The Committee
would like to remind the Ministry to observe the provisions of
Direction 73A of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ and arrange for the
Statement by the Minister in the House regarding the status of
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Nineteenth Report expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
A statement has since been made by the Minister of State (Power)
on 7/9/2012 of the monsoon session.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Recommendations (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 2.3)
11th Five Year Plan—Target and Achievements
The Committee note that the Planning Commission assessed an
outlay of Rs. 3,09,231.38 crore during the 11th Plan period for the
Central Sector comprising of Rs. 2,78,779.47 crore of Internal and Extra

21
Budgetary Resources (IEBR), to be raised by the CPSUs themselves
and Rs. 30,451.91 crore provided as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS).
Out of this Gross Budgetary Support, Rs. 3,000 crore was kept for
PSUs, whereas, the actual utilization have been Rs. 1,960.57 crore only.
Against the budgeted GBS of Rs. 26,500 crore for Rural Electrification
Scheme, the actual utilization have been Rs. 22,957.45 crore only. On
scrutiny of the data related to financial performance of the 11th Plan
by the Committee, it has been found that the Ministry have failed to
utilize the funds fully during the first four years. The BE and RE for
the 11th Plan Outlay was Rs. 2,53,873.78 crore and Rs. 2,20,726.21 crore
respectively, whereas the actual utilization during the first four years
has been Rs. 1,75,777.73 crore. Every year the Government has
substantially reduced the target at RE level. Furthermore, the actual
utilization has even been lower than the RE in these years. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review their
methodology to fix attainable targets and focus on financial
management as well as their monitoring mechanism so that funds
allocated are utilized properly and physical targets are also achieved
within the time frame. They also emphasize that implementation of
programmes should be closely monitored for target achievement as
also to take necessary steps to deal with the factors responsible for
these shortfalls at appropriate level.
Reply of the Government
(i) GBS of CPSUs during 11th Plan:
The actual expenditure was Rs. 1934.66 crore against the allocation
of Rs. 2978.58 crore. The major shortfall was under THDCIL & NEEPCO
and the reasons were as under:
(a) THDCIL: Against the allocation of GBS of Rs. 500.00 crore
to THDCIL during 11th Five Year Plan, an amount of
Rs. 121.00 crore has been incurred. The main reason for
shortfall is award of work got delayed in Pump Storage
Plant (PSP) and Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project
(VPHEP).
(b) NEEPCO Ltd.:  Against the allocation of GBS of Rs. 1500.00
crore to THDCIL during 11th Five Year Plan, an amount of
Rs. 1043.97 crore has been incurred. There was no shortfall
during 2010-11 and 2011-12 while the main reasons for
shortfall during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 are given
below:

22
During 2007-10, an amount of Rs. 901.47 Crs was approved as BE.
The project-wise actual utilisation of the funds was less than that
allocated for these three years, due to the reasons furnished below:
(Rs. in Crs.)
Sl.No. Name of the Approved Actual Reasons of shortfalls
Project BE (GBS) utilisation
2007–2010 of fund
12 3 4 5
1. Tuirial HEP (60 MW) 12.88 0.00 The project was still under suspension
and could not be revived during the
period.
2. Kameng HEP (600 MW) 162.08 163.53               —
3. Pare HEP (110 MW) 183.06 48.82 The CCEA clearance of the Project was
accorded and intimated vide MOP’s
letter dated 4th Dec., 2008. The project
activities under the already awarded
packages were under progress.
However, owing to unavoidable delay
in award of Package-II (Hydro
Mechanical Works) & Package-III
(Electro Mechanical Works) due to
splitting of originally proposed
Packages (resulting in saving of
substantial amount of money), the
allocated funds under GBS could not
be utilized fully.
4. Tipaimukh HEP (1500 MW) 298.23 0.00 The 1500 MW TipaimukhHEP would be
implemented by a Joint venture/SPV
among NHPC, SJVNL & Government
of Manipur.
5. Survey & Investigation 24.60 0.00 The expenditures on the S&I head was
incurred from the IR.
6. Talong HEP (160 MW) 10.00 0.00 As decided by the Government of
Arunachal Pradesh, this project had to
be handed over to private developer.
7. Dibbin HEP (125 MW) 10.00 0.00              -Do-
8. Extension of Agartala Gas 5.00 0.00 Due to non finalization of commitment
Turbine Project (46 MW) of gas allocation from GAIL/ONGC.

23
 9. Margherita Coal Based 26.00 0.00 Due to non conclusion of MoA with
Power Project (250 MW) the Government of Assam/Coal linkage
no progress could be made.
10. Garo Hills Coal Based 24.00 0.00 MoA could not be concluded with the
Power Project (500 MW) Government of Meghalaya.
11.W est Khasi Hills Coal Based 21.00 0.00 MoA could not be concluded with the
Power Project (240 MW) Government of Meghalaya.
12. Tripura Gas Based Power 128.62 0.00 Due to non finalization of commitment
Project (101 MW) of gas  allocation from GAIL/ONGC.
13. Mawphu HEP (90 MW) 6.00 0.00 MoA could not be concluded with the
Government of Meghalaya.
Total: 901.47 212.35
(ii) Reasons for shortfall in case of RGGVY:
Low utilization of funds is on account of following:
(a) Almost Rs. 2000 crore could not be utilized because of non-
fulfillment of condition of appointment of Franchisee in any
of the projects. 10% of the funds are to be utilized after this
condition is fulfilled and projects are closed. Ministry is in
the process of approaching Cabinet for relaxing the condition
of appointment of Franchisee in RGGVY projects.
(b) Rs. 2000 crore were estimated to be utilized on account of
release of 1st instalment of 30% for Phase-II projects which
were sanctioned in 2011-12 (32 left out projects in Phase-I)
and supplementary projects in UP and Bihar, total 69
projects). Out of 69 projects, 1st installment of 30% could
be released only in 8 projects of MP , due to enforcement of
the model code of conduct in UP and other administrative
issues in Bihar etc. Other state utilities could not award
Phase-II projects. Thus only Rs. 200 crore could be utilized
on account of Phase-II projects as against estimated Rs. 2000
crore.
(c) Low progress in difficult States, where, physical target could
not be achieved. These states are; Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Meghalaya and Odisha.
 12 3 4 5

24
Implementation of RGGVY is closely monitored with reference to
physical and financial targets viz-a-viz achievements by Inter-ministerial
Monitoring Committee and by Ministry on quarterly basis.
(iii) Reasons for shortfall in case of IEBR of CPSUs:
IEBR of CPSUs is generated and utilized by CPSUs themselves as
per their requirements for different projects. The PSU specific reasons
for shortfall for complete 11th Plan are given below:
1. NTPC Limited
The main reasons for shortfall are:
• Delay in Barh and Sipatprojects due to issues with Russian
vendors;
• Loharinag Pala shelved and North Karanpura deferred as
per Government directives;
• Permission for Hydro projects viz. Hutong, Kalai, withdrawn
by Arunachal Pradesh and other Hydro projects which could
not be taken up;
• Non-availability of gas for Gandhar-II, Kawas-II and
Kayamkulam-II;
• Non-availability of land and water confirmation from State
Government integrated projects viz. Lara, non-availability of
MoEF clearance in respect of Darlipalli-Khasiyabara;
Badarpur expansions & TTPS-II could not be taken up;
• On account of coal mining & LNG; and
• Delay in R&M and renewable project.
2. NHPC Limited
The main reasons for shortfall are rescheduling of commissioning
of Parbati-II, Subansiri Lower Project, Teesta Low Dam-III & IV as
these projects shifted to 12th Plan. Slow progress in J&K projects and
because of Kotli Bhel Projects, Dibang, Teesta-IV , Pakal Dul etc. not
come up under construction stage. Lakhwar Vyasi, Subansiri Middle
& Upper Projects having been allotted to other projects namely Chungar
Chal, Garba Tawaghat and Kharmoli LumtiTulli Projects.
3. THDC (India) Limited
The main reasons for shortfall are delay in award of contract for
Tehri PSP , litigation by the bidders and delay in approval on Revised
Cost Estimate.

25
For Civil & HM works under Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric
Project (VPHEP), Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) revised
the environment clearance changing minimum flow requirement from
3 cumecs to 15.65 cumecs in June, 2011. World Bank has approved the
loan in June 2011 and the contract is anticipated to be awarded by
end March 2012.
In new projects the survey & Investigation works could not be
taken up in Karmoli (140 MW), Jadhganga (50 MW), Bokang Bailing
(330 MW) and Humbarli PSS (400 MW) Projects because of falling in
Reserve Forest Area/Wild Life Sanctuary. Environment clearance are
pending for Malari Jhelam (114 MW) and Jhelam Tamak (126 MW)
projects.
4. SJVN Limited
The main reasons for shortfall are:
• Khab HEP project was withdrawn by Government of
Himachal Pradesh;
• Jangi Thopan HEP & Thopan Powari HEP projects were
not finally allotted to SJVN;
• Delay in Approvals/clearances in respect of Luhri HEP
project;
• Devsari HEP;
• Delay in under various stages of clearances for Jakhol Sankri,
Naitwar Mori HEP; and
• Delay in Rampur HEP Project due to extreme adverse
geography.
5. NEEPCO
The main reasons for shortfall are:
• Major design changes of different civil structures of
600 MW Kameng HEP;
• Postponement to August, 2013 in respect of Pare HEP
(110 MW) Project due to delay in award of Package II &
Package III;
• In respect of Turial HEP , the Project activities suffered due
to heavy rainfall during monsoon and bad road conditions;

26
• Expected expenditure could not be sought for R&M of Kopili
Power Station; and
• Delay in approval for Agartala Gas Turbine Power Plant
Extension Project;
Ranganadi Stage-II HEP (130 MW), could not progress further as
the Government of Arunachal Pradesh conveyed that in view of award
of Panyor HEP located just at upstream on the same river to IPP ,
NEEPCO’s proposed project would not be technically feasible.
(iv) Steps taken by the Ministry of Power
Under R-APDRP , the release of funds against sanctioned projects
is linked to progress of implementation and milestones achieved.
Accordingly, yearly budget requirement (target) is projected keeping
in view the expected progress of implementation by state utilities and
funds are released subsequently commensurate to the progress achieved.
In addition to the monitoring of the expenditure vis-à-vis budget
allocation in Senior Officers Meeting, regular monitoring and review
of the implementation of R-APDRP projects with all State utilities/IT
Implementing Agencies (ITIAs) is conducted by PFC and MoP at
monthly intervals. In many cases, the intervals are less than a month.
During such meetings the critical issues in implementation are discussed
and provide a forum for sharing of experiences/best practices among
various utilities for resolving implementation related issues. The State
power utilities and State Governments (through Distribution Reform
Committee) also monitor the implementation of the projects. Besides
the above monitoring/review mechanism, R-APDRP steering committee
also reviews the implementation of R-APDRP and issues guidelines/
direction for taking corrective measures in this regard.
Over last four years, the annual target under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) have been invariably achieved. Rural
Electrification Corporation, the nodal agency for RGGVY has been asked
to take adequate care while formulating and proposing annual quarterly
budget for the scheme so that it could be utilized without any
reduction.
Annual target for RGGVY is finalized in consultation with the
Planning Commission and Rural Electrification Corporation. The target
for completion of un-electrified villages and release of connections to
BPL households are to be achieved within a given time frame. REC in
consultation with States finalized State-wise and quarterly physical and
financial targets. On the basis of inputs given by REC, Ministry of
Power prepare/accept the quarterly targets.

27
There is a monitoring mechanism available under RGGVY.
Monitoring Committee review the implementation of RGGVY which
contains parameters of annual targets both in term of physical and
financial. Also the quarterly performance review meeting of Rural
Electrification Corporation is also held under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (P) in which these targets are also reviewed. Besides, this
Senior Officer of Ministry also takes meeting for achieving the financial
& physical targets set. REC also take internal review meeting for
achieving the targets set.”
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Recommendations (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee in their 19th Report had observed that the
utilization of the funds by the Government in 1st Quarter has been
abysmally low throughout the 11th Plan. They had, therefore,
recommended that steps should be taken to ensure uniform quarterly
utilization of funds. The Committee are surprised and disappointed to
note that despite their recommendation, 1st quarter fund utilization
for the year 2011-12 have further slipped to 1.67% against 8.15% for
the 2010-11. The Committee again emphasize that poor spending pattern
in 1st quarter has cascading effect which definitely puts pressure on
spending patterns of later quarters. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
that the Government should review their monitoring mechanism to
ensure uniform quarterly spending. They would like to be apprised of
the concrete steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations to the Committee have been noted. Secretary
(P) has issued instructions to all concerned in the Ministry for even
utilization of Budgetary allocation.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendations (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that despite hydro electric project being most
economically preferred source of green energy and environment
friendly, share of hydro power in the energy sector has been steadily
declining since 1963. The share of hydro power was 44% in the year

28
1970 which has now declined to about 19% and as per estimates
submitted by the Ministry of Power, it has possibility of further
shrinkage by the end of the 12th Five Year Plan. No doubt, the thermal
sector is doing well vis-à-vis the hydro, but the situation with regard
to backup and availability of resources for hydro development is not
as bad as to merit such steep decline in capacity share. When asked
about the reasons, the Secretary of the Ministry while deposing before
the Committee invoked the imaginary figure of capacity addition and
a hypothetical situation for the year 2032 in an attempt to justify the
neglect of hydro sector and deviate from the responsibility for the
same. The deposition of the Secretary that thermal sector is
doing very well and by 2032 capacity addition will be to the tune of
8,00,000 MW and even if we exploit the entire hydro potential of the
country it will only be 20% of the thermal capacity so the hydro
capacity will not go very high is misleading. The Committee are
astonished by this version of the Ministry especially in view of the
fact that there is about 75% of the identified hydro capacity is yet to
be exploited. The Committee feel that the attitude of the Ministry is
judgmental, justifying the decline of hydro performance and giving an
inkling of their thought process with regard to their role and
responsibility for hydro sector. They feel instead of giving it up in an
absurd manner the Ministry should make sincere efforts and take
necessary steps to step up the share of hydro sector in the energy
sector keeping in view the global warming concerns and shortage of
fossil fuel supply for thermal power stations. If given due attention
hydro power can be a suitable, substantial and sustainable source of
energy in future.
The Committee find that during 11th Plan target of 15,627 MW
(8,654 MW in Central Sector, 3,482 MW in State Sector and 2,461 MW
in Private Sector) was fixed for achievement. However, the performance
has been extremely distressing as it could achieve only 5,502 MW
(1,550 MW in Central Sector, 2,660 MW in State Sector and 1,292 MW
in Private Sector). The reasons adduced for such performance are
routine such as geographical surprises, natural calamities, environment
and forest issues, rehabilitation and resettlement issues, land acquisition
problems, law and order problem and contractual problems. In this
connection, task force on hydro development, inter-ministerial group
on development of hydro power in North-East and Advisory Group
has been constituted to look into the problems. However, these exercises
appear to be routine and devoid of seriousness. There are giant PSUs
in the Central Sector with adequate infrastructure, long experience,
sufficient working capital and best technical expertise. Despite these
positives, if the achievement in Central Sector is 1,550 MW only, it is
nothing but wastage of resources and talent and abdication of primary

29
responsibilities. NTPC (Hydro), DVC, SJVNL, NEEPCO, BBMB have
not added even a single MW of capacity during the 11th Plan. NHPC
has also achieved only 1150 MW vis-à-vis a target of 5,322 MW thereby
causing slippage of 4,172 MW i.e. 78.39% during the 11th Plan. The
slippage by NTPC (hydro sector) during the 11th Plan is to the extent
of 1,920 MW (which was the target of PSU for the Plan). The
Committee is unable to accept this kind of non-performance especially
from such giant PSUs and expect that a professional approach should
have been adopted by them and be exemplary for other players in the
field. Simultaneously, the performance of the Private Sector, with
financial, technical and infrastructural limitations, has achieved much
more than the Central Sector. As regards, roadmap for hydro sector
during 12th Plan, nothing concrete has been said except that a working
group on power has been constituted by the Planning Commission
which has prepared a tentative list of 31 hydro projects. This list
includes the projects from all the three categories i.e. Central, State
and Private envisaging a capacity of more than 9,000 MW. This clearly
shows the indifference of the Government. They also feel that it reflects
on the efficiency of the Ministry.
The Committee therefore, recommend that instead of just enlisting
the programme as a perspective plan for future, the Government should
make serious efforts in the 12th and 13th Plans wherein all out and
concerted efforts should be made to harness the identified hydro
potential fully. The issues like environmental clearances, resettlement
of displaced persons and other anticipated problems can be taken care
of in the beginning itself.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned earlier, the Government of India has accorded high
priority to the development of the hydro potential in the country.
After the new Hydro Policy, 2008 was notified on 31.3.2008, an impetus
has been given to the development of hydro power potential in the
country and about 77% of the hydro potential of the country has
either been developed or is under various stages of development.
2. The decline in percentage of hydro share in the total capacity
addition in the country is mainly attributed to the growth of thermal
projects outpacing the growth of hydro sector rather than due to slow
down in the hydro sector. The demand of power in the country has
increased manifolds in the past decade. This demand has been mainly
met through the thermal projects due to their low gestation period.
Since the hydro projects have long gestation, the ideal hydro-thermal
mix ratio of 40:60 is difficult to be achieved/sustained. This ratio is

30
likely to show a continued downtrend against hydro-sector since the
ever-increasing demand of power, to sustain a high annual growth
rate of the economy, would be met primarily through the thermal
sector.
3. The hydro projects are site specific and located in difficult/
inaccessible sites. The projects located at the approachable sites were
developed first and the new projects located at higher reaches/
inapproachable areas suffer from proper approaches to the project areas.
Further, North-East region has a high hydro potential, which is yet to
be tapped. The reasons for slow pace of growth in the region, besides
the inapproachability, is attributed to the fact that as the demand of
power in the region is low, the development of hydro power potential
was not taken up on a large scale. Now, with the interconnection of
regional grids, the power from N.E. Region could be transported to
other energy deficit regions of the country. Most of the projects, which
are under various stages of development, are situated in the North-
East. The development of infrastructure like road, adequate transmission
system evacuation of power etc. is getting priority in the Region which
would help in expeditious harnessing of hydro potential.
4. The limiting factors enunciated above coupled with the fact that
hydro projects inherently have long gestation period, impacts the
development of hydro projects and a considerable time is taken from
its conception till its actual fructification on the ground. While planning
for hydro-power capacity addition target for a particular 5-year plan,
only those hydro-projects are taken as candidate projects where either
the construction has started or at least the works have been awarded
for execution. Moreover, all the under development projects are
reviewed intensively on a periodic basis in CEA as well as Ministry
of Power, so that the bottlenecks, if any , are appropriately attended to.
As mentioned earlier, the projects which are under development are
likely to come up during the 13th Plan and beyond.
5. As regards taking care of the issues of resettlement of displaced
persons and environmental clearances in the beginning itself, it may
be mentioned that environment as well as forest clearance and approval
of R & R plan is a pre-requisite for starting any hydro project and as
such are taken care of in the beginning itself. Ministry of Environment
and Forests (MoEF) accords environment and forest clearances based
on Environment Impact assessment (EIA) Studies/Environment
Management Plan (EMP), wherein issues concerning the environmental
impact, Rehabilitation & Resettlement (R&R), etc. are adequately
covered.

31
6. However, some of the issues like geological surprises, local
agitation and other law and order related problems can not be foreseen
in advance, leading to delay in commissioning of some of the projects.
Whenever, such unforeseen problems are reported by the project
authorities in the Central, State or Private Sector, immediate remedial
steps are taken as per the requirement of each project on a case to
case basis e.g. for sorting out law and order problem, the issue is
immediately brought to the notice of the State law enforcing agencies.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
While reviewing the performance of Hydro Sector, the Committee’s
examination has revealed that the performance of Damodar Valley
Corporation (DVC) has gone down substantially over the years.
Scrutiny of the data provided by the Ministry reveals that the profit
after tax pertaining to DVC has shown consistent decline from
Rs. 1,239 crore in 2006-07 to Rs. 300 crore in 2009-10 and fell into
negative side with a loss of Rs. 120 crore in 2010-11.
Similarly physical performance of DVC has been very dismal. The
data regarding generation exhibits a fluctuating trend showing total
generation of 1,4136 MU in 2006-07, 15,554 MU in 2008-09, 14,720 MU
in 2009-10 and 16,380 MU in 2010-11. At the same time, the dependency
on import has increased consistently over the last five years from
991 MU in 2006-07 to 1,114 MU in 2008-09 and 2,642 MU in 2010-11.
The Committee are surprised to find that the PLF of the thermal power
plants of DVC has been hovering around 60 per cent during 2011-12,
the highest being 68.90 per cent for Mejia TPS. The situation is worse
in respect of hydel power plants where PLF has not touched the mark
of even 25 per cent. The reasons cited by the Ministry for such dismal
PLF are not convincing and not at all acceptable to the Committee.
The mechanical problems like crack in Turbine HP stop valve, frequent
boiler tube leakages, air ingress in boiler, low condenser volume, failure
of Generator/Transformer are not unforeseeable in nature and could
have been dealt with professionalism and promptitude and in a more
responsible manner. Also the situation of coal shortage is not
insurmountable. Similarly, the factors quoted by the Ministry responsible
for delay in completion of capacity addition projects of DVC like law
and order issue, land acquisition problem, delay in supply of erection

32
material and equipment, visa problem and shortage of agencies are of
course obstructive in nature, nevertheless these hurdles should not
block the roadway to progress and blow off performance if output is
taken as the motivation.
The Committee find it incomprehensible that such a huge
organization established way back in 1948 by an act of Parliament of
India as an ambitious multipurpose dream entity for integrated
development of Damodar Valley has become a poorly functioning,
badly managed, debt ridden organization where debt equity balance
has landed in a very alarming state. The DVC has plunged itself into
such a situation in spite of its entire infrastructure and professional
management supported by a huge skilled manpower. The Committee
feel that the organization has to be saved from slipping in to an
irremediable situation and recommend that the reasons for poor
financial and physical performance may be analyzed objectively,
responsibility may be fixed and suitable corrective and supportive
measures with policy revamp, if needed, be adopted to make the
organization healthy, self reliant and performance oriented.
The Committee note that DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011 was aimed
at improving the operational efficiency of the Corporation and to give
more autonomy. The Committee trust that with this the Corporation
would be in a position to overcome the obstacles which were hitherto
hindering the working of the Corporation. They, therefore, expect that
henceforth there should not be any further complaint or excuse for
non-performance, both in physical and financial parameters.
Reply of the Government
(A) The main reason for decline in the profit and cash internal
resources of DVC is attributed to new tariff, fixed by CERC which is
in force after the implementation of Electricity Act, 2003. DVC in
addition to Generation is also involved in various social and economic
development schemes as per DVC Act, 1948. Hence the high cost which
has already been spent towards these activities cannot now be recovered
fully under the new tariff.
(B) Performance of Hydro Sector
Performance of DVC Hydel Units during 2008-09—2011-12 is as
under:
Financial Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Generation (MU) 432.09 198.114 115.611 303.45

33
Generation of Hydro Unit in 2009-10 and 2010-11 declined due to
decrease in reservoir level which is dependent upon monsoon.
Generation again increased in 2011-12. The total generation of Hydel
Power is dependent on the monsoon water as well as direction of the
Central Water Commission (CWC), GoI, in respect of release of water
through generation units from reservoir.
Hydel units of DVC most of the times remained available for
generation and also all remedial measures were taken for keeping the
machines available throughout the year except preventive maintenance
in off-monsoon period.
In case of Hydro Power Units, availability is the main performance
criteria. The PLF of DVC Hydel Power Stations is around 23.20%. The
PLF of some other Hydel Projects which are similar in nature to that
of DVC are furnished below:
Sl.No. Power Station   PLF %
1. Teesta Cannel Fall Hydel Project 18%
2. Jal Dhaka Hydel Project Stage-I 28%
3. Rinchington Hydel Project 13%
(C) Dependency on Import of Power
DVC’s power import has increased in the previous year’s mainly
due to drawal of power through UI mechanism. Till March 2009, DVC
has supplied power to its consumers almost as per its commitment
and exported surplus power to other regions beyond its command
area. Acute problems for shortage of power started from April, 2009
as DVC’s generation went down drastically mainly due to frequent
forced outage of some vintage generating units and forced outage of
new units at DVC’s base Thermal Power Station—Mejia Thermal Power
Station (MTPS) (Gross Generation of DVC slashed from 15554 MU in
the FY 2008-09 to 14720 MU in the year 2009-10). DVC failed to
generate power as per its capability mainly due to shortage in supply
of coal and problem in its transportation. Side by side DVC’s
Contractual Demand (CD) has increased significantly from 2460 MVA
in the FY 2008-09 to 2608 MVA in the FY 2009-10 leaving a huge gap
between the available generation and average system demand. ISGS
help in the monsoon period is less and share of DVC from the thermal
units of NTPC is negligible. Hence, to bridge the Gap DVC had two
options to follow:
(i) To impose load restriction/load shedding to all private
consumers including State Utilities to maintain grid
discipline.
(ii) To purchase power from external source.

34
Indian Railways is exempted from Load shedding as well as load
restrictions also. Load shedding to other core sector consumers like
SAIL, TISCO, Coal India were not possible except load restriction to
some possible extent.
Hence, DVC had been compelled to draw power from the Eastern
Region-Grid at a higher cost than its sale cost. However, a detailed
action plan is being drawn to minimize import of power.
(D) Thermal Power Generation
In FY 2011-12 DVC Old units (2710 MW) achieved a PLF of 68.35%
whereas the PLF of DVC New units (1000 MW) were 52%. Overall
DVC PLF for FY 2011-12 was 65.33%. An Action Plan to ensure
sustained generation from Old units is given below:
• During 2006-09 DVC in association with NTPC PIE group
implemented comprehensive action plan for performance
improvement in a holistic manner. In 2006-07 & 2007-08
overall DVC Thermal PLF was 71.2% & 75% respectively.
But the noticeable turnaround in PLF could not be sustained
from 2008-09 onwards due to acute coal shortage. DVC has
already taken coal mine development to overcome the
constraints of coal shortage.
• DVC has already taken up new O&M initiatives such as
implementation of performance improvement plan as per
Technical Audit and Gap Analysis Report of NTPC in respect
of Bokaro Thermal Power Station ‘B’ (BTPS ‘B’),
Chandrapura Thermal Power Station (1-3) (CTPS), Durgapur
Thermal Power Station (DTPS) & MTPS (1-6),
implementation of optimized O&M practices with new O&M
initiatives, implementation of 6 year overhauling rolling plan
to address the O&M issues in a holistic manner and
workshops on new O&M initiatives to improve technical
proficiency of technical personnel.
• Implementation of Integrated Computerization through EBA
(already started in CTPS & DTPS).
• Energy Efficiency has been taken up through CEA for BTPS
‘B’ (3x210 MW) Units.
• There is a programme of R&M for DTPS U-4 (1x210 MW)
also.

35
New Units
• PLF of New Units at MTPS (500 MW) & CTPS (2X250 MW)
was low in FY 2011-12 mainly due to initial teething trouble
after commissioning of these units. CTPS U#8 suffered
generation loss due to crack in Turbine HP Stop valve (RHS)
which was replaced by M/s. BHEL in Dec., 2011. MTPS
U#7 suffered generation loss due to melting of GT Bushing
(Y-phase) in Oct., 2011 & hot spot in Gen. Bus duct which
was progressively addressed by M/s. BHEL.
• After stabilization of these New Units at MTPS (500 MW)
& CTPS (2X250 MW), 85.28 % PLF of these new Units has
been achieved in April, 2012 of FY 2012-13.
• Overall DVC PLF in April, 2012 was 70.91 % & a noticeable
turnaround in PLF has been achieved after stabilization of
these new units.
(E) Capacity Addition
DVC has taken all out efforts to overcome the troubles faced during
construction, some of which are placed below:
• Constant persuasion with State governments for acquisition
of land and to mitigate other law & order issues.
• Monthly & periodical review meetings with EPC/Major
Contractors at DVC head office as well as their
manufacturing sites.
• Posting of DVC's Engineers at BHEL’s different
manufacturing units for timely delivery of materials/
Equipments at site.
• Deployment of Project coordinators/Project Managers.
• Periodical visit to Vendors’ works towards timely delivery
of materials at site.
• Close monitoring of financial progress vis-à-vis physical
progress with realistic targets for execution of each Project/
Scheme.
• Persuading various L1, L2, L3 schedules etc. submitted by
BHEL/EPC Contractors and immediately bring it to the
notice in case of slippage/delay.
•V igorous persuasion with BHEL/Reliance Infrastructure Ltd.
and other agencies to make up the slippages in the
schedules.

36
• Bringing the matter of concerns to the knowledge of Ministry
of Power (MoP), GoI & Central Electricity Authority (CEA)
during HLMC, Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) and
Progress review meetings.
Keeping all above in consideration as well as the current progress
of works, DVC signs MoU with MoP , GoI for various milestones for
different projects/schemes.
(F) Restructuring of DVC:
With the restructuring of DVC Board through the enactment of
DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011, the existing strength of the DVC Board
has been increased from 3 Members to 10 Members. Instead of
3 Members, DVC Board will now comprise of 4 Full Time Members
and 6 Part-time Members. The Part-time Members will consist of a
representative from Central Government, 2 representatives, one each
from the State of Jharkhand and West Bengal and 3 Independent experts
one each from the field of irrigation, water supply & generation or
transmission or distribution of electricity. The above re-structuring has
been done with the objective of improving the overall functioning of
the Corporation.
A series of new measures have been introduced to improve the
administrative and managerial functions of DVC at various levels which
are enumerated below:
(i) Eminent experts drawn from different fields have been
engaged by DVC to improve the knowledge base of its
working team.
(ii) A new training policy has been formulated and introduced
to take care of the skilled development of its manpower so
that their overall performance may be improved.
(iii) It has been made mandatory to attend management
development programme for occupying the post of Dy. Chief
Engineer and above in the new training policy.
(iv) Undertaking mandatory training has been made a
prerequisite for giving promotion for higher responsibility.
(v) Concepts of key result areas have been introduced to
evaluate the performance of its existing employees.
(vi) In addition to the above the functioning of DVC is also
monitored through the daily HoDs meeting held at Head
Qtrs. under the Chairmanship of Chairman, DVC.

37
(vii) Quarterly Operational Performance Review Meetings are also
held at HQs to review the performance of generating stations
and T&D activities. Management Committee Meeting and
Committee on Management Control also review the key
performance areas on regular basis. At plant level, daily
meeting are held to review the performance and other
related issues of the plant.
With the restructuring of DVC Board through the enactment of
DVC (Amendment) Act, 2011, coupled with the above mentioned
measures taken towards performance improvement the operating
efficiency of the Corporation is definitely going to improve and which
will be reflected both in physical and financial performance in coming
days.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendations (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee also find that the DVC is not able to collect regular
dues from the stakeholders. It has been informed that Jharkhand
State Electricity Board (JSEB) is not paying full amount of their dues
and the total tentative dues in respect of JSEB has gone up to
Rs. 2,622 crore upto 17th February, 2012. They are compelled to take
recourse to the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of Power for
realization of dues through Central Plan Allocation as per securitization
scheme. The Committee would like the Ministry of Power to take up
the matter with concerned authorities at highest level to help recover
the dues. The Committee may be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Dues as on 31.03.2012 in respect of JSEB is mentioned hereunder:
Principal Dues : Rs. 2820 Cr.
Delayed Payment Surcharge (DPS) : Rs. 1543 Cr.
2. Outstanding dues of JSEB have been accumulating every month
due to less/part payment. Their monthly power supply bill is above
Rs. 120 crore. whereas they are maintaining a Letter of Credit (LC) of
Rs. 52.88 Cr. resulting further accumulation of power dues to the tune

38
of Rs. 67 Cr. every month. Several Meetings for liquidation of
outstanding dues and enhancement of LC has been held time and
again. But till date no outcome has been emerged.
3. In terms of tri-partite agreement under Securitization scheme,
load regulation to JSEB has been imposed in steps w.e.f. 10.8.2011.
Load regulation has been enhanced to 15% w.e.f. 25.09.2011.
4. Ministry of Power has taken up the issue of recovery of JSEB
through Central Plan devolution with Ministry of Finance. Ministry of
Finance has raised queries regarding legality of the recovery and has
asked for seeking opinion of Ministry of Law. Based on the advice of
Ministry of Law the matter has again been taken up with Ministry of
Finance to recover through Central Plan.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
Restructured Accelerated Power Development Reform Programme
(R-APDRP)
The Government approved Re-structured APDRP during the year
2008 as a Central Sector Scheme focusing on actual and demonstrable
performance to achieve Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C)
loss reduction. The objective of the programme is to facilitate State
Power Utilities to reduce the level of AT&C losses to 15%. Projects
under the scheme are taken up in two parts. Part-A of the scheme is
dedicated to establishment of IT enabled system for achieving reliable
and verifiable base line data system in all towns with populations of
more than 30,000 as per the census of 2001. Part-B of the programme
includes strengthening of regular distribution projects. R-APDRP also
has provision for capacity building of utility personnel and development
of franchises through Part-C of the scheme. Projects worth Rs. 31,416.15
crore (Part-A: Rs. 6,639.98 crore covering 1,402 towns and 63 SCADA
projects; Part-B Rs. 24,776.17 crore covering 1086 towns) have been
sanctioned and so far Rs. 5,305.75 crore has been released to
State utilities under the programme. The release of funds against
Part-A & B projects is linked to progress of implementation and
milestones achieved. On the aspect of evaluation of success of scheme
Committee have been informed that IT implementing agencies have

39
been appointed in majority States for execution of Part-A projects and
implementation is in progress. Implementation of Part-B projects have
started in 8 States covering 402 towns and tenders for appointing
execution agencies for balance Part-B projects are under process by
the State utilities for which the maximum implantation time is five
years from the date of sanction. The Committee have also been
informed that the evaluation of the scheme will begin from the year
2012-13 onwards. On the question of extending the scheme to
12th Five Year Plan, it has been stated that on the request of State
utilities, Ministry is considering to extend the R-APDRP to private
utilities and to towns having population upto 15,000 (5,000 for special
category States). The financial target for the year 2012-13 under the
scheme has been fixed to be Rs. 3,114 crore. The Committee have been
apprised that execution of the scheme is very difficult and it is taking
much more time than anticipated. The AT&C losses are also very high
and it is a matter of grave concern.
The Committee also find that the National Electricity Fund has
been setup to provide interest subsidy on loans disbursed by banks &
FI's including REC & PFC to the State Power Utilities, Distribution
Companies (DISCOMS)—both in public and private sector, to improve
the distribution network. The preconditions for eligibility to avail
interest subsidy are linked to the reforms in the power sector and the
amount of interest subsidy is linked to the progress achieved in reforms.
National Electricity Fund would provide interest subsidy aggregating
Rs. 8466 crore spread over 13 years for loan disbursement amounting
to Rs. 25,000 crore for distribution schemes sanctioned during the
2 years viz., 2012-13 and 2013-14. The outlay of Rs. 8,466 crore would
cover payment of interest subsidy to the borrowers, service charges to
the nodal agency, payments to independent evaluators and other
incidental expenses. The source of funding will be from Government
of India.
The Committee find that the objective of the scheme has been
laudable as it seeks to bring down the AT&C losses. However, the
scheme has failed to make the desirable impact though four years
have elapsed. In some of the States AT&C losses, in the year 2009-10
is still as high as 70.49% while average AT&C losses as per Report on
Performance of State Utilities is 27.15% during the same period. The
energy scenario of the country is rapidly transforming with the entry
of multiple players in generation, transmission and distribution. The
high loss on account of transmission and distribution is a matter of
serious concern. The scheme as envisaged and executed hitherto will
succeed in achieving its objective is an issue of anybody’s guess. IT
enabled data base line is yet to take any definite shape and

40
strengthening of distribution utilities are inter-linked with it. The
Committee have been informed that the scheme has not been
implemented in all the towns with 30,000 population in the 11th Plan
and this is still being proposed to extend to towns with
15,000 population. The Committee desire that the scheme should be
implemented in a graded manner so that States first cover
30,000 population criteria and thereafter schemes for 15,000 population
criteria may prepared and implemented.
Taking note of flaws in the implementation of the scheme, the
Committee strongly recommend that R-APDRP in its present forms
requires thorough review. Some mechanism may be evolved wherein
the stake-holders  i.e. State utilities, DISCOMS and other related parties
should be clearly told to draw their own plans and strategy for
containing AT&C losses. It should be made clear to them that they are
not going to be rewarded for their failures in the form of interest
subsidy or through other methods under Central sponsored schemes
indefinitely. It should also be ensured that they are not allowed to
pass the burden to the consumer beyond a reasonable limit for their
failure to contain the AT&C losses with a clear signal to tighten their
belt to shape themselves in or be prepared for stringent action.
Reply of the Government
Though R-APDRP Scheme was approval on 31.07.2008, projects
have been sanctioned gradually and Projects under Part-A, were
sanctioned from February, 2009 to March,2010 and projects under
Part-B were sanctioned from March, 2010 onwards. Some of the States
are still in the process of preparing the DPRs for Part-B projects. So
far under Part-A, 1402 projects at the cost of Rs. 5,196.50 crore have
been approved, by this 100% coverage of eligible towns as per census
2001 have been achieved. All States except Haryana have appointed
the IT implementation agencies (ITIAs) to execute the Part-A Projects.
Haryana has re-invited the bids for appointment of ITIA, the bids are
being evaluated. Under Part-B, 1134 projects worth Rs. 25,685 crore
out of total 1150 projects envisaged (under Part-B projects are to be
approved for the towns with more than 15% AT&C losses) have been
sanctioned. The projects sanctioned are at various stages of
implementation. Though estimated time for completion of Part-A project
was 2 years at the formation of scheme, but now experience shows
that the then Part-A projects are likely to take 36 months or more.
2. The exact level of present AT&C losses in a town can be
determined on establishment of baseline data through setting up the
IT enabled energy accounting and auditing system, which is being

41
undertaken under Part-A of R-APDRP . Part-B projects are expected to
upgrade and strengthen electrical network and to reduce AT&C losses.
Therefore the AT&C loss reduction is expected to happen after
completion of Part-A & Part-B and as explained above these projects
are under various stages of implementation, therefore the impact of
the scheme cannot be determined as of now.
3. The scheme is under implementation in all towns with
population more than 30,000 (10,000 in Special Category States) as per
2001 census. A proposal for extending the scheme to the towns with
population of 15,000 (5000 in Special Category States) has been prepared
as per the recommendation of Power Minister’s Conference. This
proposal is at present, at EFC stage. After the approval of EFC, further
decision on submitting to CCEA will be taken. Only after the approval
of CCEA is obtained on the same, the programme would cover towns
with population of 15,000 and above for implementation. Therefore, at
present R-APDRP is being implemented in towns having population
more than 30,000 (10,000 for special category states) only.
4. The progress of the R-APDRP is being monitored at various
levels, which involves thorough review with all stake holders like State
Government, State Utilities, Implementation Agencies and the officials
involved in implementation of the projects. In the various review
meeting with the stakeholders it has been clearly reiterated by the
Ministry that, if the State utilities are not able to achieve the desired
AT&C loss level, the loan amount will not be converted in to grant
and the State utilities will have to bear, the burden of loan and interest
accrued thereon. Therefore the R-APDRP is not incentivizing the non-
performing States and only performing States are to incentivized as
per approved scheme.
5. Regarding allowing the utilities to pass the burden to the
consumer beyond a reasonable limit for the failure of utilities to contain
the AT&C losses in this regard it is submitted that the determination
of tariff of the State utilities is being dealt by the State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions (SERCs), and these SERCs have been
mandated under Electricity Act for fixing of electricity tariff.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Recommendations (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
Open Access
The Committee in their 14th Report (2010-11) on 'Transmission
and Distribution Systems and Notworks’ had, inter-alia, pointed out
that about 8 years have passed since the enactment of the Electricity

42
Act, 2003 and yet one of the measures aimed at, in power reforms,
viz., to provide open access to create competitiveness in supply of
electricity was yet to start. During the discussions with the Ministry
of Power and Power Grid Corporation of India Limited during their
Study Tour at Mumbai in January, 2012, it emerged out that the Open
Access System in distribution network has just started as a pilot project
in Mumbai. Under the scheme a few consumers have taken benefit of
the System. Considering the interest of consumers across the country,
the Committee would like the Ministry to impress upon the power
utilities and others to expedite the policy of Open Access as enumerated
in the Electricity Act, 2003. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the programme prepared for this vital aspect and steps proposed
to be taken to implement the same.
Reply of the Government
To give a fresh impetus to implementation of open access over
transmission lines of State utilities and over the distribution networks,
Power Ministers’ Conference was held on 28.4.2010 in which it was
resolved that non-discriminatory open access in intra-State transmission
and distribution system would be provided in letter and spirit as per
the provisions of the Electricity Act and the National Policies. The
issue of open access was also emphasized in the Group of Ministers
on Power Sector Issues in its meeting held on 29.10.2010 under the
chairmanship of Minister of Power. Issues related to open access were
also discussed in the Power Ministers meeting held on 13.7.2011.
2. CERC has notified the Open Access in inter-State transmission,
Short-term Open Access and grant of Connectivity, Long-term Access,
Medium-term Open Access in inter-State Transmission.
3. At state level, as per the information available with the Forum
of Regulators (FoR) Secretariat, 24 State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions (SERC) have issued regulations on Open Access in intra-
state transmission and distribution. 25 SERCs have allowed Open
Access to consumers with loads of 1MW and above. 22 SERCs have
determined Transmission Charges, 18 SERCs have determined Wheeling
Charges and 20 SERCs have determined Cross Subsidy Surcharge for
Open Access.
Success/Progress in Open Access:
• More than 1000 end consumers mainly industrial consumers
are buying power from power exchanges through open
access.

43
•T o accelerate the process of operationalisation, a working
Session on open access in distribution was held on 16.7.2010
by this Ministry in which representatives of some of the
State Governments and State Distribution Companies
(DISCOMS) participated. During the Session, the concerns
and apprehensions of the States/DISCOMs were heard and
important issues were identified and list of the action points
were forwarded to the State Government and SERCs on
14.09.2010 for further operationalisation of Open Access.
• In order to deal with such concerns, FOR has drafted the
Model regulation on Model Terms and Conditions of Intra-
State Open Access Regulations in September 2010 and
circulated to all State commissions.
•A  review meeting was held on 20th April, 2011 to assess
the progress made by the States in implementation of open
access in eight States and important decisions taken in the
meeting include proactive steps be taken by all concerned
for implementation of Open Access a sit is statutory
requirement.
• The Ministry of Power in consultation with M/o Law &
Justice/Ld. Attorney General of India has issued clarification
vide letter dated 30.11.2011 that “all 1MW and above
consumers are deemed to be open access consumers and
that the regulator has no jurisdiction over fixing the energy
charges for them”. All concerned have been requested to
take necessary steps for implementing the provisions relating
to open access in the Electricity Act, 2003 in light of the
said opinion.
•A  workshop was also held under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Power) on this issue on 29.2.2012 where the
officers of State Government and Power Utilities also
participated to assess the progress made by States in respect
of above legal interpretation.
• The 2nd Task Force on measures for operationalizing open
access in power sector constituted under the chairmanship
of Member (Energy), Planning Commission has submitted
its report. The Ministry has initiated action on the
recommendations of the Task Force.
• Further this Ministry has issued direction under section 107
of the Electricity Act, 2003 to Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission on 23.04.2012 for taking necessary steps for
immediately implementing the provisions relating to open
access in the Electricity Act, 2003 in the light of opinion of
Attorney General.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]

44
Recommendations (Sl. No. 15 Para No. 2.16)
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
RGGVY is a scheme for creation of rural electricity infrastructure
and household electrification. The scheme envisage creation of (i) Rural
Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB) i.e. provision of 33/11 KV (or
66/11 KV) sub-stations of adequate capacity and lines in blocks where
these do not exist, (ii) Village Electrification Infrastructure (VEI) with
a provision of distribution transformers of appropriate capacity in
electrified villages/habitation(s) and (iii) Decentralized Distributed
Generation (DDG) and Supply from conventional or renewable or
non-conventional sources such as biomass, bio-fuel, bio-gas, mini hydro,
geo-thermal and solar etc. for villages where grid connectivity is either
not feasible or not cost effective. Ninety per cent capital subsidy is
being provided towards overall cost of the projects under the scheme
and 10% of the project cost would be contributed by states through
own resources/loan from financial institutions/REC. Free electricity
connection is also being provided to BPL households. Government has
sanctioned 576 projects involving electrification of 1,10,809 un-electrified
villages, intensive electrification of 3,48,859 already electrified villages
and providing electricity connections to 230.10 lakh Below Poverty
Line households with total sanctioned project cost of Rs. 33,843.1 crore
under Phase-I projects. In addition to above, Government has also
sanctioned 69 projects involving electrification of 1,587 un-electrified
villages, intensive electrification of 50,953 already electrified villages
and providing electricity connections to 36.54 Lakh Below Poverty Line
households with total sanctioned project cost of Rs. 7,021.95 crore under
Phase-II projects. As on 15.03.2012, electrification in 1,03,345 un-
electrified villages out of 1,10,809 UE villages has been completed and
free electricity connections to 190.59 Lakh BPL households out of 230.10
Lakh BPL have been released.
The Committee find that during the 11th Plan against RE of
Rs. 22,988 crore, an amount of Rs. 21,650.76 crore has been released as
capital subsidy. With regard to the performance of the scheme, it has
been stated that as on 15.03.2012, electrification in 1,03,345 un-electrified
villages out of 1,10,809 UE villages (93.26 %) has been completed and
free electricity connections to 190.59 Lakh BPL households out of
230.10 Lakh BPL (82.82%) have been released. Bharat Nirman target of
electrification of 1 lakh villages and 1.75 crore BPL households has
been achieved by December 2011. There are also difficulties in
implementation of the project which vary from delay in award of
contract to limited availability of good turn key contactor, limited

45
availability of manpower, material, equipments and limitations of
implementing agencies etc. Despite these obstacles Government has
decided to extend the scheme to the 12th Plan wherein the remaining
works under the sanctioned projects will be completed. However, the
targets for 12th Plan are yet to be finalized. The Committee find that
an amount of Rs. 4,900 crore has been earmarked to carry out the
work under the scheme during the year 2012-13. RGGVY is flagship
scheme of the Government and its effective implementation benefits
that segment of people who is most marginalized and deprived.
Drawbacks in implementation of the scheme such as the sub-letting of
contracts, transformers of low capacity and their maintenance, poor
quality of work, concept/definition of electrified villages under the
scheme and involvement of elected representatives into the scheme for
better and coordinated functioning have been pointed out repeatedly.
It was expected of the Government and REC to address these problems
by now. Another issue needs to be resolved is to install transformers
of high capacity instead of 16 KVA transformers, which has been
ignored by the Government. This can be testified from the deposition
before the Committee wherein it was stated that this entire scheme
wants to have smaller transformers so that possibilities of thefts are
minimized. It has also been stated that technically it is advised that
you should have smaller transformers to reduce the losses. The
Committee are not at all convinced with this logic and find it to be
misleading and hoodwinking. Transformers of required capacity are
the basic minimum for the accomplishment of the scheme. Low capacity
transformers not only negate the success of the scheme but result in
the wastage of the entire efforts and resources. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should become
sensitive to the aspirations of the people, suggestions of the Committee
for improving the scheme by taking effective measures by bringing
sub-contracting of the scheme to the minimum, involving the elected
representatives in the implementation of the scheme, making provision
of adequate capacity transformers and strengthening monitoring
mechanism by keeping provisions of surprise and random checking to
ensure the success of the scheme. The Committee would also emphasize
that necessary compliance of the guidelines issued by the Ministry in
regard to awarding contracts for the scheme to the implementing
agencies with proven track record is ensured.
Reply of the Government
Under RGGVY, 576 projects covering electrification of 1.18 lakh
(revised to 1.11 lakh) un/de-electrified villages, intensive electrification
of 3.56 lakh (revised to 3.49 lakh) partially electrified villages and

46
providing free electricity service connections to estimated 2.47 crore
(revised to 2.30 crore) BPL households have been sanctioned in the
country. Cumulatively, as on 15.05.2012, the electrification works in
1.05 lakh un/de-electrified villages, intensive electrification of 2.56 lakh
partially electrified villages have been completed and 1.96 crore free
electricity service connections to BPL households have been released
in the country under RGGVY.
2. In additional to above, 72 projects (33 new and 39 supplementary
projects) have also been sanctioned recently by Government of India
under Phase-II of RGGVY covering electrification of 1,909 un/de-
electrified villages and providing free electricity connections to 45.59
lakh BPL households.
3. In view of the recommendation of the committee, Ministry has
proposed to take following measures in the 12th Plan for RGGVY
Scheme:
(a) Burning of transformers was primarily due to overloading.
In XI-Plan, the transformers were provided keeping BPL
load of 60 Watt per family only. Under XII-Plan, it has been
proposed to provide adequate number of transformers.
Additionally the assured connected load for BPL and APL
has also been proposed to be enhanced to 250 Watt and
500 Watt respectively against 60 Watt and 250 Watt earlier.
(b) Regarding subletting of works by turnkey contractors,
Ministry is considering the limiting the level of sub-
contracting as recommended by Committee and also
allowing utilities to carry out work departmentally with
adequate safeguards.
(c) It is proposed to incorporate the following composition of
the District Level Committee under the Chairmanship of
MP to monitor the RGGVY Programme. “In addition to
Member of Parliament of the districts, all MLAs from the
districts, Chairperson of Zila Panchayat, Mayor of Municipal
Corporation, Chairperson of Municipalities and Presidents
of few Gram Panchayats (06-08 nos.) could be members of
the District Level Committee, in addition to DM, utility
officials, officers of REC, NGOs, etc.”
(d) Ministry is also considering the revamping of three tier
quality monitoring mechanism to bring element of random
and surprise checks in ensuring quality of works to be
executed under RGGVY in 12th Plan.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]

47
Recommendations (Sl. No. 16 Para No. 2.17)
Energy Conservation & Efficiency
The Committee are aware that country’s power generation capacity
as also the actual power generation is far less than the ever growing
demands for power. They therefore, feel that it is significant that besides
taking measures for enhancing power generation, emphasis should also
be laid on the conservation of the energy. The Committee note that
various energy conservation programmes are being actively pursued
by the Government such as Bachat Lamp Yojana, Standards & Labeling
Scheme, Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC), Agriculture and
Municipal DSM, Small and Medium Industries, Operationalising EC
Act by Strengthening Institutional Capacity of State Designated
Agencies (SDAs) and Awareness Schemes. The Committee were
apprised that by the end of March, 2012, total of about 10,758 MW is
expected to be saved through their various schemes. The Committee
find that the major schemes under conservation scheme of the
Government are (i) National Energy Conservation Day Award,
(ii) National Level Painting Competition for school children, and
(iii) Awareness and Publicity with an outlay of Rs. 6.00 crore each.
Further, National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE) is
also a scheme for energy conservation announced by the Prime Minister
as a part of National Action Plan on Climate Change. An outlay of
Rs. 180 crore has been provided for the year 2012-13 to operationalise
the NMEEE. The Committee also find that Rs. 290 crore was proposed
by the Ministry of Power for the Budget allocation for Energy
Conservation for the year 2012-13. However, only Rs. 200 crore has
been approved and allocated by the Planning Commission under this
head.
While the Committee would urge the Government to continue
emphasis on implementation of the conservation schemes of the
Government, they feel that reduced allocation may affect the
achievements in the coming year. The Committee, accordingly,
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with the
Planning Commission to enhance their Budget under the head. Further,
they would also like the Ministry to enhance pace of implementation
of their various schemes in the 12th Five Year Plan and to achieve the
higher level of conservation of energy. They would emphasize that the
Ministry should focus specially on creating awareness among the
masses so as to actualize energy efficiency and conservation. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to examine the feasibility of
promoting installation of CFL/LED lamps/bulbs as one of the measures
of energy conservations, eco-compatibility in view of global warming
and its cost-effectiveness. They would like to be apprised accordingly
of the findings.

48
Reply of the Government
The Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), established in 2002 under
the provision of Energy Conservation Act, 2001, has been mandated to
promote Energy Efficiency in the country . In order to enhance the
efforts to promote energy efficiency during the XI Plan period and to
achieve the target of reducing consumption by 5% (equivalent to 10,000
MW of avoided capacity) by 2012, BEE has initiated several
programmes/schemes targeting the following areas:
• Bachat Lamp Yojana
• Commercial Buildings
• Standards & Labeling of appliances
• Demand Side Management in Agriculture/Municipalities
• SMEs and Large Industries
• Capacity Building of SDAs
• National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE)
2. The initiatives taken have resulted in an avoided capacity
generation of 10836.19 MW during the period from April, 2007 to
December, 2011 against the target of 10,000 MW.
3. In 12th Plan, in addition to the HRD activities undertaken in
each of the scheme of following initiatives are also proposed:
• Student awareness programs
•T raining, skill up gradation and refresher training of energy
managers and energy auditors
•T raining, skill up gradation and refresher training of ECBC
building professionals (Architects, Building engineers,
Building bye-law regulators & code compliance officials)
•T raining, skill up-gradation and refresher training of
operators handling fuel fired furnaces and boilers.
• Inter-institutional networking in energy efficiency training
•T raining of Power plant personnel
4. The actual expenditure during 11th Plan was Rs. 289.06 crore as
against Plan allocation of Rs. 346.86 crore. As regards enhancement of
the budget, Bureau of Energy Efficiency has proposed allocation of

49
Rs. 2499.91 crore in XII plan to undertake implementation of various
schemes under energy conservation, with a targeted savings of 12350
MW of avoided capacity generation. The proposed schemes in XII
plan include three additional new schemes, apart from the schemes of
XI plan. The proposal is under consideration of Planning Commission.
5. Regarding promoting CFL/LED lamps/bulbs as one of the
measures of energy conservations, BEE is promoting CFLs in the
domestic sector through its Bachat Lamp Yojana programme. The
“Bachat Lamp Yojana” (BLY) aims at the large scale replacement of
incandescent bulbs in households by CFLs. It provides CFLs to
households at the price similar to that of incandescent bulbs and utilizes
the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol to
recover the cost differential between the market price of the CFLs and
the price at which they are sold to the households.
6. BEE monitors the electricity savings in each project area in
accordance with the monitoring methodology prescribed by the
Executive Board of the CDM(Clean Development Mechanism). In order
to reduce the transaction costs associated with the approval of CDM
projects, BEE has developed a Programme of Activities (PoA) which
serves as an umbrella CDM project, and is registered with the CDM
Executive Board. The individual projects, designed to be in conformance
with the umbrella project, are added to the umbrella project as and
when they are prepared. The development of the PoA is a voluntary
action on the part of BEE, and it would not seek any commercial or
CDM revenues from the PoA. On the other hand, BEE, on behalf of
the Government of India, takes the responsibility of monitoring of all
project areas after the DISCOMs and the CFL suppliers have entered
into a Tripartite Agreement (TPA) with BEE.
7. As regards LED, it is expected that in the 12th Plan, LED
technology will contribute towards reducing demand of electricity in
a big way in the area of lighting and industrial application. This shall
help in achieving demand side saving targets under the National
Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE) in the country.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]

50
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
Development of Hydro Power Sector
The Committee note that the broad objectives of the National Hydro
Policy inter-alia include harnessing of balance hydro electrical potential
and inducing private investment in power hydro product. The hydro
policy 2008 as enunciated by the Government of India tend to provide
level playing field to private developers in determination of tariff
selection criteria for awarding sites, provision of merchant selling of
electricity upto a maximum of 40% etc. Developers were also entrusted
with some social responsibilities like development of local area besides
running of welfare schemes, creation of infrastructure etc. Further
liberalizing the policy the Government made provisions for hydro
projects incorporating several incentives to private developers which
covered initiatives for better availability of machines generation of extra
energy above the designed energy and compensation for hydrological
risk etc. While welcoming the initiatives on policy platform in spite of
giving further impetus through liberalization of policy, the Committee
find that desired result on hydro electrical sector are not coming forth.
Regarding specific achievements of policy with regard to objectives it
has been stated that 139 hydro electric projects having installed capacity
of 41,732 MW have been allotted to private sector by the States which
are at different stages of development. The problems plaguing the
hydro sector have not been taken care of in the hydro policy. Primarily
the obstacles which are hindering the growth are localized in nature,
but need resolution at the policy level. The problem in the North-
Eastern region may be different from the one being encountered in the
State of J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Hence problems are
to be addressed at policy level while giving autonomy and
decentralizing decision making in the Sector. The Electricity Act, 2003
also emphasizes the need for development of hydro power and aims
at strengthening of structure including dams but no growth has been
witnessed despite proper legislation in vogue and policy initiation.
National Electricity Policy lays immense emphasis on full development
of the feasible hydro potential in the country taking care of issues like

51
resettlement and rehabilitation, environmental protection, review of
procedure for land acquisition and other approvals/clearances for
speedy approval of hydro projects. The Government should be able to
address all problematic areas while foreseeing the contingencies/
situations that may arise from time to time and ensure that it does
not hamper the growth of the sector. The Committee therefore, strongly
recommend that the Government must revisit the Hydro Policy for
taking corrective measures and give adequate priority to the hydro
sector of the country.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India has accorded high priority to the
development of the hydro potential in the country. Since the combined
effort of Central and State Sector developers was not enough, the new
Hydro Policy, 2008 was notified on 31.3.2008 to attract the private
developers as well by providing level playing field to them for
development of hydro-electric projects in the country.
2. The status of development of hydro potential in the country as
on 30.06.2012 is as follows:—
Sl. Status Nos. Capacity
No. (MW)
1. Schemes under Operation 179 39,291.40
2. Schemes under Construction 49 13,031.00
3. DPRs concurred by CEA (yet to be 33 19,436.00
taken up for construction)
4. Schemes for which DPRs have been 17 10,934.00
prepared and are under Examination
5. DPRs returned by CEA 29 9,163.00
6. Schemes under Survey & Investigation 98 20,520.00
405 112,375.40
3. From the above figures, it can be seen that about 77% of the
hydro potential of the country i.e. 145320 MW (above 25 MW) has
either been developed or is under various stages of development. It
would also be seen that a large number of projects are under survey
and investigation stage, which are mostly with the private developers.
Most of these projects have been allotted in the last 3-4 years after the
new Hydro Policy, 2008 was brought into force. Thus, this Policy has
given an impetus to the development of hydro power potential in the
country.

52
4. It is known that development of H.E. Projects is an intricate
and long drawn process, spanning over 3-5 years. Long time is required
for Survey & Investigation, preparation of DPR, obtaining of statutory
and non-statutory clearances including environment/forest clearances
and approval of R&R Plan, concurrence by CEA, investment decision
and financial closure. Once the projects achieve financial closure,
implementation takes another 5-8 years. Thus, hydro projects usually
have long gestation period. Therefore, the projects which are under
development are likely to come up during the 13th Plan and beyond.
It is evident that the new Hydro Policy, 2008 has started showing its
impact, however, due to the long gestation period of hydro projects,
its full impact would get reflected on the ground from 13th Plan
onwards.
5. It may be mentioned that the issues like Resettlement and
Rehabilitation, review of procedure for land acquisition, management
of forest land vis-à-vis environmental protection, are under consideration
of the Government as under:
1. Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement:
A new Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2011 by Ministry of Rural Development, which will
have more participation of local people in terms of land
acquisition and Rehabilitation & Resettlement, is under
consideration.
2. Management of Forest Land
A Committee to study Development in Hill States arising
from management of forest lands with special focus on
creation of Infrastructure, Livelihood and Human
Development has been constituted under Chairmanship of
the Member (Energy), Planning Commission.
6. Since the review of a policy is a continuous process, the Hydro
Policy could be revisited after finalisation of Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2011 and submission of report/
recommendations of the Committee under Chairmanship of the Member
(Energy), Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee find that as of now there is 38,948 MW hydro
capacity in the country which is about 20% of the total energy capacity.
It is estimated that during the 12th Plan Period a capacity of

53
9,204 MW will be added. Despite this accretion the percentage share
of the hydro will decline. There are a number of hydro projects in
North-East and other hydro fuel abundant States which were to achieve
Commercial Date of Operation (COD) or nearing completion, but have
been left mid-way due to the various reasons. Besides, there are also
instances wherein survey and investigation have been entrusted to
Central PSUs and after completion of this important elementary work
the projects have been handed over to private developers. The projects
so handed over are held up without concrete progress. The issue of
upfront premium has also impacted the progress of the plants on
anticipated lines. Task force on hydro power projects, Inter-Ministerial
group on development of hydro power in North-East and advisory
group has been set up for ensuring that the situation of non-
achievements of targets in 11th Plan is not repeated in the 12th Plan
period. In addition, Central Electricity Authority is also monitoring
the power projects. A power project monitoring panel has also been
set up to monitor the progress of hydro projects besides continuous
review meetings by the Ministry with all the stakeholders. The steps
taken for timely completion of projects are good but the main aspect
is their implementation in letter and spirit. It has been stated that in
the process of allotment of projects bids are to be called on the basis
of only one single quantifiable parameter such as free power in excess
of 13%, equity participation offered to the State Government or upfront
payment etc. Therefore, the State Governments are free to allot projects
on the basis of upfront premium as long as they follow a transparent
procedure. It has also been stated that NHPC and NEEPCO have not
been denied the opportunity to develop the projects in North-East on
account of non-payment of upfront premium. Despite that, the projects
in Dibang and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh and Subansiri Lower in
Assam are held up. The Committee also find that four projects of
6600 MW capacity were handed over to private developers for which
the base work was done by NHPC. The contention of the Government
that State reserves the right to decide on the agency to prepare the
DPR and the agency to finally carry out the execution of the projects
is untenable. Before switching over the agency mid-way it should have
been established that the previous agency is incapable of executing
the work and the agency which got lateral entry into the projects is
better equipped with infrastructure, finance and technical support. The
right of the State to select or change agency is not unfettered and
should stand public scrutiny. While the State Government can decide
to hand over the execution of the project to a lateral entrant the process
of selecting that party should be transparent and the decision should
be based on the proven capacity of that party to execute such project.

54
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the issue of upfront
premium should be resolved at the Government level in a time bound
manner so that the progress of the hydro projects particularly with
reference to Central PSUs is not impacted adversely.
Reply of the Government
The Dibang, Tawang and Lower Subansiri HEPs are not held up
on account of non-payment of upfront premium. The Dibang HEP is
held up for want of environment as well as forest clearance whereas
Tawang HEP-I and Tawang HEP-II are held up due to want of forest
clearance. As far as Lower Subansiri HEP is concerned, the project is
already under development and is presently held up due to agitation
launched by Anti-dam activists against construction of the project in
view of downstream impact and safety of dam. A Technical Expert
Committee, constituted by the Planning Commission and the Joint
Steering Committee, constituted by NHPC Ltd. have recently examined
the issues and given certain recommendations in respect of dam safety
and mitigation of downstream impact respectively.
2. As regards to the issues of handing over of the projects to the
private developers in Arunachal Pradesh and transparent selection of
the developer thereof, the Ministry of Power had been constantly
making efforts at various levels for return of the projects to NHPC
and ensuring competitive bidding. The Government of Arunachal
Pradesh (GoAP) had been requested for details of the procedure
followed for allocation of projects to private companies and whether
a fair opportunity of being heard was given to NHPC to present its
case before the State authorities, before the drastic action of withdrawal
of the said projects was taken. However, the GoAP has been
maintaining that NHPC was allowed to carry out survey and
investigation works for Siang, Subansiri and Dibang basins and to
prepare the DPRs for them by the end of the 10th Plan. They have
stated that the State Government reserved the right to withdraw
permission for DPR preparation at any stage. The GoAP stated that
since the projects were not allotted to NHPC for development, the
question of withdrawing them from NHPC does not arise. As regards
the procedure followed by them, the GoAP has been maintaining that
the projects were allotted in line with the State Hydro Policy of 2005
and in a transparent manner on limited competitive bidding, duly
examined by a High Powered Committee constituted by the Cabinet.
3. As regards to the issue of upfront premium, the para 5.1 of
Tariff Policy (January, 2006) has been amended on 08.07.2011, whereby
the CPSUs and private developers of hydro-electric projects have come
at equal footing including upfront payment.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]

55
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the Planning Commission had fixed a
capacity addition target of 78,700 MW for the 11th Five Year Plan
(2007-12) which was reduced to 62,374 MW at the time of Mid-Term
Appraisal by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA). However, the
actual capacity addition that has taken place during the 11th Plan is
54,964 MW only. The Ministry of Power has been assigning various
reasons, which are more generic and repetitive rather than genuine,
plausible and distinct, for the poor capacity addition performance
during the 11th Plan.
Further, it has been reported by the Ministry that capacity addition
to the tune of 20,500 MW was achieved in 2011-12 against the target
of 15,600 MW. The Committee appreciate the achievement of capacity
addition for the year. However, they are skeptical about the target
itself which by no yardsticks is laudable one. It is no secret that despite
overshooting the target of the terminal year of the Plan, they are
nowhere around their own truncated target for the Plan after Mid-
Term Appraisal.
The Committee are also concerned about the poor performance of
Central Sector in regard to attainment of capacity addition vis-à-vis
States and Private Sector performance during the 11th Five Year Plan.
Against the target of 36,874 MW, 26,783 MW and 15,043 MW, the
achievements of Central, State and Private Sector have been 15,220
MW, 16,732 MW and 23,012 MW which is 41%, 62% and 153%
respectively of their original targets. While the Committee feel happy
about the exceptional performance of Private Sector in capacity addition,
it is taken aback at the poor performance of the Central Sector. In
view of the performance of Central Sector for the entire 11th Plan, is
it befitting to blow your own trumpet of accomplishment specially
comparing it with inconsequential past performances. The Committee
feel that it is a feeble attempt of hiding for present non-performance
of Central Sector in the not so glorious past. The Central Sector is

56
having giant companies with already laid out infrastructure such as
NTPC, NHPC, DVC etc. yet they have failed to achieve even half of
their targets put together. Had the Private Sector not performed
exceptionally well, it can easily be comprehended how bad the situation
could have been in terms of capacity addition. If there were problems
and hindrances for Government's Power Sector PSUs so were they for
Private Sector. It is a fact that the Central Sector have unmatched
financial and unstinted support of the Government, hence their dismal
performance compel the Committee to infer that all is not well so far
as the Management of the Power Sector PSUs and monitoring by the
Ministry is concerned. The Committee are of the strong view that if
the power projects are not being commissioned as per time schedule
there is fault either in planning process or in the execution of the
plan. Repeating the failure over and again without taking any concrete
remedial measure is most undesirable and unacceptable especially
where the demand in the country for electricity is rapidly growing
and there is already a yawning gap between the supply and
requirement of energy. The Committee recommend that the Government
should review the working of all Power Sector PSUs with a view to
analyse the causes for their dismal performance during the 11th Plan
as compared to Private Sector. They also desire that the Government
should urgently look into the causes of the serious slippage in the
target achievement and take immediate corrective measures. The
Committee may be apprised in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Planning Commission, the
capacity addition target of 21,222 MW was set for the Central Sector
for the 11th Plan against which 15,220 MW of fresh capacity was
commissioned during the 11th Plan.
2. Lower achievement of CPSUs vis-à-vis the targets was mainly
due to fact that certain projects could not be commissioned due to
agitation (Kudankulam), decision to withdraw from the projectat Lohari
Nagpala, contractual issues (Barh, Sipat), law & order, acquisition of
land, delay in placement of order (Nabinagar, Mouda, Bongaigaon),
etc. and in hydro sector, reasons like geological surprises, floods,
agitation. In addition Maithon RBC TPS (2x525 MW) which was
originally included in the target of Central Sector (DVC), was
subsequently excluded from Central Sector as this project was
commissioned in Private Sector, thereby reducing achievement of
Central Sector. The details are given below:

57
Thermal Projects (Original target vs. MTA Target)
PSU Original MTA Remarks
Target Target
(MW) (MW)
NTPC 15,840 9,220 Bar h-I & II (2640 MW), Sipat-I (1980 MW), Nabi
Nagar (750 MW), Bongaigaon U3 (250 MW), Mauda
(1000 MW): Not considered due to:
• Contractual dispute between NTPC and
Technopromexport Russia
• Delay in placement of main plant order
• Delay in acquisition of land, law and order
problem, heavy rainfall, frequent bandhs etc.
DVC 6,500 6,000 Bokaro ‘A’ (500 MW) not considered due to delay in
shifting of Live Switchyard & removal of existing
underground facilities
NLC 1,750 750 Tuticorin JV (1000 MW) not considered due to delay
in placement of main plant order and change in
design by main plant contractor
Thermal Projects (MTA vs. Actual Achievement):
PSU MTA Actual Remarks
Target Achieved
(MW) (MW)
NTPC 9,220 7,720 • Bongaigaon U1&2 (500 MW) slipped due to slow
(83.7%) progress of civil works, frequent bandhs and heavy
monsoon
• Indira Gandhi U-3 (500 MW) slipped due to slow
progress of civil works and delay in supply of TG
material.
•V allur TPP Ph-I U-1-500 MW slipped due to slow
civil works and delay in supply of TG material.
DVC 6,000 3,250 • Koderma U-2-500 MW slipped due to Delay in TG
(54.2%) erection start due to non-readiness of civil fronts
and supply of material for boiler and TG.
• Raghunathpur TPP—2x600 MW-slipped due to
delay in land acquisition for water and rail corridor,
delay in main plant equipment erection by
M/s. RIL and law & order problem.
• Maithon RBC TPS 2 x 525 MW was taken in central
sector in the mid-term target and these units have
been taken in the private sector after
commissioning.
NLC 7,50,500 (66.7%) Neyveli TPS-II—U-2—due to delay in erection of
refractory work.

58
Hydro Projects (Original target vs. MTA Target)
PSU Original MTA Remarks
Target Target
(MW) (MW)
NHPC 4,802 2002                        —
NHDC 520 520 No Change
NEEPCO 600 0 Kameng HEP (600 MW)
• Adverse geology resulting in slow progress in
HRT.
•W orks suffered due to flash flood in 28.10.2008.
Ingress of water in HRT.
NTPC 1,920 0 Koldam HEP (800 MW)
• Slow progress of clay/earth filling of main dam
etc.
• Delay in procurement of steel and contractual issues.
Loharinagpala HEP (600 MW)
•W ork stopped by MOP order dated 24.12.2010 as
per decision of NGRBA to discontinue the project.
Tapovan Vishnugad (520 MW)
• Slow progress in power house due to Poor rock
strata.
• Ingress of water in Head race tunnel.
• Bad geology & stucking up to TBM
SJVNL 412 0 Rampur HEP (412 MW)
• Slow progress of Head Race Tunnel due to bad
geology.
• Slope failure in Power House Area.
THDC 400 400 No Change
Total 8,654 2,922
NHPC Projects slipped
Particulars (MW) Remarks/Critical Areas
12 3
Central Sector
Parbati St.-II NHPC, 800 • Slow progr ess of Head Race Tunnel works because
HP . 4x200= 800 MW of bad geology.
• Contractual issues.
• Slide in Power House area during 2007.
• Flash flood in August, 2011.

59
Subansiri Lower 2,000 • Poor geology & consequent change in design of
NHPC, Ar.Pr. surge shaft arrangement.
8x250= 2000 MW • Slope failure in Power House area in January, 2008.
• Damage of bridge on NH-52.
• Local issues.
Total 2,800
Hydro Projects (MTA  vs. Actual Achievement):
PSU MTA Actual Remarks
Target Achieved
(MW) (MW)
NHPC 2,002 630              —
NHDC 520 520 No Change
THDC 400 400 No Change
Total 2,922 1,550
NHPC Projects slipped
Particulars (MW) Reasons for slippages
12 3
Teesta Low Dam-III 132 • Flash floods in the year 2007, May, 2009 and July/
NHPC, W.B. 4x33 = August. 2010.
132 MW • Fr equent interruption of works due to GJM
agitation.
• Slope failure in Power House area.
Teesta Low Dam-IV 160 • Flash floods in the year 2007, May, 2009 and July/
NHPC, W.B. 4x40= August. 2010.
160 MW Frequent interruption of works due to Gorkha Jan
Mukti agitation.
Nimoo Bazgo NHPC, 45 • V ery short working season available due to
J&K 3x15= 45 MW extreme cold climate.
• Difficulty in transportation of materials due to
difficult terrain.
Chamera-III NHPC, 231 • Delay in plugging of diversion tunnel.
H.P 3x77 = 231 MW • Works suffered due to heavy rain and snow fall
in Feb, 2012.
• Cavity formation in Lower Expansion Gallery.
12 3

60
Uri-II NHPC, J&K 240 • Delay in completion of TRT due to flash flood in
4x60 = 240 MW Sept., 2011
•P roblem faced during erection of surge shaft gate.
• Law and Order problems.
Chutak NHPC, J&K 44 • V ery short working season available due to
4x11 = 44 MW extreme cold climate.
• Difficulty in transportation of materials due to
difficult terrain.
• Unit #1 & Unit #2 commissioning delayed due to
insufficient load.
Parbati-III NHPC, 520 • Slow progress in Head Race Tunnel due to bad
H.P . 4x130= 520 MW Geology .
• Flash flood in August, 2011.
• Stoppage of works by locals.
Sub-total (Central) 1,372
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para No. 2.6)
12th Five Year Plan—Projections
The Committee note that a capacity addition target to the tune of
75,785 MW has been projected for the 12th Plan. The Committee,
considering the growing demand of energy in the Country, find the
targets of 12th Plan very moderate. The Electric Power Survey Report
has forecasted that energy requirement and peak demand in the country
in 2016-17 will be 13,54,874 Million Unit and 1,99,540 MW respectively.
Various reasons have been assigned by the Government for poor
performance during 11th Plan such as delay in placement of orders,
delay in supply of material for main Plant, problems of land acquisition,
contractual disputes, shortage of fuel etc. The Committee apprehend
that there are chances that these reasons may further impede the
progress of the work during the 12th Plan curtailing the proposed
capacity addition targets. The Committee are unhappy to find that
though the representatives of the Ministry of Power have on several
occasion, submitted before the Committee that about a capacity addition
target of 1,00,000 MW for the 12th Plan, have now submitted before
12 3

61
the Committee a target of 76,000 MW for 12th Plan, which happens to
be even lower than the original target of 78,700 MW set for the
11th Plan. The Committee are unable to accept this target mainly
because they are aware that the ambitious plans of implementation of
Ultra Mega Power Projects will alone provide a capacity addition of
4,000 MW or above by each of these commissioned projects during
the 12th Plan besides the capacity addition from the already existing
Power Giant in Central, State and Private Sector Companies. It is also
pertinent to mention here that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy have submitted before the Committee that they alone will be
able to achieve a capacity addition of 30,000 MW with a meager
allocation during the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee are not
convinced with the extreme conservative targets set by the Ministry of
Power despite such huge infrastructure and ambitious plans during
the 12th Plan. They recommend that they should revisit this area and
revise their targets after proper assessment of sector’s potential and
resources and apprise the Committee of the same.
Reply of the Government
The capacity addition requirement during the 12th Plan has been
estimated to meet the projected electricity demand and electrical energy
requirement at the end of the 12th Plan. Accordingly, the Report of
Working Group on Power for 12th Plan has recommended a capacity
addition of 75,785 MW during the 12th Plan based on the capacity
addition of 62,374 MW during the 11th Plan. However, the actual
capacity addition during the 11th Plan has been 54,964 MW as against
the Mid Term Appraisal (MTA) target of 62,374 MW.
2. While working out the capacity addition requirement for the
12th Plan, the Working Group had analyzed the reasons for slippages
of projects from the 11th Plan in order to avoid such slippages during
the 12th Plan. Accordingly, Working Group had recommended that
only those projects should be included in the 12th Plan capacity
addition programme where all clearances had been obtained, linkages
were tied-up, and the project was under construction. Further, adequate
availability of coal was also considered to decide the size of the
12th Plan capacity addition programme.
3. The capacity addition target for the 12th Plan would be finalized
by the Planning Commission. Planning Commission will firm up the
capacity addition target after taking into account all relevant factors
including the fuel constraint, environmental, water and land acquisition
issues.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report)

62
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee find that the share of Central, State and Private
Sector in 12thPlan will be 19,858 MW, 13,796 MW and 42,131 MW,
whereas, their target for 11th Plan have been 36,874 MW, 26,783 MW
and 15,043 MW respectively. It is surprising that the targets for
12th Plan in respect of Central and State Sector have been fixed almost
half of their target set for 11th Plan, whereas, the Private Sector target
has increased almost three times from their target set for 11th Plan.
The Committee are of the opinion that the Central Sector undertakings
already have huge infrastructure, experience and skill and by virtue of
these advantages should be able to achieve much more than the
relatively new entrant of private sector. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Government should review the targets
set for the 12th Plan with a view to increase the share of Central
Sector having big and established power sector PSUs.
Reply of the Government
As per the Report of Working Group on Power for 12th Plan, the
capacity addition recommended to Planning Commission is 75,785 MW
comprising 19,858 MW in Central Sector, 13,796 MW in State Sector
and 42,131 MW in Private Sector.
2. The recommended capacity of 75,785 MW including the sectoral
break-up would not undergo major change as it has been estimated
based on the capacity addition requirement to meet the projected
electricity demand and electrical energy requirement at the end of
12th Plan and taking into account the status of preparedness of various
power projects. It may undergo minor changes taking into account the
projects slipped from 11th Plan to 12th Plan. The exact figures of
capacity addition in Central, State and Private Sector will be known
once the capacity addition target for 12th Plan is finalized.
3. Several measures initiated by the Government has encouraged
private sector participation in the generation of electricity. These include
delicensing of thermal generation and small hydro projects, 100% FDI
in power generation, Tariff Policy, Ultra Mega Power Project initiative,
Mega Power Policy etc. As a result of these measures, the private
sector has come up in a big way with a number of private players
showing keen interest in setting up of power projects in the country .
This led to increased capacity addition by the private sector which
also includes Ultra Mega Power Projects.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

63
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that the Working Group on Power for the
12th Plan in its report has estimated fund requirement of Rs. 12,37,480
crore for power sector during the 12th Plan excluding renewable energy.
The estimated requirement of fund of Rs. 13,72,580 crore for the
12th Five Year Plan includes the expenditure involved with regard to
ongoing projects (7,432 MW of hydro projects and 14,370 MW of
thermal) would be carried over to the 12th Five Year Plan from
11th Five Year Plan. In regard to availability of funds for the power
sector the Committee have been informed that the final report along
with the interim report of the Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship
of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission has since been considered
and adopted by the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on
29.10.2010. Recommendations relating to taxation and those pertaining
directly to the States have been segregated and taken up separately
with Ministry of Finance and States concerned. Further, in respect of
tax exemption and incentives for the investors, it has been stated that
Power is included in the definition of infrastructure and sunset clause
under Section 80-IA and has been extended for one year i.e. till 31.3.2013
for power sector. In view of the above the Committee feel that
Rs. 12,37,480 crore is a huge amount and will not be easy to arrange,
therefore, the Government should take necessary steps with utmost
sincerity to ensure that the required funds for the 12th Plan are
arranged so that the projects to be commissionedare not delayed,
stopped or abandoned for the want of funds. The Committee further
recommend that the Ministry of Power should take up the matter at
appropriate level to continue the sunset clause under Section 80-IA
which has been extended for one year i.e. 31.3.2013 for power sector,
for entire 12th Five Year Plan so as to give much needed thrust to
power capacity addition in the Country.
Reply of the Government
The two issues mentioned above are fund requirement of the power
sector of Rs. 12,37,480 for the 12th Plan and continuation of the sunset
clause under section 80-IA which has been extended for one year  i.e.
31.03.2013 for the power sector, for the entire 12th Plan. Regarding
funding of power projects both in the Public and Private sector, funds
are generally raised through the market mechanism i.e. internal resource
generation, issue of fresh equity capital and market borrowing. Funding
of power projects through budgetary support is restricted to
programmes like RGGVY and R-APDRP to cater to service obligation
of power utilities for enhancing the access to electricity in the rural
areas, particularly for the people living below the poverty line.

64
2. The issue of extension of sunset clause under 80-IA for the
power sector for the entire 12th Five Year Plan has been taken up
with Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue as a part of pre-
budget consultations for financial year 2012-13.
3. Ministry of Finance has extended the said sunset clause u/s
80-IA upto 31.03.2013. However, they have not made any commitment
for extension during the remaining period of 12th Plan.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/2/2012-Bud Dated 19.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)

65
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
17 December, 2012 Chairman,
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

66
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON  ENERGY  (2012-13)  HELD  ON
11TH DECEMBER, 2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora— in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
3. Smt. Mausam Noor
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
11. Shri Jagda Nand Singh
12. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
13. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
15. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
16. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director

67
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.
The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on:
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in 27th
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy.
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in 28th
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Power.
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with minor
modifications in Action Taken Report on the recommendations
contained in 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
5. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

68
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
28TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of recommendations: 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total: 10
Percentage 62.5%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Sl.Nos. 8 and 10
Total: 02
Percentage 12.5%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl.Nos. 3, 5, 6 and 7
Total: 04
Percentage 25%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%