THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirtieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Functioning of Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.08.2013
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  27.08.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2013/ Bhadrapada, 1935 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 238
Price : Rs. 87.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 25
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 57
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 63
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ............................................................................ 75
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee held
on 22nd August, 2013 ............................................................... 78
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
30th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................... 80
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. *Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7.
@Smt. Mausam Noor
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18.
$Smt. Pratibha Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
20. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
21. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
22. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
(iii)
* Passed away on 1st March, 2013.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 01.05.2013.
$ Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.08.2013.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
23. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
24. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
25. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
26. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
29. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
30. Shri Birender Singh
31.
#Shri K.C. Tyagi
32. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant
# Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.03.2013.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 38th Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 30th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Power.
2. The 30th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 24th August, 2012. Replies of the Government to all
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
18th March, 2013.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 22nd August, 2013.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 30th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
26 August, 2013 Chairman,
04 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on Functioning of Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) pertaining to the Ministry of Power.
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
24th August, 2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same day. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15
Total–10
Chapter–II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial Nos. 7 and 8
Total–02
Chapter–III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 2, 3 and 5
Total–03
Chapter–IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
Serial No. 16
Total–01
Chapter–V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action T aken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Performance of CERC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee had noted that regulatory provisions under the
Electricity Act, 2003 are being implemented through the CERC.
Functions of CERC relate to important areas of power sector, viz.
regulating tariff of generating companies owned and controlled by
the Central Government, of such companies having composite scheme
for generation and sale of the electricity in more than one State,
regulating inter-state transmission of the electricity, determining tariff
for inter-state transmission of the electricity, issuing licenses to
transmission licensees and the electricity traders with respect to their
inter-state operations, specifying grid code, levying fee, specifying and
enforcing quality, continuity and reliability of services by the licensee,
fixing inter-state trading margin etc. The Commission is also
responsible for balancing consumer interest and promoting investments
besides being responsible for oversight of the market. In pursuance of
these CERC has undertaken various steps, however, in view of the
Committee had these activities been taken to their logical conclusion
and been implemented in letter and spirit, the consumers/citizens of
the country would have been in a better position than the prevailing
situation in terms of cost and availability of the electricity. The
Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Commission should
introspect and identify as to why the optimal results are not coming
forth. Such a detailed analysis should identify whether there are
legislative limitations, functional constraints, absence of
entrepreneurship, lack of resources, dearth of qualified manpower or
un-enabling environment, which jointly or severally, are hampering
the growth of the Sector. The Committee had also strongly
recommended that reasons so identified be followed up with remedial
measures with utmost promptitude. The Government should not shy
away from bringing amendment to the Electricity Act, 2003 if such
measures are required to improve the efficacy of CERC. The Committee
had also recommended that the Government should take necessary
steps to appoint an independent Committee of experts to review the
functioning of CERC and identify the areas which require

3
improvements in the working of the organization and limitations of
the autonomy and legislation. They had also desired that such an
exercise should be conducted in a time-bound manner and followed
up with necessary action wherever required.
7. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated
as under:—
“The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) engages
in continual review of its regulations and makes amendments based
on the demands of time and need for facilitation of reforms in the
sector. For instance, the Commission issued first Multi Year Tariff
regulations for the control period 2001-04 and subsequently made
changes in the regulations for the next two control periods of
2004-09 and 2009-14 based on the prevailing market conditions.
The parameters of tariff were finalized after detailed analysis and
wide stakeholder consultations during each of the control period.
The Commission has been discharging its mandated functions in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Government Policies
and the resources available. Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003
mandates the Appropriate Commission to promote development
of market in power. The Tariff Policy also emphasized on
development of market and regulations on power exchanges.
Accordingly, the Central Commission facilitated establishment of
two power exchanges and made power market regulations.
CERC has mentioned constraints affecting the Commission in
bringing optimal results which have been brought out as follows
alongwith the response of the Government:—
A. Legislative limitations:
(i) Any regulatory policy adopted by the Commission can
translate into benefits to the end consumers only if such
policy is followed uniformly. In a federal structure, the State
Commissions are independent and the regulatory policy
initiatives taken by the Central Commission are not binding
on the State Commissions.
(ii) In the matter of grid discipline and UI payments, there is
a need for ensuring full and quick compliance of the
directions of the Commission by the erring entities. To
ensure this, the Commission not only needs to have power
to take actions against the erring entities and the officers in
charge of such entities but should have the power to impose
penalty commensurate with the nature and gravity of the

4
offense. At present, the Commission has the power to impose
penalties upto an amount of Rs. 1 Lakh for non-compliance
of the orders and directions of the Commission and upto
Rs. 15 lakh for non-compliance of the orders of the Regional
Load Despatch Centre. These powers need to be increased
commensurate with the nature and gravity of offense so
that it acts as an effective deterrent for future violations.
(iii) The Commission should be vested with powers to penalize
officers in charge of the erring entities by way of vicarious
liability. The Commission does not have power to execute
its own decisions except to initiate action under Section 142
of the Act for non-compliance of its earlier order imposing
the penalty. The Commission needs to be armed with powers
of execution of a Civil Court so that its orders can be
executed through due process of law.
(iv) Recently open access has been thwarted in many cases on
account of two reasons. First, State Commissions have
issued notifications under Section 11 of the Act to prohibit
generators from selling electricity outside the State citing
the ground of scarcity of power. Secondly, the SLDCs are
not operating independently and are denying open access
on some pretext or the other. There is a need to make the
SLDCs independent so that they can discharge their
functions impartially and in accordance with the Act and
regulations. Section 11 needs to be suitably amended to
specifically exclude shortage of electricity as the ground
for invocation of the power of the State Government under
the said provision.
With regards to the legislative limitations affecting the Commission
in bringing optimal results, it is stated that amendment in Sections
11 & 142 are under consideration of the Committee under that
Chairmanship of Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority,
constituted for examination for proposed amendments in the
Electricity Act, 2003.
B. Autonomy of Regulator:
It has been stated by CERC that there are constraints arising out
of lack of autonomy on the following issues relating to:
• staffing, 1
• operationalisation of separate fund,
• flexibility in addressing needs for skill building involving
foreign visit.

5
Staffing: It may be stated the sufficient staff strength and
compensation package etc. have been finalized as per the functional
requirement and on the lines of other regulatory bodies. The
Government has been responsive to the difficulties faced by CERC
due to inadequate staff-strength. In October 2005, 20 additional
posts under various categories were created for the Commission.
The present sanctioned staff strength of CERC is 80. Further, certain
restrictions imposed while creating the additional posts that some
of the posts should be filled up from CEA only on deputation,
have been removed by the Government in October 2012 for the
smooth functioning of the Commission. In addition as per
Section 91(4) of the Electricity Act, CERC has powers to appoint
Consultants required to assist the Commission in discharge of its
functions. Accordingly, CERC has been appointing a number of
consultants under the provisions of CERC (Appointment of
Consultants) Regulations, 2008 from time to time.
CERC Fund: As per the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act,
Rules regarding constitution of the CERC Fund have been issued
by the Government vide Notification dated 22.10.2007. The Fund is
operational as per the provisions of the said Rules. CERC had
recently made a representation that releases from CERC Fund
should not be treated as grant-in-aid (General). This was examined
in consultation with Department of Economic Affairs and Controller
General of Accounts who did not agree to the views of CERC in
the light of the provisions of the Act and Rules made thereunder.
Views of Department of Economic Affairs and Controller General
of Accounts have since been communicated to CERC.
Skill building needs for staff: It has been stated by CERC that
they should also be delegated the powers of deciding and
approving the needs for skill enhancement of officers/staff
including those involving foreign visits. In this regard, it may be
mentioned here that earlier proposals of Chairperson and Members
of CERC for undertaking foreign visits used to go to the Screening
Committee of Secretaries for approval. This has been done away
with vide amendment made in the Service Rules. At present,
Chairperson, CERC powers for approving training programmes for
skill enhancement of the officers/staff of the Commission except
their foreign deputation for which approval are accorded by the
Government in line with austerity measures of the Government
(Ministry of Finance/Department of Expenditure) from time to time.
The Commission has initiated to undertake impact assessment of
regulations framed by it. However, to start with, Regulatory Impact
Assessment (RIA) inter alia , of only CERC tariff regulations for all

6
the three control periods shall be carried out. The following
activities shall be carried out under the assignment:—
(a) Study of methodologies adopted for regulatory impact
assessment by other Indian and Foreign regulators.
(b) Development of RIA tools for impact assessment.
(c) Comparative analysis of 2009 regulations vis-à-vis previous
regulations.
(d) Impact analysis of tariff norms, financial as well as technical,
on generating companies, transmission companies and
beneficiaries.
(e) Impact analysis of external factors like Government policies
and taxes, duties, funding etc.
(f) Comparison of Tariff norms Vs. Actual Economic/Financial
Conditions and operation efficiency .
(g) Impact on investment promotion and environment.
(h) Way forward to tariff regulations.
Further, the Working Group on Power for 12th Plan has
recommended that through suitable legislative changes, a Multi-
disciplinary body shall be constituted comprising of representatives
from Centre and States to review the performance of the Regulatory
Commission periodically on the basis of a performance evaluation
matrix and report to the appropriate Government for necessary
corrective action. The same is being examined by a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Chairperson CEA constituted for
examination of various proposals for amendment in Electricity Act,
2003. Therefore, there appears to be no need for appointment of
an independent Committee of experts to review the functioning of
CERC and identify the areas which require improvements in the
working of the organization and limitations of the autonomy and
legislation as recommended by the Standing Committee.”
8. The Committee, considering the importance of the work which
has been assigned to CERC and the ineffectiveness of the institution,
for whatsoever reasons, to carry out the assigned task, had
recommended the Government to appoint an independent Committee
of expert to review the functioning of CERC with a view to make
it more efficacious. Should it be necessary, the Committee had also
recommended to bring amendment in the Electricity Act, 2003.
However, in the action taken reply, they have only enumerated and
described the constraints of CERC which the Committee are already

7
aware of and which was the basis of the very recommendation of
the Committee. The Committee expected the Government to come
up with the solution to the problems being faced by the CERC and
apprise the Committee about the same in the action taken note. In
regard to recommendation of the Committee, in their action taken
reply they have stated that there appears to be no need to set up
an independent Committee of expert to review the functioning of
the CERC as a proposal for constitution of multi-disciplinary body
comprising of representatives from Centre and States to review the
performance of the Regulatory Commissions periodically and to
report to the appropriate Government for necessary corrective action
is under examination of a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Chairperson CEA. Simultaneously, it has also been stated that any
regulatory policy adopted by the Commission can translate into
benefits to the end consumers only if such policy is followed
uniformly. In a federal structure, the State Commissions are
independent and the regulatory policy initiatives taken by the
Central Commission are not binding on the State Commissions. The
Committee infer that issues like regulating inter-States transmission
of electricity, determination of tariff for such transmission, issuing
licences to transmission licensees and electricity traders for inter-
States operations, specifying Grid Code, levying fee, ensuring quality
services by licensees, fixing inter-State trading margins etc. are the
core issues within the domain of CERC. The character and quality
of electricity scenario in the Country will be revolving around such
issues and CERC has have to play a lead role despite the existence
of multi-lateral bodies like FoR and the proposed multi-disciplinary
entity. Independence of State Regulatory Commissions and their
dependence on the appropriate governance is perhaps the main factor
for uncertain and un-viable electricity scenario of the Country and
hence an effective CERC would lend a great helping hand in
heralding a competitive and viable atmosphere for economic and
reliable electricity set up in the Country. Therefore, the analysis of
shortcomings of CERC by an expert body cannot be a substituted
by a yet to be constituted multi-disciplinary body of the Centre
and States. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation
with regard to making CERC making more effective and more
efficacious by identifying the problems through an expert body and
taking follow up remedial measures.
A. Establishment of CERC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
9. The Committee had noted that the Commission functions in a
quasi-judicial manner and consist of a Chairperson, three full time
Members and the Chairperson of Central Electricity Authority as

8
ex-officio Member. Owing to the efficient functional requirement the
Act mandates that Chairperson and the Members shall be persons
having adequate knowledge and experience in Engineering, Law,
Finance, Management, Commerce etc. The Chairperson and the
Members are appointed by the President of India on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee as prescribed under the
Act. The Act also provides for the appointment of a Secretary of the
Commission whose powers and duties are defined by the Commission.
The Committee had found that given the functions of the Regulatory
Commissions to transform the electricity sector, the constitution of a
Board was enshrined in the Act itself to make these Commissions the
proper bodies with adequate powers to develop and regulate the
sector. However, over the years it has been found that the spirit of
the Act has not been carried in the right perspective. Most of the
Regulatory Commissions have become the refuge for the
superannuated but influential officials. Their primary objective is to
remain in employment rather than making any meaningful contribution
with regard to the activities of the Commissions in the pursuit of
their objectives. Hence these bodies have lost sheen and the authority,
which they were designed to represent. In the process they have also
lost the autonomy, which the Act has provided them for functional
purposes. Had these Commissions acted as mandated under the Act,
there would have been hardly any justification for languishing
electricity sector in the Country. The Committee had inclined to infer
that Regulatory Commissions have squarely failed in performing their
assigned duties. The Committee had recommended that with a view
to revolutionize the Sector it has become imperative to recast these
Commissions at Board level, therefore, these establishments should
not become the sanctuaries for senior citizens to secure sinecure
positions without any accountability and stakes. Hence, these positions
should be manned by the senior technical brains of the respective
areas who are alive in services, having sense of accountability.
10. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated
as under:—
“It is understood that by constitution of Board, constitution of
Commission is implied. Section 76(5) of the Electricity Act, 2003
provides for composition of the Central Commission as under:—
(a) a Chairperson and three other Members;
(b) the Chairperson of the Authority who shall be the Member,
ex officio .
The Chairperson and Members of the Central Commission shall
be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation

9
of the Selection Committee. Composition of the Selection Committee
for appointment of Chairperson and Members of CERC has been
provided in the Electricity Act, 2003. The qualification and
experience requirements for appointment to these posts are also
provided in the Act. As per the provisions of the Act, the Central
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and three other members
who shall be persons having adequate knowledge of, or experience
in, or shown capacity in dealing with the problems related to
engineering, law, commerce, finance or management. The
Chairperson and Members of the Central Commission have been
appointed in pursuance of the provisions of the Act. A glance
through the experience of Chairperson and members appointed by
the Central Commission in the past and at present would reveal
that the persons having proven track record in finance, engineering,
accounts, management and law have been appointed as chairperson
and members of the Commission. With their contribution, the
Commission has been able to create regulatory culture in the
country and at present, the regulations and the decisions of the
Central Commission are one of the guiding factors in the
development of the power sector in the country. Further, the
recommendations have been noted.”
11. The Committee in their Report after due consideration of
the provisions made in the Act in regard the appointments of the
Chairman and the Members of the Regulatory Commissions had
made a specific recommendation that these position should be
manned by the senior technical brains of the respective areas who
are still alive in their services so that their functions can be ensured
in more accountable manner. However, the action taken reply of
the Government has tried to justify the status quo by citing the
provisions of the Act and that the incumbent to the positions have
been contributing for development of power sector. The Committee
after the perusal of the Act find that there is no such provision
which prevent the Government to appoint such persons who are
still in the service. The rationale behind such recommendation of
the Committee is quite clear as implementation of this provision
will surely bring sense of greater responsibility and stake resulting
in improvement in performance of the Commission. They, therefore,
reiterate their recommendation and desire the Government to
reconsider Committee’s recommendation for implementation. The
Committee would like the Government to expand their selecting
horizons with regard to the positions of the Commissions by
identifying and inducting experienced and excellent talents of the
respective fields rather than limiting it to exhausted and retired
bureaucrats. Illustratively it can begin by inclusion of banking,
revenue or other financial core areas into the criteria for selection
at Board level to look after financial activities.

10
B. Forum of Regulators
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
12. The Committee had noted that The Forum of Regulators (FoR)
was constituted vide the Ministry of Power’s Notification dated
16th February, 2005 in pursuance of the provision under Section 166(2)
of the Electricity Act, 2003 with the primary objective of harmonization
of regulation in the power sector. The Forum consists of Chairperson
of CERC and Chairpersons of SERCs. The Chairperson of CERC is
the Chairperson of the Forum. The Committee were informed that
FoR provides a platform for the regulators at the Centre and State
level to exchange ideas and best practices. Issues of importance (at
inter-state level or intra-state level) are discussed and consensus is
evolved in FoR. In order to encourage uniformity of regulations among
SERCs, the Forum has evolved several Model Regulations which can
be adopted by the State Regulatory Commissions. The Electricity being
the concurrent subject, the Committee had found FoR a vital
instrument to bring all the State Regulatory Commissions at a platform
where consensus can be built for smooth and effective implementation
of regulations meant for bringing reforms, restructuring and revitalizing
of power sector of the Country. However, the Committee were
agonized to find that the FoR has miserably failed to achieve the
desired result due to some or other reasons. The Committee had found
that in regard to implementation of model regulations on various
issues viz. open access, rationalization of tariff, reduction of AT&C
losses etc. there is great disparity in States as some have done well
while the others’ performances are far from being satisfactory. For the
Committee it was a matter of concern that even regulations made
with consensus were either not being implemented satisfactorily or
not being implemented at all. The Committee were surprised that
FoR has failed to enforce even the decisions/regulations arrived at
through consensus among SERCs. The situation somehow indicates to
the ineffectiveness of the Forum. The Committee, therefore, had
recommended the Government to come up with some orders/
regulations providing much needed teeth to the Forum to make it
effective in enforcing the model regulations/guidelines prepared by
FoR itself in all the participant States in a time bound manner. The
Committee had desired that the FoR should meet more frequently.
They had also recommended that the SERCs should be given due
autonomy as envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003 enabling them
to discharge their mandated duties effectively without any pressure
from respective State Governments.

11
13. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply stated as
under:—
“Ministry of Power made a reference to the Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity raising the issues of tariff revisions and tariff adequacy
and Appellate Tribunal of Electricity (APTEL) in its judgment dated
11th November, 2011 has inter alia ruled that fuel and power
purchase cost is a major expense of the distribution company which
is uncontrollable. Every State Commission must have in place
mechanism for fuel and power purchase cost in terms of Section
62(4) of the Act. The fuel and power purchase cost adjustment
should preferably be on monthly basis on the lines of the Central
Commission’s Regulations for the generating companies but in no
case exceeding a quarter. Any State Commission which does not
already have such formula/mechanism in place must within
6 months of the date of this order must put in place such formula/
mechanism. The Ministry has also requested all the State
Governments to take necessary action accordingly.
FoR provides a platform for the regulators at the Centre and State
level to exchange ideas and best practices. The frequency of meeting
of the Forum has been increasing continuously. In the last two
years the Forum has held meetings on an average every two
months. In FY 2012-13, the Forum has already held 4 meetings in
the first six months. A detailed account of meetings held in the
last five years is presented in the table below:—
Financial Year No. of Meetings
2008-09 5
2009-10 5
2010-11 6
2011-12 6
2012-13 4
Issues of importance facing the sector (at inter-state level or intra-
state level) are discussed and consensus is evolved in FoR. In
order to encourage uniformity of regulations among SERCs, the
Forum has evolved several Model Regulations. These help bring
regulatory certainty in the sector. Some of the important Model
Regulations are mentioned below:
• Model Regulations for Multi Year Distribution Tariff.
• Model Regulations for Protection of Consumer Interest.
• Model Terms and Conditions of Intra-State Open Access
Regulations.

12
• Model DSM Regulation for SERCs.
• Model Regulation for SERCs for Renewable Energy
Certificate (REC) Framework.
• Model Regulation on Standards of Performance for
Distribution Licensees.
• Model Supply Code.
A brief account of some of the initiatives/decisions of the Forum
is as follows:—
•T ariff revision and tariff adequacy are the primary issues
with respect to the financial viability of Distribution
companies. The financial viability of State Distribution has
been deliberated at length in various meeting of FoR. In
this regard the Forum of Regulator conducted a study—
Assessment of Financial viability of Discoms which analysed
the tariff orders of various State Commissions and the
reasons for increasing revenue gap in State utilities.
• The detailed study carried out for ten States revealed that
the revenue gap of utilities has been increasing due to non-
revision of tariff, absence of true-up mechanism, shortfall
or delay in payment of subsidy by the State Governments
and disallowance of the legitimate cost in tariff. Based on
the diagnosis of the problems facing the distribution sector,
the Forum evolved consensus on the need for taking
corrective measures to restore the health of this critical
element of distribution of electricity. Consequently, the
Forum evolved Model Tariff Regulations to address the
issues revealed by the ten State study.
• The proposal for inclusion of additional Unscheduled
Interchange (UI) charge imposed on the utilities under
CERC’s UI Regulation for overdrawal during the time blocks
when frequency was below 49.2 Hz was discussed by the
Forum. It was decided that the SERCs should not allow the
same in the Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR).
• Another significant achievement of the Forum in renewable
energy sector was in terms of evolution of the Renewable
Energy Certificate (REC) mechanism.
• The Forum also deliberated and evolved consensus on
measures for encouraging Demand Side Management and
Energy Efficiency (DSM & EE). The Forum endorsed the
proposal from the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) for
regulated Multi-State DSM Programme.

13
•Y et another initiative of the Forum was on the development
of benchmark capital cost for distribution.
• The Forum has also submitted its proposal on amendments
to Electricity Act, 2003 after evolving consensus on various
issues which is under examination by the Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of Chairperson, Central
Electricity Authority.
Further, Ministry of Power has also written to the State
Governments to peruse the model regulations on ‘Terms &
Conditions on Intra-State Open Access’ and ‘Model Tariff
Regulations’ framed by the Forum of Regulators and take necessary
action for notification of regulations on similar lines by the State
Regulatory Commission.
From the number of meeting and action taken by FoR as brought
out above it is inferred that FoR has successfully performed their
functions as per the mandate given in the Electricity Act. Central
Government has also supplemented and forwarded the
recommendations/model of FoR from time to time to States. This
has helped in adoption of enabling regulations by SERCs.
As regards granting more powers to FoR, it is brought out that
the powers and responsibilities of the statutory authorities have
been appropriately balanced in the Act whereas, the SERCs and
CERC have been made accountable to State Legislatures/Parliament
through the process of laying of Annual Report, regulations and
are subject to Questions/Detailed examination by Committee etc.,
no such mechanism for accountability for FoR has been provided.
In view of the same, granting powers to FoR without any
accountability may not be desirable and may also disturb the
existing framework.
14. In regard to recommendation of the Committee for providing
teeth to the Forum of Regulators to make it more effective in
enforcing the model regulations/guidelines prepared by FoR, the
Committee find Ministry’s action taken reply contradictory. On the
one hand the Ministry has stated that the Forum has successfully
performed their functions which has led to adoption of enabling
regulations by SERCs while on the other hand they have disagreed
to the idea of providing more power to FoR due to apprehension
of resultant power and responsibility imbalance. However, the
Committee are happy to note that the frequency of the meetings of
FoR has increased in the recent years which shows its growing
relevance. Taking into account the composition of the FoR which
include Chairperson of CERC and Chairpersons of SERCs and the

14
purpose of its formation viz. to provide a platform for the exchange
of ideas and best practices, the Committee find it hard to believe
that it will not be prudent to provide more resources and power to
this set up — which has so far proved useful in not only formulation
of model regulations but also in adoption of the same by the States.
It is a platform where the issues can be discussed and consensus
among various States can be arrived, more so when CERC does not
have power to enforce the Model Regulations in States and the due
autonomy of SERCs has yet to be ensured. In view of this the
Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation of providing
more resources and power to FoR.
The Committee are unhappy to find that the Ministry’s action
taken reply is silent about Committee’s recommendation for giving
due autonomy to the SERCs as envisaged under the Electricity Act,
2003. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
every efforts should be made to provide due autonomy of the SERCs
so that they can discharge their assigned functions of regulating
the Sector impartially without facing any pressure from State
Governments.
C. Grid Discipline
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
15. The Committee had noted that the Electricity Act, 2003 has
entrusted CERC the responsibility of regulating Inter-State Transmission
System and also notifying Grid Code for smooth conveyance of
electricity across States. In discharge of this responsibility CERC issued
the revised Regulation on Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) in April,
2006. IEGC brings together a single set of technical rules, encompassing
all the utilities connected to or using the Inter-State Transmission
System. The Committee had further noted that Unscheduled
Interchange (UI) charges are imposed when a generator generates less
or beneficiary overdraws power than the schedule thereby decreasing
the normal frequency of 50Hz. The Committee find that though this
mechanism has been helpful in containing the problem of UI to some
extent but the scrutiny by the Committee of the data as provided by
the CERC regarding grid frequency leaves much to be desired. The
minimum frequency of Grid has dropped even below 49 Hz during
all the three years  i.e. 2009-10 to 2011-12 putting the smooth functioning
of the Grid at stake. The scrutiny of the Committee had revealed that
UI charges for the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative value
of Rs. 74,181 crore which itself indicates to the degree of problem of
Unscheduled Interchange and misuse of the mechanism. The UI
charges system has perhaps failed to enforce the desired grid discipline
as it is found to be an easy alternative of short term electricity trading

15
by overdrawing power from the grid by Discoms at the cost of lesser
power supply to the actual beneficiary and also resulting in lowering
of frequency endangering the safety of the grid. The Committee had
also noticed that there is no uniformity in realization of UI charges
due to several reasons. The Committee, therefore, had recommended
that necessary changes may be effected in Indian Electricity Grid Code
(IEGC)/and the UI charges/penalty should be increased to the extent
that it effectively deter Discoms/Generators from Unscheduled
Interchange. For repeated offences of overdrawing and putting the
grid safety at risk, penal provisions, apart from hefty financial penalty,
should be made harsh enough to pose as deterrence. They had desired
that required amendments to provide more authority to CERC/FoR
for effective realization of financial penalty imposed for the offenses
should also be made in the regulation. Simultaneously, the Committee
had also recommended the Government to explore the possibility of
ancillary market for the purpose of ensuring strict grid discipline.
16. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply stated as
under:—
“In order to ensure better grid discipline, the IEGC and UI
Regulations have been amended by CERC and the operating
frequency band has been narrowed down from 49.5-50.2 Hz to
49.7-50.2 Hz. The CERC (Indian Electricity Grid Code) (First
Amendment) Regulations, 2012 and CERC (Unscheduled
Interchange Charges and related matters) (Second Amendment)
Regulations, 2012 have become effective from 00 hours of 17th
September, 2012.
Regarding recommendation for increase in penalty to ensure grid
discipline, it is to state that implementation of the above provision
itself would also lead to enhancement in penalty for overdrawal
by the States at grid-frequency below 49.7 Hz. This apart, CERC
has powers to impose penalty for grid indiscipline in the inter-
State power system under sections 29 and 143 of the Electricity
Act, 2003. CERC is also empowered to impose penalty under
section 142 for violation of provisions of the Act, Rules or
Regulations made thereunder, or any direction issued by the
Commission. The amount of penalty mentioned in the Act, does
not appear to be deterring one and it is felt that even multiples
of that penalty may not make much difference as long as it is
imposed upon the defaulting organisation. However, if the penalty
is imposed upon the head of the organisation in the individual
capacity for recovery from his own pocket, it is expected to make
the difference.

16
As regards realisation of the financial penalties if not paid,
section 170 of the Act already has the provision for recovery of
the penalty in the same manner as recovery of arrear of land
revenue. This section also needs revisit as it is also not easily
implementable.
Many times the commercial penalty etc. does not serve the purpose
of sufficient deterrent against grid indiscipline. In this case physical
measures of reducing/stopping supply to defaulting utility from
grid may be used as effective tool. In this direction, CERC in its
order dated 17.08.2012 directed NRLDC to identify feeders, in
consultation with CEA, CTU and STUs/SLDCs, at higher voltage
level under control of agency other than STUs, which can be
opened in case of over drawal by a State and submit the details
by 30.09.2012. This is under finalization by NRLDC. Similar exercise
could be undertaken by other regions also.
Regarding opinion of the Standing Committee on Energy that UI
system has perhaps failed to enforce the desired grid discipline,
the Enquiry Committee on Grid Disturbances of 30th & 31st July,
2012 has also in its report recommended review of UI mechanism
in view of its impact on these grid disturbances. It has been further
recommended that frequency control through UI may be phased
out in a time bound manner and Generation reserves/Ancillary
services be used for frequency control. Appropriate regulatory
mechanism needs to be put in place for this purpose. POSOCO
had filed Petition No. 351/2010 on 01.12.2010 for introduction of
Frequency Support Ancillary Service in Indian Electricity Market.
Ancillary Services implied in relation to power system (or grid)
operation, the services necessary to support the power system (or
grid) grid operation in maintaining power quality, reliability and
security of the grid. The Commission had initiated separate action
on the question of introduction of Frequency Support Ancillary
Service by placing it before the Central Advisory Committee
meeting on 14.3.2012. On the recommendations of the CAC, the
Commission is in the process of framing the regulations. In view
of the said developments, POSOCO had withdrawn its petition
during the hearing on 10.7.2012. As regards the progress of the
regulation on Ancillary Service, the Commission had approved the
basic framework of the regulation. The draft regulation is under
preparation and would be placed in the public domain shortly for
inviting public comments/suggestions/objections. The regulation
on Ancillary Services will be notified after following the due
process. The petition (No. 208/MP/2012) filed by POSOCO on
7th September, 2012 related to amendment to relevant provisions
of CERC (UI) Regulations, 2009. The Commission while disposing

17
of the said petition vide order dated 05.12.2012 directed initiation
of the process of amendment to UI Regulations and permitted
POSOCO to submit further necessary information in furtherance
of the proposal. The draft amendment to UI Regulations is under
consideration of the Commission.
As regards the imposition of commensurate financial penalty and
its realization, there is a need to address the limitations of penal
powers available with the regulators under section 142 of the Act.
In this regard, the proposals for amendment in Section 142 & 146
related to punishment for non-compliance of directions by
Appropriate Commission and other provisions is under
consideration of the Committee constituted under the Chairperson,
Central Electricity Authority on the proposed amendments in the
Electricity Act, 2003.
Further, it may be mentioned that in our country, though there is
perennial shortage of power, some generation capacity, at times,
remains unrequisitioned. By introducing frequency support ancillary
services, this undispatched capacity can be harnessed and it can
be brought into the grid to mitigate shortage. The payment for
this additional power may be made by overdrawing States. This
in turn would bring reliability and security in grid. Introduction
of ancillary service may reduce dependence on UI which should
be resorted to only as a last mile imbalance settlement mechanism.
The CERC has initiated steps towards introduction of ancillary
market which is required for balancing power and grid security.
While the underlying theme remains reliability and security of
grid, the ancillary services will help harness the untapped
generation capacity, mitigate load shedding, and address
transmission congestion in a limited way. It will also supplement
the need arising out of variability of renewable energy sources
like wind and solar.”
17. The Committee, on finding the misuse of UI mechanism
and its failure in deterring the nuisance of overdrawal by the
Utilities, had recommended to effect changes in IEGC and increase
the amount of penalty for the defaulters. The Ministry in their
reply have stated that operating frequency band has been narrowed
down from 49.5-50.2 Hz to 49.7-50.2 Hz w.e.f. 17th September, 2012.
However, in regard to recommendation of raising the penalty amount
which will consequently be increased due to narrowing of frequency
band, they have added that the amount of penalty does not appear
to be deterring one and it is felt that even multiples of that penalty
may not make much difference as long as it is imposed upon the
defaulting organization. However, if the penalty is imposed upon
the head of the organization in the individual capacity for recovery

18
from his own pocket, it is expected to make the difference. Further,
in regard the recommendation of providing more authority to CERC/
FoR for realization of financial penalty imposed, it has been stated
that Section 170 of the Act, which has the provision for recovery of
the penalty in the same manner as recovery of arrear of land
revenue, needs revisit as it is not easily implementable. The
intention of the Committee in their recommendation was to create
strong deterrence to prevent the utilities to overdraw power. It is
for the Government to decide the ways and means to implement
the recommendation of the Committee in letter and spirit. The
Committee are in agreement with the methods suggested by the
Government to make the UI mechanism more effective. However,
they would have appreciated had the Government instead of mere
suggesting these methods to the Committee, had enumerated the
efforts made to implement the same. The Committee expect that
the Government will expedite the implementation of the suggested
measures and will apprise the Committee about the amendments/
changes in the code/rules governing the UI mechanism to curb the
problem of overdrawl by the utilities.
Further, in regard to the recommendation of the Committee to
explore the possibility of ancillary market for the purpose of
ensuring strict grid discipline, the Ministry have stated that the
CERC has initiated steps towards introduction of ancillary market.
The Committee are not satisfied with the curt reply of the Ministry
as no details regarding steps taken by the CERC have been
furnished. Nonetheless, the Committee would be happy if the said
steps lead to positive outcome in the sector. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the development made in this regard at the
time of final action taken statement.
D. Trading of Electricity
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
18. The Committee had noted that Electricity Act, 2003 has
recognized the transaction involving purchase and sale of electricity
as a distinct licensed activity. Prior to that the electricity industry
recognized generation, transmission and supply as the three principal
activities. The SEBs/Discoms who have the obligation to provide
electricity to their consumers mainly rely on supplies from long-term
contracts. The responsibility of developing the market in electricity
has been vested with the Regulatory Commissions. CERC grants inter-
State trading licence, which is mandatory under the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003, to electricity traders and registration with the
power exchanges. The Committee were informed that there are two
Power Exchanges operational presently namely Indian Energy

19
Exchange and Power Exchange of India Limited. Regarding benefits
of electricity trading the Committee were apprised that the power
prices in the short term market have decreased in the last three years
and the volume has increased. Both Discoms and open access
consumers, who participate in this market actively, have benefited
due to the price decrease in this market. The Committee had expressed
their satisfaction over the fact that trading has helped bringing down
the power price. However, the Committee had felt that the electricity
trading in the country is still at rudimentary stage, characterized by
low volume and fewer numbers of transactions limited to specific
section of society and absence of favourable rule and regulations
attracting more traders to take part in the process. The Committee,
had therefore, recommended the Government/CERC to take steps in
framing such set of rules and regulations that should prove not only
conducive for electricity trading and invite more and more players in
this field to make it more competitive but also effectively prevent/
tackle any malpractices by big players of the Sector.
19. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply stated as
under:—
“The action taken for creating conducive environment for electricity
trading and invite more and more players in this field to make it
more competitive are given below—
1. The Central Commission has formulated specific regulations
to promote development of markets and trading in power
thereby creating fair, transparent and competitive market
for trading in electricity. The following regulations have been
notified in this regard:—
(a) Procedure, Terms and Conditions for grant of trading
licence and other related matters Regulations, 2009—To
issue licence to electricity traders, define the business
conduct and monitor their business.
(b) Fixation of Trading Margin Regulations, 2010—To
regulate the short term trading margin of electricity.
(c) Power Market Regulations, 2010—To issue licences to
power exchanges and the overall market structure and
definite market structure.
(d) Open Access in inter-State Transmission Regulations,
2008—To provide open access to distribution companies
generators and large consumers to power efficiently.
2. The Commission has created a Market Monitor Cell (MMC)
under the Economics and Power Markets division for market

20
oversight and market surveillance. The MMC which
regularly monitors inter-State trading undertaken by
electricity traders and the transactions in the power
exchange. All transactions undertaken by traders and power
exchange are reported to the MMC. Monthly market reports
are published by the MMC for information dissemination
purpose.
3. Further steps being taken to prevent malpractices:—
The Commission has recently amended the grant of trading
licence regulations and included non-serious and serious
category of offences depending on the gravity of the
violation. Penalties commensurate with the gravity of the
violation have been added. These will act as appropriate
deterrents on malpractice, if any, to ensure the strict
compliance by market participants. Penalty clauses like
debarring a trader from trading for a certain period, etc.,
have been introduced. Further, the Commission is in the
process of formulating regulations on prevention of market
dominance by market player defined under Section 60 of
EA 2003. This will help prevent abuse of dominant position
or any action which is anti-competitive.
Power markets in India are growing at a rapid pace. The
nature of the participants is varied with divergent interests
and the complexity of transactions is increasing. The market
oversight and surveillance will be one of the key focus
areas of the Central Commission to ensure that markets
remain fair and competitive.”
20. The Committee note that the Ministry had taken a series of
actions with a view to create conducive environment for electricity
trading and to make it more competitive by inviting more and more
players to join the foray. This inter alia included framing of
Procedure, Terms and Conditions for grant of trading licence and
other related matters Regulation, 2009, Fixation of Trading Margin
Regulation, 2009, Power Market Regulation, 2010 and Open Access
in inter-State transmission regulation, 2008. The Committee would
like the Government to ensure implementation of these regulations
to achieve the stated objectives. The Committee have also been
informed that for preventing malpractices and market dominance,
efforts are underway to formulate regulation with a view to prevent
abuse of dominant position or any action which is anti-competitive.
Admittedly, the nature of participants in the market is varied with
divergent interests and the complexity of transactions is increasing

21
due to rapid power market expansion in the country. The Committee,
therefore, again emphasize that more effective regulations should
be formulated so as to create conducive atmosphere for healthy
competition in the power sector.
E. Promotion of Renewable Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
21. The Committee had noted that section 86(1)(e) of the Electricity
Act mandates the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions to promote,
inter alia , generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy
by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and
sale of electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of
electricity from such sources, a percentage of the total consumption
of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee. The Committee
were informed that a number of SERCs have already specified such
percentage of the electricity to be procured in the area of a distribution
licensee and have also notified cost plus tariff for different technologies
of renewable energy exploitation. However, the Committee had found
that the level of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO), i.e. the
percentage of electricity to be procured from such sources varies
significantly from State to State. A few States like Tamil Nadu and
Karnataka have already achieved a RPO level of more than 10%, but
there are number of States which have not even touched RPO level
of 2%. Further, the Committee were informed that though Delhi
Electricity Regulatory Commission has prescribed two per cent but
actually Delhi is not using any green energy. To overcome the issue
of mismatch between availability of RE Resources in a State and the
requirement of the obligated entities to meet the Renewable Purchase
Obligation (RPO), the Secretary of CERC stated that they have come
up with a mechanism of renewable energy certificates under which
States endowed with abundant renewable energy potential generates
more power than required under RPO and can sell the certificate of
excess generation to States bereft of renewable energy source so that
they can fulfil their RPO. The Committee while endorsing this concept
felt that it is a step in the right direction to promote the optimum
utilization of renewable energy as it incentivises the production of
energy from renewable sources and will encourage the endowed States
to fully utilize their renewable sources. The Committee, had therefore,
recommended that RPO should be fixed uniformly for each State at
7% for the year 2012 and thereby increasing 1% every year to reach
15% in year 2020 as envisaged under National Action Plan on Climate
Change (NAPCC) in year 2008. The Committee also expected that the
Government will take sincere and prompt action in this regard under
their intimation.

22
22. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply stated as
under:—
“The responsibility of promoting cogeneration and generation of
electricity from renewable sources of energy has been entrusted on
the Appropriate Commission in section 61 and in particular to the
State commissions under section 86(1)(e) of the Electricity Act, 2003.
Pursuant to this provision of the act, the tariff policy stipulates
that the Appropriate Commission shall fix minimum percentage of
purchase of power from such sources taking into account the
availability of renewable resources in the region and its impact on
the retail tariff. Accordingly, almost all State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions (SERCs)/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(JERCs) have specified the Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO)
for their licensee distribution companies. Specified RPO varies
across the States.
In order to accelerate the large-scale deployment of renewable
energy, the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
envisages dynamic renewable purchase obligation target of 5% at
national level for 2010 with annual increase in trajectory over long
term so as to reach around 15% RPO target by 2020 at national
level.
The Ministry of Power also amended the Para 6.4(1) of Tariff Policy
which inter alia states that purchase of energy from non-
conventional sources of energy should take place more or less in
the same proportion in different States and for achieving this
objective in the current scenario of large availability of such
resources only in certain part of the country, an appropriate
mechanism such as Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) would need
to be evolved.
The Tariff Policy was amended on 20.1.2011 for fixing a minimum
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a
distribution licensee from solar energy in accordance with the
National Solar Mission strategy. The minimum percentage for
purchase of solar energy will go up to 0.25% by the end of 2012-
2013 and further up to 3% by 2022.
In this connection in order to bring in an element of harmony in
approach, the FOR had, in 2010, carried out a study to assess the
feasible renewable energy potential in different States to enable
setting the possible RPO trajectories and its likely impact on
consumer tariff. This study had revealed that to achieve the NAPCC
suggested target, availability of renewable energy capacity would

23
not be a constraint to meet the National Action Plan on Climate
Change (NAPCC) target of 10% by 2015 and around 45000 MW
RE generation capacities will be required. Further study report
revealed that the pan India incremental impact of increasing RPO
by a uniform rate of 1.2% every year from the present level of 4%
would not be substantial and the incremental impact was estimated
to be less than 1.5 paise per unit which reduces to almost zero in
2015. Almost 25000 MW capacities are required to be added in the
next 4 years to achieve 10% target as suggested by NAPCC by
FY 2015, in accordance with the above referred study. In June,
2012 another study was carried out by FOR for suggesting RPO
trajectories based on resource assessment for the period from 2012
to 2017.
Further, in order to accelerate development of Renewable Energy
through legislative & policy changes and to evolve competitive
bidding guidelines for procurement of power from renewable
energy by distribution licensees under section 63 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 and also to suggest measures for addressing the issues
relating to connectivity and evacuation infrastructure for large scale
deployment of renewable energy, a Committee has been constituted
in the Ministry of Power.
The recommendation of the Committee regarding prescribing
uniform RPO in line with the NAPCC will be examined for further
action in this regard in consultation with States as the same is
likely to have financial implications on the distribution utilities.”
23. With a view to incentivize the production of energy from
renewable sources and encourage the endowed States to fully utilize
their renewable sources, The Committee had recommended that
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) should be fixed uniformly
for each State at 7% for the year 2012 and thereby increasing it 1%
every year to reach 15% in year 2020. The Ministry in their action
taken reply have stated that the recommendation of the Committee
regarding prescribing uniform RPO in line with the NAPCC will
be examined for further action in consultation with States as the
same is likely to have financial implications on the distribution
utilities. However, they have also stated that the study done by FoR
in 2010 had revealed that to achieve the National Action Plan on
Climate Change (NAPCC) suggested target of increasing share of
renewable energy to 10% by 2015, availability of renewable energy
capacity would not be a constraint to meet as around 45,000 MW
RE generation capacities will be required. Further, study report
revealed that the pan India incremental impact of increasing RPO

24
by a uniform rate of 1.2% every year from the present level of 4%
would not be substantial and the incremental impact was estimated
to be less than 1.5 paisa per unit which will reduce to almost zero
in 2015. Further, a fresh study was done in 2012 by FoR and the
incremental impact of varying levels of RPO on the Power Purchase
Cost (PPC) has been analyzed for each State as well as at the pan
India level. It has been found that the incremental impact on the
Power Purchase Cost (PPC) is only 1.0 paisa per unit for the first
year, which gradually decreases to negative incremental impact to
the extent of 0.5 paisa per unit in FY 2017. In view of the above it
is clear that neither generation capacity nor cost implication is major
constraint in increasing RPO. The Committee strongly believe that
increasing RPO will incentivize the utilization of renewable energy
which will motivate the endowed State to optimally utilize the RE
potential as the same will not only help in meeting their mandatory
RPO but also they can sell the excess renewable energy produced
to other States having less or no renewable energy potential to
fulfil the RPO. The Committee believe that this way the participation
of all the States, directly or indirectly in optimal development of
renewable energy potential available in the country, can be ensured.
The Committee, however, are surprised to note that even though
there is hardly any major barrier in the implementation of increased
RPO, the Ministry has neither initiated any step to actualize it nor
furnished the details of the roadmap to implement it in future. The
Committee find the reply of the Government on this important issue
rather routine and the same is not acceptable to the Committee. It
appears that after the presentations of the Report the issue has not
even been discussed in FoR and the Ministry has merely stated
that the recommendation will be examined. The Committee expects
that Government action is prompt and conclusive. As huge
renewable energy capacities are lying unutilized in some pockets/
States across the Country, it becomes imperative that all the States
collectively should share the responsibility of developing Renewable
Energy sources in the Country. The Committee believe that the
provision to increase RPO and making it uniform and mandatory,
provides a solution to the problem of economic un-viability of
renewable energy due to its high cost as the same could be shared
by all the States thereby making the consequent increase in power
cost negligible. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Government to expedite this matter by placing it before Forum of
Regulators for discussion and its subsequent implementation.
Needless to emphasize the Government would continue to pursue
the matter with State Governments at appropriate levels.

25
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Mandate vis-à-vis Performance of CERC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that the Electricity Act 2003 has given the
CERC a renewed mandate vis-à-vis its status emanating from
Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. After 2003, it was expected to make
the power sector modern, vibrant efficient, responsive and productive.
To achieve this the Commission has been entrusted with the
responsibilities which among others include tariff determination,
regulating interstate transmission and grid code, regulating market
development, licensing, adjudication and giving advice to the
Government. These objectives are sought to be achieved by notifying
regulations, passing orders and tendering policy advices to the
Government of India. The Mission Statement of the Commission
intends to promote competition, efficiency and economy in bulk power
market, improve the quality of supply, promotes investment and to
advice the Government on the removal of institutional barriers to
bridge the demand supply gap and foster the interest of the
consumers. The Committee observe that despite given mandate for
transforming the power sector, CERC has done precious little in
discharge of its duties to achieve the objectives. The duties assigned
in principle, are efficacious to shape and revive the sagging sector
into its new and ideal incarnation making it efficient, economic,
energized and ebullient. However, it is regretted that it is still a
controlled, traditional and non-resilient labyrinth confounding the
consumers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
CERC, adopting the true spirit of the Electricity Act 2003 must shed
its inhibition, laid back approach and be in the forefront of heralding
a new era in the Power Sector. The importance this Sector hold to the
development of this Country, its economy, people, agriculture, industry
etc. cannot be overemphasized and hence it dwells more on CERC to
function in an efficient and responsive manner. The Commission cannot
ignore the fact that while developing the Sector in a competitive
manner it has to protect the large sections of the society and hence
its action should be guided not only by the letter and spirit of the
Act but also by the invisible yet important element of the welfare of
the poor of the Country.

26
Reply of the Government
The Electricity Act, 2003 assigns distinct functions and
responsibilities to various organizations and entities. The Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) has been broadly assigned
the following functions and responsibilities within the Electricity Act,
2003:—
(a) Regulation of tariff of Generating Stations owned or
controlled by the Central Government, generating stations
having composite scheme for generation and supply of
electricity to the Distribution Companies in more than one
State and the determination of tariff for Inter-State
transmission of electricity.
(b) Regulation of Inter-State transmission of electricity.
(c) Specifying the grid code and maintenance of grid discipline.
(d) Issue Inter-State transmission and Inter-State trading license.
(e) Promotion of market in power.
(f) Facilitation of non-discriminatory open access in Inter-State
transmission system through appropriate regulations.
(g) Advice to the Central Government on the matters of
formulation of policies, promotion of competition, promotion
of investment, efficiency and economy in activities of the
electricity industry and any other matter referred to the
Commission.
(h) Adjudication of disputes involving generating companies
and Inter-State transmission licensees who fall within the
jurisdiction of the Commission.
By virtue of the nature of functions being discharged by the
Central Commission, it does not have the opportunity to directly deal
with the end consumers.
Nevertheless, it is the consistent endeavour of the Central
Commission to ensure that various steps and actions taken by the
Commission in discharge of its statutory functions and responsibilities
result in benefit to the power sector, the economy and the end
consumers. The Central Commission in discharge of its responsibilities
balances the interests of the consumers and the investors.

27
Consumer Interest
It has been a constant endeavour of the Commission to enhance
power supply by improving availability of generating plants and
transmission system for the benefit of the end consumers. The
Commission induces efficiency in operation of the power plants by
tightening the operating norms for the power plants in its tariff
regulations. Benefits of efficiency gains were shared with buyers and
in turn with the end consumers in every successive control period of
tariff regulations. The Commission has provided alternatives to procure
power for the consumers through its efforts on development of power
market and facilitating open access. The Commission regulates inter-
state transmission grid for better operation and to improve reliability.
Investment Promotion
The Electricity Act, 2003 and tariff policy both have assigned the
responsibility to the Commission for development of market in
electricity. Adequacy of supply and promotion of investment in the
sector serve consumer interests in the long run. One of the thrust
areas for the Commission, to improve power availability , is investment
promotion in the power market. For the development of power market
the Commission has provided enabling framework for market access
to the generators. By facilitating establishment of power exchanges in
India, the Commission has provided multiple alternatives to the
generators to sell power,  i.e., either directly to the consumers or
through traders or through power exchange. The Central Commission
has been making efforts to facilitate investment in transmission sector,
with implementation of Point of Connection (PoC) mechanism being
the latest initiative in this direction.
The Commission realizes the importance of development of
renewable sector for rural consumers and has been promoting green
energy for both grid connected and off grid projects. Apart from
preferential tariffs, a market based instrument viz., Renewable Energy
Certificate (REC) was introduced by the Commission in coordination
with the Forum of Regulators. With this mechanism in place, the
renewable energy generators now have another avenue for sale of
power and at the same time the obligated entities have another option
to meet their renewable purchase obligation. The Commission has
also sought to address the issues around grid integration of the
renewables by enabling connectivity to the CTU network for hydro
generating stations and renewable energy source of 50 MW and above.

28
CERC is also responsible for oversight of the market and grid
security. Introduction of UI mechanism and Grid Code has improved
grid discipline.
The Commission understands its responsibility for Indian Power
Sector and in the national interest or on recognizing any impediment
in implementation of a concept such as open access, the Commission
has time and again advised Central Government on a number of
issues which have been duly examined and acted upon appropriately.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee find that there is shortage of adequate manpower
in the Commission. As of now the sanctioned staff strength of CERC
is 80 only and almost all of these post are required to be filled up
through deputation from other Government Departments. The pay
structure, service conditions and other amenities available to CERC
employees are also discouraging. Certain benefits which are available
to the Central Government employees are denied to the officials of
the CERC. These benefits among others include pensions, CGHS
facilities and Government accommodations etc. Independent regulation
is an emerging concept and to make it a reality adequate manpower
with required qualification and skill have to be arranged for making
CERC more dynamic and result oriented. The certainty of service
with career progression on a regular basis is an essential motivating
factor in any organization to succeed. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the personnel policy of the organization
should be well laid down having its own cadre with adequate
promotional prospects and better amenities to the officials of the
Commission corresponding to the job profile to ensure the high
standards of professional approach and dedication in the
accomplishment of the task cut out for the Commission. Needless to
emphasize, deputation should be an exception rather than the main
source of meeting man power needs of CERC.
Reply of the Government
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) was set
up by the Government of India at New Delhi under the provisions of
the erstwhile Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. CERC is
recognized as the Central Commission under the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003 which repealed the Electricity Regulatory
Commission Act, 1998.

29
CERC has stated that since the inception of the Commission in
1999, the activities of the Commission have increased manifold. From
merely, a tariff setting mechanism, initially , the Electricity Act, 2003
enjoined upon the Commission various other functions. The
Commission had to come out with various regulations, not only
covering the terms and conditions of tariff but also other regulations
on licensing activities, Grid Code, Open Access regulations etc. the
subject of each of which has a wide range covering financial, technical,
regulatory, managerial, legal, commerce, economics and the like. This
calls for apart from discipline based knowledge, thorough
understanding of the complexity of power sector and its operations
as also the expectations of investors, customers and all other
stakeholders. This definitely calls for attracting the best talents which
can happen only if apart from job enrichment, the remuneration is
attractive and growth opportunities are provided.
The Government has been responsive to the difficulties faced by
CERC due to inadequate staff-strength. In October 2005, 20 additional
posts under various categories were created for the Commission. The
present sanctioned staff strength of CERC is 80. Further, Certain
restrictions imposed while creating the additional posts that some of
the posts should be filled up from CEA only on deputation, have
been removed by the Government in October, 2012 for the smooth
functioning of the Commission. Although deputation has been
prescribed as the method of recruitment in the Commission in terms
of the service regulations of the Officers and staff of the Commission,
there is provision in the service Regulations that the personnel engaged
by the Commission on deputation can get absorbed in the Commission
permanently. This gives the Commission the option of creating its
own cadre with efficient and suitable officers and staff. A number of
officers and staff have already got absorbed in the Commission
permanently in terms of the above provision.
CERC has stated that certain benefits like Pension, CGHS facility,
Govt. accommodation etc. available to Central Govt. Employees are
not available to CERC officials, it may be mentioned that even in the
case of Government servants who joined on or after 1.1.2004, the old
Pension Scheme has been replaced with the New Pension Scheme
(NPS) under which the employees and the employer contribute equally
towards pension fund. As per the CERC service regulations, provisions
of Pension/General Provident Fund as applicable to Central
Government servants of corresponding level are applicable to the staff
of CERC absorbed permanently. CGHS facilities are not available to
employees of regulatory bodies. However, in lieu of CGHS facilities,

30
Government had given approval for the Commission’s medical
regulations under which medical facilities are being availed by CERC
employees. Government accommodation is also not available to
employees of regulatory bodies. However, Government had also given
approval for the Commission’s regulations for availing leased
accommodation by the employees at a rent equivalent to two times
of the HRA admissible.
Ministry of Power has been responsive to the proposals of CERC,
including those relating to Staffing, and facilitated necessary approvals
in consultation with other concerned Ministries/Department with a
view to provide all possible assistance to the Commission in discharge
of its functions from time to time.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Forum of Regulators (FoR)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2003 empowers the
State/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs/JERCs) to fix
tariffs for consumers. The Act also stipulates under section 61 that
the SERCs while fixing the tariff should be guided by the factors
which inter-alia include that tariff progressively reflects the cost of
supply of electricity and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission. The Committee were
informed that Model Tariff Regulations have been formulated by
Forum of Regulators which inter -alia address the major issues
responsible for financial distress of the distribution companies. The
Model Tariff Regulations have been designed to arrive at a set of
uniform practices that the various State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions could adopt. The major objective of these model
regulations is to standardize the process of determination of tariff for
a distribution utility and which smoothens the cost transfer in retail
tariff appropriately. The Committee note that under section 131 of
Electricity Act 2003, it has been mandated to reorganize the State
Electricity Boards in the country to separate entities of Generation,
Transmission and Distribution segments with the purpose of making
them self sustaining. A study conducted by the Indian Institute of
Public Administration (IIPA) on the impact of reorganization of the
State Electricity Boards has revealed that despite some shortcomings,
the overall impact of restructuring has been positive and in the right

31
direction. The Committee have been informed that so far 18 SEBs
have been reorganized. Out of the remaining States, Bihar, Jharkhand
and Kerala are in the process of formulating schemes for reorganization
of their SEBs.
Against this backdrop the Committee note that over the years,
owing to factors such as very high Transmission and Distribution
losses, irrational tariffs and several shortcomings on the distribution
side, the financial health of the SEBs have deteriorated. Also the
13th Finance Commission has projected the losses of the SEBs, which
are now the Discoms, to the tune of Rs. 70,000 crore. The Secretary
of the Ministry of Power while explaining this situation stated that
there are State Commissions which have not rationalized tariff for
seven to eight years. All this has contributed to the State Electricity
Boards coming back to the situation which they were in 2001 and
probably getting even worse. The Committee are aghast to note the
critical financial situation of the State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/
Discoms. More surprisingly, the precarious financial positions of the
Discoms were known and need for rationalization of tariff was felt
for a very long time. Nonetheless, any concrete remedial efforts in
this regard have been delayed for reasons which are not known to
the Committee. The losses have been allowed to accumulate to the
extent that it cannot be cleared by the Discoms themselves. The
Committee are concerned that due to negligence and non-performance
of concerned organizations ultimately the common man has to bear
the brunt of these huge losses either in the form of increase in tariff
or taxes or surcharges. The Committee believe that delay in taking
corrective measures will only exacerbate the issue. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend the followings:
(i) Work related to reorganization of SEBs in remaining States
should be expedited as it is an important strategy in the
pursuit of reforms for encouraging competition, promoting
greater efficiency by streamlining operations of distribution,
transmission, generation and trading, while promoting
transparency and accountability.
(ii) FoR should ensure that adequate steps are taken by every
State’s Regulatory Commission and DISCOMS to rationalize
their tariff annually by taking into account all the aspects
including distribution losses and their management
inefficiency. The endeavour should be that the price of
inefficiency of DISCOMS in the form of distribution losses
should not be passed on to the common man in the form

32
of increase in tariff. Also a target should be fixed to reduce
the AT&C losses in a time bound manner failing which this
component should be dealt within a manner wherein
DISCOMs are made accountable for their inefficiency without
passing it on to the consumers.
(iii) Energy audit of each and every Discoms should be
mandatorily by third party, which should invariably be taken
into account for tariff rationalization purposes.
(iv) The Government, CERC and FOR should come up with
some innovative ideas to overcome the menace of huge
losses incurred by various SEBs, which in the view of the
Committee is nothing but the result of inefficiency, lack of
vision and will power of the Government on this issue.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the sincere
efforts taken by the Government/CERC/FoR in this regard .
Reply of the Government
The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, provided for creation of State
Electricity Boards (SEBs) to handle the power sector in each State.
Over the years, owing to factors such as very high Transmission &
Distribution losses, irrational tariffs and several shortcomings on the
distribution side, the financial health of the SEBs deteriorated.
Reorganization of SEBs was an important strategy in this pursuit
of reforms for encouraging competition and improving efficiency in
operation. Restructuring these boards is aimed at promoting greater
efficiency by streamlining operations of distribution, transmission,
generation and trading, while also promoting transparency and
accountability.
Under Section 131 of Electricity Act 2003, it has been mandated
to reorganize the State Electricity Boards in the country to separate
entities of Generation, Transmission and Distribution segments with
the purpose of making them self sustaining.
Ministry of Power has got conducted a study by the Indian
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) on the impact of
reorganization of the State Electricity Boards. The study concluded
that “despite some short coming, the overall impact of restructuring
has been positive and in the right direction”. The report given by
IIPA states that the following overall improvements have been noticed
in four States which have reorganized their SEBs (Andhra Pradesh,
Haryana, Karnataka and Odisha).
(i) Trend towards reducing AT&C losses.
(ii) Increased and more focused investments.

33
(iii) Capacity addition and strengthening of the power systems.
(iv) Localisation and reduction of inefficiencies.
(v) Improved customer care.
(vi) Progress in metering, billing and collection  etc.
(vii) Increased accountability of the Utilities.
(viii) Establishment of Regulatory Mechanism.
(ix) Empowerment of consumers.
(x) Reporting and reviewing of performance of the Utilities on
a regular basis.
So far 19 numbers of SEBs have been reorganized. The remaining
States of Jharkhand and Kerala are in the process of formulating
schemes for reorganization of their SEBs. Time to time, correspondences
and follow up is being taken up with the States who have not yet
reorganized their SEBs. States are urged to make sincere efforts for
development of the Power Sector on various platforms including Power
Minister Conference.
It may, however, be emphasized that it is not enough to expedite
the work related to reorganization of SEBs in remaining States. It is
equally important that the single buyer model, which is continuing in
some of the reorganized SEBs, should also be abolished. Single buyer
model – that is, the practice of an intermediary agency procuring
power on behalf of the distribution utilities and allocating differential
power purchase cost - distorts competition. Even after reorganization
of SEBs, the restructured entities in States continue to operate under
an umbrella holding company.
The single buyer model camouflages inefficiency of discoms and
perpetuates cross-subsidisation between discoms. These are not only
undesirable but also against the letter and spirit of the Act. There is
an urgent need to engage with the States to persuade them to do
away with the single buyer model by assigning the existing PPAs
with the generators directly to the distribution companies, and
facilitating differential tariff based on efficiency of discoms. If need
be, necessary clarity to this aspect may also be brought through
amendment to the Act which is under examination of the Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of CEA.
Forum of Regulators (FoR) carried out a study “Tariff revision
assessment for financial viability of discoms” for 10 States in the
country. The study of the 10 States highlighted inter-alia the following

34
major issues responsible for financial distress of the distribution
companies:
•T imeliness of tariff determination process.
• Disallowance of legitimate costs.
• Fuel Purchase Adjustment.
• Untreated gap/Regulatory Assets.
The findings of the study were used as reference points for
evolving Model Tariff Regulations. The Model Tariff Regulations
address each of the major issues revealed by the study of the 10
States. The model regulations provide for SERCs to issue suo-motu
tariff order in case of delay/non submission of tariff application. The
Model regulations also propose to conduct year-long studies for correct
estimation of metered sales and un-metered sales. Based on the
assessment of metered and unmetered sales, the Commission shall
update existing baseline of distribution losses and approve circle-wise
distribution loss reduction targets. On the basis of circlewise
distribution loss, circle-wise differential tariff by way of separate and
distinct distribution loss surcharge is proposed to be implemented
under the Model Regulations. Circle-wise differential tariff shall
mobilize support/push from the consumers on the distribution licensee
to drive loss reduction. The responsibility primarily now rests with
the State Regulators to take the recommendations forward and
implement Model Tariff Regulations in their respective States.
Highlighting the facts in the study report of FoR, Ministry of
Power made a reference to the Appellate Tribunal raising the issues
of tariff revisions and tariff adequacy and Appellate Tribunal of
Electricity (APTEL) in its judgment dated 11th November, 2011 has
inter-alia ruled that fuel and power purchase cost is a major expense
of the distribution company which is uncontrollable. Every State
Commission must have in place mechanism for fuel and power
purchase cost in terms of Section 62(4) of the Act. The fuel and power
purchase cost adjustment should preferably be on monthly basis on
the lines of the Central Commission’s Regulations for the generating
companies but in no case exceeding a quarter. Any State Commission
which does not already have such formula/mechanism in place must
within 6 months of the date of this order must put in place such
formula/mechanism. The Ministry has also requested all the State
Governments to take necessary action accordingly . Following APTEL’s
judgment OP No. 1 of 2011, 28 SERCs/JERCs have issued the tariff
order for retail supply for FY 2012-13.

35
As regards energy audit of discoms by third Party, it may be
stated that Para 8.2.1 (2) of Tariff Policy provides that third party
verification of energy audit results for different areas/localities could
be used to impose area/locality specific surcharge for greater ATC
loss levels and this in turn could generate local consensus for effective
action for better governance. Further, this Ministry has asked all the
SERCs to furnish the detailes of third party verification of energy
audit results for their tariff determination in their respective States.
Further, the Forum of Regulators constituted a Working Group on
“Loss Reduction Strategies” for detailed examination of issues around
reduction of distribution losses. The report finalized by the FoR based
on the inputs of the working group emphasizes that third party
verification of the technical and financial data submitted by the utility
is crucial, before such data is taken into account for determination of
tariff. Further, FoR in its report on Multi Year Tariff and Distribution
Margin has recommended that data on distribution loss levels should
be verified through a third party as envisaged in the Tariff Policy.
FoR has indicated that the services of accredited energy auditors and
academic institutions such as Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) and
other engineering colleges could be utilized for this.
It may be mentioned here that the distribution of power is the
responsibility of the Discoms. Central Government acts as a facilitator
in supplementing the efforts of States to provide power to consumers
in an improved manner. However, the steps taken by the Union
Government to improve distribution sector and to reduce the losses
of SEBs/power distribution companies of the country are given
below:—
R-APDRP
To reduce the AT&C losses in the country and to improve the
power distribution sector of state utilities, Government of India has
launched the Restructured-Accelerated Power Development and
Reforms Programme (R-APDRP) during 11th Plan period. The focus
of R-APDRP is on actual demonstrable performance by utilities in
terms of sustained AT&C loss reduction in the project areas. Projects
under the scheme are taken up in two parts in towns having
population more than 30,000 (10,000 for special category States) as
per census 2001. Part-A of the scheme is for establishing IT enabled
system for energy accounting/auditing and Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition (SCADA) for big cities (population: 4 lacs and Annual
Energy Input: 350 MU) whereas Part-B is for upgradation,
augmentation & strengthening of electrical infrastructure in project
towns.

36
So far, under R-APDRP , projects worth Rs. 32323.70 crores
(Part-A: Rs. 6638.79 crores covering 1402 towns and 63 SCADA projects
in 63 towns; Part-B: Rs. 25684.91 crores in 1132 towns) have already
been sanctioned.
Rating of Utilities
In order to enable a unified approach by Financial Institutions
(FIs)/Banks for funding State Distribution Utilities, Ministry of Power
has developed an integrated rating methodology for State Distribution
Utilities. The overall objective of the integrated rating methodology is
to devise a mechanism for incentivizing/disincentivising the
distribution utilities so as to improve their operational and financial
performance, enable regulatory compliance and influence respective
State Governments to fulfil commitments on subsidy, equity support
including transition funding support to achieve self-sustaining
operations.
Order of Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL)
Ministry of Power has requested “Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity” to issue directions under section 121 of the Electricity Act
to the State Regulatory Authorities to revise the tariff appropriately
(suo-motto, if required), in the interest of improving the financial health
and long term viability of electricity sector in general and distribution
utilities in particular.
The Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL) in its order dated
11th November, 2011 has issued directions to the State Commissions
with a view to improve the financial health of SEBs/Discoms and
ultimately help to deal with the mounting arrears of pending dues of
the distribution utilities, which inter alia include automatic fuel and
power purchase adjustment cost, suo-motto determination of tariff, if
petition is not filed by utility, annual truing up of accounts and no
reverse gap to be left uncovered by SERCs. The regulatory assets are
to be created only in extraordinary circumstances and to be liquidated
in maximum 3 years.
Model Tariff Guidelines
Forum of State Regulators and Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) have resolved to implement Model Tariff
Guidelines, which address issue of rationalization of tariff. FoR (Forum
of Regulators) has circulated Model Tariff Guidelines to SERCs, for
their adoptions. Now SERCs are required to adopt these tariff

37
guidelines and make regulation. Adoption of Model Tariff Guidelines
is a precondition for disbursement of loan by Power Finance
Corporation and Rural Electrification Corporation to utilities.
Financial Restructuring of State Distribution Companies
A scheme for Financial restructuring of State Owned Discoms has
been notified by the Government of India to enable the turnaround
of the State Discoms and ensure their long term viability. The scheme
contains measures to be taken by the State DISCOMS and State
Government for achieving financial turnaround by restructuring their
debt with support through a Transitional Finance Mechanism by
Central Government.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Tariff Regulation
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that prior to the Electricity Act 2003 there
was no concept of competitive bidding or tariff discovery through
competitive bidding. The Electricity Act, 2003 has brought in the
concept of tariff discovery through completive bidding process and
the Commission is required to adopt the tariff so discovered. Section
63 of the Act provides that the CERC has to adopt the tariff if such
tariff has been determined by the completive bidding process in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Central Government in
this regard. In response to Committee’s inquest whether any study
has been carried out to find out as to which category of tariff is
cheaper between the two i.e. tariff through competitive bidding or
through cost plus process, it was informed that in the year 2011 CERC
had carried out a study of 14 competitively bid power plants with
commercial date of operation between 2011 and 2014 comparing the
bids with cost plus approach and the prices under cost plus approach
were found higher in respect of 11 of the 14 projects. In 3 plants
(2 in Maharashtra and 1 in Madhya Pradesh) tariff for competitive
bids were found higher than the cost plus approach. It was concluded
that in general competitive bid can lead to lower tariff. The Committee
have also been apprised that “however, these were levelized prices
and actual payments over the years depends on bid structure
(particularly proportion of variable part in tariff) and how the
parameters really vary in future. While replying to a specific question
of the Committee whether 85% tie up of power through bidding will

38
not stall the process of development of thermal power projects by
private power developers, the Committee were informed that “the
provisions of 85% tie up of private power through competitive bidding
is to ensure availability of power to the distribution licensee at a
relatively cheaper rate in power shortage condition. The 85% tie up
of power would not stall the development of thermal power stations
by the project developers because by this, the developer would be
assured of the customer for his 85% output and balance 15% power
could be sold by him based upon prevailing power merchant rate.”
The Committee find that the exercise of tariff determination through
competitive bidding is not akin to reality . The comparison between
the two systems of tariff determination with the projects whose COD
are between 2011-14 with the running plants is nothing but chimera.
The justification of tariff discovered thorough competitive bidding
being lower in 11 plants is specious for the fact that despite tariff
being quoted for these plants none of these plants are operational,
neither there is any likelihood of them becoming operational as
scheduled. It is a near certainty that most of them will be mired with
the several issues including tariff for final decision or adjudication
before concrete action is taken for them becoming a reality. The
contention of the Ministry that 85% power tie-up will not stall the
development of the plants as it assures developers the market of
their product is also not sustainable on the ground that the situation
in the Country regarding availability of power is still far from the
satisfactory leading to scarcity and hence any prior tie-up of sale is
not going to reassure developers to keep pace of the plant as planned
particularly when they find the tariff uneconomical due to several
factors. The Committee as such are not averse to idea of competitive
bidding per se but definitively have inhibition about the shoddy
manner in which it has been done and projected thereafter. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that entire process of
competitive bidding for determination of tariff has not been tested on
the touchstone of the system and hence there is nothing to cheer
about this policy. It should be framed in such a way so as to
encompass the future variables also of the various constituents within
the policy otherwise it is not going to fructify as conceived and projects
attained through this process are highly unlikely to reach their logical
stage.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Power had issued Guidelines for determination
of tariff by bidding process for procurement of power by distribution
licensees under section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 on 19.1.2005. As
per these Guidelines the Standard Bidding Document were issued on
31st March, 2006.

39
The underlying idea was to attract private investments and
availability at reasonable rates to consumers in a fair, transparent and
competitive process based on an arrangement of legally enforceable
contract. As per the study carried out by CERC based upon 14 projects
had revealed that tariff under competitive bidding route in case of 12
projects is lower than the cost plus approach. The details of UMPP
projects awarded through competitive bidding route and the prices
discovered and adopted by CERC are as under:—
Project (L1-Bidder) Levellised Tariff
adopted (Rs./kWh)
Sasan UMPP Reliance Power Ltd. 1.19616
Mundra UMPP Tata Power Company Ltd. 2.26367
Krishnapatnam UMPP Reliance Power Ltd. 2.33296
Tilaya UMPP Reliance Power Ltd. 1.77040
As per information made available by CERC, presently following
petitions have been filed before the Central Commission in cases
involving Competitive Bidding:—
(1) Mundra UMPP of CGPL (Tata Power Limited) CGPL
(2) Mundra Power Plant of Adani Power Ltd.
(3) Krishnapatnam UMPP of CAPL (Reliance Energy Limited)
(4) Sasan UMPP of SPL (Reliance Energy Limited)
The Commission has not yet issued final orders on these Petitions.
Further, this Ministry received a number of references from various
stakeholders including private power producers regarding fuel
availability risk of domestic coal, price risk due to change in prices
of fuel in coal exporting countries, delay/denial in environment and
forest clearance pertaining to coal blocks and different options for
termination of projects etc. and seeking amendment in the Standard
Bidding Documents. To examine the references received from various
stakeholders including private power producers, the Ministry of Power
had constituted a Committee. The Committee had a number of
meetings and consultations with stakeholders including State
Governments, DISCOMS, developers, financial institutions and
concerned Ministries/Departments. Based on the decisions taken in
the various meetings/deliberations held with stakeholders, the Draft
Model Power Purchase Agreement (MPPA) was prepared and with

40
the approval of after approval of Hon’ble MoP , the same was circulated
on 7th September, 2012 for seeking comments stakeholders. Further,
an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) was also constituted under the
chairmanship of Secretary (Power) to consider the suggestions of
stakeholders and to fine-tune the document. The IMG has approved
the Standard Bidding Document in its meeting held on 11th December,
2012.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Grid Discipline/Transmission
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2003 has entrusted
CERC the responsibility of regulating Inter-State Transmission System
and also notifying Grid Code for smooth conveyance of electricity
across States. In discharge of this responsibility CERC issued the
revised Regulation on Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC) in April,
2006. IEGC brings together a single set of technical rules, encompassing
all the utilities connected to or using the Inter-State Transmission
System. The Committee further note that in respect of regulation for
Unscheduled Interchange (UI) the concept of Availability Based Tariff
(ABT) which primarily has two components, namely fixed cost and
variable cost has been introduced by the Commission. Under ABT a
generator is allowed to recover the fixed cost only if it is able to
make its capacity available for use, whereas, the energy charge is
recoverable as per the pre-committed schedule of supply. This
mechanism also provides for charges of Unscheduled Interchange (UI)
which are imposed when a generator generates less or beneficiary
overdraws power than the schedule thereby decreasing the normal
frequency of 50Hz. The Committee find that though this mechanism
has been helpful in containing the problem of UI to some extent but
the scrutiny by the Committee of the data as provided by the CERC
regarding grid frequency leaves much to be desired. The minimum
frequency of Grid has dropped even below 49Hz. during all the three
years i.e. 2009-10 to 2011-12 putting the smooth functioning of the
Grid at stake. The scrutiny of the Committee have revealed that UI
charges for the period 2002-03 to 2011-12 have cumulative value of
Rs. 74,181 crore which itself indicates to the degree of problem of
Unscheduled Interchange and misuse of the mechanism. The UI
charges system has perhaps failed to enforce the desired grid discipline
as it is found to be an easy alternative of short term electricity trading
by overdrawing power from the grid by DISCOMS at the cost of

41
lesser power supply to the actual beneficiary and also resulting in
lowering of frequency endangering the safety of the grid. This set up
also indicate to the possibility of gaming — an intentional mis-
declaration of declared capacity by any generating station or seller to
make an undue commercial gain through UI charges. The Committee
strongly feel that the safety and smooth functioning of the Grid is of
utmost importance so that the legitimate beneficiaries and generators
should not suffer due to malpractices indulged by some DISCOMS/
Generators. The Committee also notice that there is no uniformity in
realization of UI charges due to several reasons like stay granted by
the Court, petition for waiver of penalty, setting aside of penalty by
APTEL and also without any genuine reasons. Since 2005, 46 cases of
indiscipline were reported of which in 24 cases penalties were imposed
and only in 17 cases the penalty were paid. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that necessary changes may be effected in Indian Electricity
Grid Code (IEGC)/and the UI charges/penalty should be increased
to the extent that it effectively deter Discoms/Generators from
Unscheduled Interchange and this practice should be resorted to only
under emergency and unforeseen circumstances rather to be misused
as ill-practice of gaming and short term electricity trading. For repeated
offences of overdrawing and putting the grid safety at risk, penal
provisions, apart from hefty financial penalty, should be made harsh
enough to pose as deterrence. The required amendments to provide
more authority to CERC/FoR for effective realization of financial
penalty imposed for the offences should also be made in the
regulation. Simultaneously, the Government should also explore the
possibility of ancillary market for the purpose of ensuring strict grid
discipline as prevalent in Western Countries.
Reply of the Government
In order to ensure better grid discipline, the IEGC and UI
Regulations have been amended by CERC and the operating frequency
band has been narrowed down from 49.5-50.2 Hz to 49.7-50.2 Hz.
The CERC (Indian Electricity Grid Code) (First Amendment)
Regulations, 2012 and CERC (Unscheduled Interchange Charges and
related matters) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2012 have become
effective from 00 hours of 17th September, 2012.
Regarding recommendation for increase in penalty to ensure grid
discipline, it is to state that implementation of the above provision
itself would also lead to enhancement in penalty for overdrawal by
the states at grid-frequency below 49.7 Hz. This apart, CERC has
powers to impose penalty for grid indiscipline in the interstate power

42
system under sections 29 and 143 of the Electricity Act, 2003. CERC
is also empowered to impose penalty under section 142 for violation
of provisions of the Act, Rules or Regulations made thereunder, or
any direction issued by the Commission. The amount of penalty
mentioned in the Act, does not appear to be deterring one and it is
felt that even multiples of that penalty may not make much difference
as long as it is imposed upon the defaulting organisation. However,
if the penalty is imposed upon the head of the organisation in the
individual capacity for recovery from his own pocket, it is expected
to make the difference.
As regards realisation of the financial penalties if not paid, section
170 of the Act already has the provision for recovery of the penalty
in the same manner as recovery of arrear of land revenue. This section
also needs revisit as it is also not easily implementable.
Many times the commercial penalty etc. does not serve the purpose
of sufficient deterrent against grid indiscipline. In this case physical
measures of reducing/stopping supply to defaulting utility from grid
may be used as effective tool. In this direction, CERC in its order
dated 17.08.2012 directed NRLDC to identify feeders, in consultation
with CEA, CTU and STUs/SLDCs, at higher voltage level under
control of agency other than STUs, which can be opened in case of
over drawal by a State and submit the details by 30.09.2012. This is
under finalization by NRLDC. Similar exercise could be undertaken
by other regions also.
Regarding opinion of the Standing Committee on Energy that UI
system has perhaps failed to enforce the desired grid discipline, The
Enquiry Committee on Grid Disturbances of 30th & 31st July 2012
has also in its report recommended review of UI mechanism in view
of its impact on these grid disturbances. It has been further
recommended that frequency control through UI may be phased out
in a time bound manner and Generation reserves/Ancillary services
be used for frequency control. Appropriate regulatory mechanism
needs to be put in place for this purpose. POSOCO had filed Petition
No. 351/2010 on 01.12.2010 for introduction of Frequency Support
Ancillary Service in Indian Electricity Market. Ancillary Services
implied in relation to power system (or grid) operation, the services
necessary to support the power system (or grid) grid operation in
maintaining power quality, reliability and security of the grid. The
Commission had initiated separate action on the question of
introduction of Frequency Support Ancillary Service by placing it
before the Central Advisory Committee meeting on 14.3.2012. On the
recommendations of the CAC, the Commission is in the process of
framing the regulations. In view of the said developments, POSOCO
had withdrawn its petition during the hearing on 10.7.2012. As regards

43
the progress of the regulation on Ancillary Service, the Commission
had approved the basic framework of the regulation. The draft
regulation is under preparation and would be placed in the public
domain shortly for inviting public comments/suggestions/objections.
The regulation on Ancillary Services will be notified after following
the due process. The petition (No. 208/MP/2012) filed by POSOCO
on 7th September, 2012 related to amendment to relevant provisions
of CERC (UI) Regulations, 2009. The Commission while disposing of
the said petition vide order dated 05.12.12 directed initiation of the
process of amendment to UI Regulations and permitted POSOCO to
submit further necessary information in furtherance of the proposal.
The draft amendment to UI Regulations is under consideration of the
Commission.
As regards the imposition of commensurate financial penalty and
its realization, there is a need to address the limitations of penal
powers available with the regulators under section 142 of the Act. In
this regard, the proposals for amendment in Section 142 & 146 related
to punishment for non-compliance of directions by Appropriate
Commission and other provisions is under consideration of the
Committee constituted under the Chairperson, Central Electricity
Authority on the proposed amendments in the Electricity Act, 2003.
Further, it may be mentioned that in our country, though there is
perennial shortage of power, some generation capacity, at times,
remains un-requisitioned. By introducing frequency support ancillary
services, this un-dispatched capacity can be harnessed and it can be
brought into the grid to mitigate shortage. The payment for this
additional power may be made by overdrawing States. This in turn
would bring reliability and security in grid. Introduction of ancillary
service may reduce dependence on UI which should be resorted to
only as a last mile imbalance settlement mechanism. The CERC has
initiated steps towards introduction of ancillary market which is
required for balancing power and grid security . While the underlying
theme remains reliability and security of grid, the ancillary services
will help harness the untapped generation capacity, mitigate load
shedding, and address transmission congestion in a limited way . It
will also supplement the need arising out of variability of renewable
energy sources like wind and solar.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

44
Grid Discipline/Transmission
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that it is difficult to dispense with UI
mechanism as there is deficit in generation of electricity vis-à-vis its
demand. Surplus electricity is a distant dream and may take decades
before becoming a reality. Hence, the UI System will be in place till
the time the generation outpace the demand. As it involves financial
transactions, a relative degree of transparency with regard to fixation
of such charges, the process of their realization from overdrawing
and under-injecting entities, disbursement of these charges to entitled
entities (under-drawing and overinjecting entities) and upkeep of the
amount so collected, will go a long way to ensure the seemly fairness
of the affairs. In reply to a question about the amount collected by
CERC through UI charges, the Committee have been informed that
cumulative amount of Rs. 74,181 crore from the year 2002-03 till
October, 2011 has been charged under this head. After the capping of
UI rates for generator, some funds are available which are maintained
as Regional Unscheduled Interchange Pool Account Fund maintained
by respective Regional Load Dispatch Centre. Subsequently, the UI
charges standing to the credit of Unscheduled Interchange Pool
Account Fund has been credited to the Power System Development
Fund. As on May 2012, the surplus amount of UI charges is Rs. 3404
crore as deposited in PSDF. The utilization of this amount for the
purposes identified by CERC in PSDF Regulation 2010 is yet to be
notified as the consultation with the Ministry of Finance are on. The
Committee, therefore strongly recommend a final decision with regard
to the utilization of money may be taken at the earliest in the best
interest of this sector and it should be in consistent with the concept
of public money with regard to its deposit and usage.
Reply of the Government
The “Power System Development Fund” was constituted under
the CERC (Power System Development Fund) Regulations, 2010
notified by the Central Commission after previous publication in the
Official Gazette dated 4th June, 2010.The objective of the PSDF
Regulations was to utilize the surplus fund generated in the UI Pool
account, congestion amount account, congestion charge account and
reactive energy charge account inter-alia primarily for servicing the
investment made in transmission with the larger objective of removing
congestion. However, the PSDF in its existing framework faces some
practical implementation challenges, especially in terms of
disbursement of fund from the PSDF. Efforts are being made to address
these issues to ensure that the objectives that have gone into making
the regulations are achieved.

45
CERC had submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Power
regarding operationalisation of PSDF and the same was examined in
the Ministry. Ministry of Power requested CERC to send a draft
proposal regarding PSDF “to evolve a system for depositing the
congestion charges/revenue and other charges levied under the PSDF
and other regulations of CERC into a separate and exclusive Public
Account to be maintained by NLDC consistent with the definition of
‘Public Money’ and subject them to the accounting/audit procedures
as per the established norms. However, to ensure that the PSDF can
be utilized for the purposes identified by the CERC in PSDF
Regulations, 2010 with certain modifications, if required, may be
notified with the approval of the Ministry of Finance, before codifying
the procedure.”
The revised proposal received from CERC, with certain
modification has been referred to Deptt. of Economic Affairs, Ministry
of Finance for comments.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that provisions under Section 63 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 and the guidelines of National Electricity Policy,
issued by the Ministry of Power, on 13.4.2006 aim at laying down a
transparent procedure for facilitating competition in the transmission
sector through wide participation in providing transmission services
and tariff determination through a process of tariff based competitive
bidding. They further note that since 6.1.2011, all the ISTS transmission
schemes are to be implemented through Tariff based Competitive
Bidding as given in the Tariff Policy. Selection of transmission service
provider (TSP) for implementation of the transmission project is
through the bidding process. The Committee were informed that
8 transmission projects have been awarded through the process of
competitive bidding. 3 projects have been awarded to Sterlite Grid
Limited, 1 project to Consortium of M/s Patel Engineering Limited,
M/s Simplex Infrastructures Limited & M/s BS Trans Comm Limited,
while Reliance Power Transmission Limited and Power Grid
Corporation of India Limited bagged 2 projects each.
When enquired by the Committee as to why any of the awardees
have approached Government/CERC expressing their inability to carry
out the work on terms and conditions agreed to at the time of
competitive bidding/award of work, it has been informed that three

46
awardees have approached the CERC due to one difficulty or the
other which includes inordinate delay in the issuance of approval
under section 164 of the Electricity Act, 2003 by the Ministry of Power,
cost escalations of various component, delay in notification of suitable
sponsoring authority etc. The Committee feel that the work related to
construction of transmission projects will play a vital role in evacuation
of electricity from the surplus to deficient regions and are disappointed
to note that it is not progressing satisfactorily. It is well known that
the upcoming power stations generation capacity will be of no use if
required transmission lines for transmission of electricity to the
designated regions are not put in place in time. Thus augmentation
of transmission lines proportionate to capacity addition in generation
of power is of equal importance. The Committee feel that the problems
plaguing the transmission projects are neither unexpected nor
insurmountable. The Committee are of the opinion that in the cases
of competitive bidding, the issues like approvals and notification of
sponsoring authority are automatically taken care of. Any delay in
this regard will enable the bidders to take the plea of cost escalation
and thus abandon the project. This nullifies the entire exercise and
process come to a naught. The Committee are unhappy to note
response on specific issues raised such as alternative course of action,
action proposed against the defaulters or any contingency plan and
future event have been intentionally evaded. The Committee observe
that in most of the cases of competitive bidding, the successful lower
bidder, starts complaining about the non-viability even before the start
of the project. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should ensure that necessary clauses should be inserted
in the terms and conditions of projects meant for award through
competitive bidding to the effect that this problem of projects becoming
economically unviable due to cost escalation or other reason can be
taken care of at the time of bidding itself. Further, the Committee
also recommend the Ministry to expedite the process of issue of
approval under section 164 of the Electricity Act, 2003 to the concerned
transmission companies. They also desire the progress of the above
mentioned transmission projects as well as 9 High Capacity Tower
Transmission Corridors projects involving investment to the extent of
Rs. 58,000 crores approved by CERC, should be closely monitored
and appropriate remedial action should be taken to overcome the
impediments being faced, if any. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the action taken by the Government with regard to
progress of three transmission projects which have been held up
following the inability of the successful bidder to carry on the work.

47
Reply of the Government
As per information made available, the present status of the 8
transmission projects awarded under Tariff Based Competitive Bidding
process and High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors is as under:—
(A) Projects under Tariff Based Competitive Bidding
Sl. Scheme Implementing Remarks
No. agency
1. Talcher–II Reliance Power Strengthening in ER for enabling reliable
Augmentation T ransmission Ltd. export of power to SR.
system
2. North Karanpura Reliance Power System Strengthening in NR & WR for
Transmission T ransmission Ltd. import of power from North Karanpura
System and other projects outside NR/WR.
3. East–North Sterlite For enabling import of NER/ER surplus
Interconnection– power by NR.
Scheme
4. Raichur–Sholapur Consortium of Scheme for enabling Synchronisation of
Transmission Patel Engg. with SR with New grid.
System Simplex
Infrastructure &
BS Transcom
5. Dharamjaygarh– Sterlite T ransmission system associated with
Jabalpur–Bina evacuation of power from IPP projects
Transmission in Odisha.
System
6. Jabalpur-Bhopal– Sterlite Strengthening of Transmission System in
Indore and WR for dispersal of power in WR from
Aurangabad– IPPs in Odisha and Jharkhand.
Dhule–Vadodara
Transmission
System
7. Vemagiri POWER GRID Evacuation of Power from Gas based
Transmission IPP pr ojects in Vemagiri area of
System Andhra Pradesh.
8. Nagapattinam POWERGRID Evacuation of Power from Gas based IPP
Transmission pr ojects in Nagapattinam area of
System Tamil Nadu.

48
• The schemes at Sl. No. 1 & 2 ( viz.,  Talcher–II
Augmentation system; and North Karanpura Transmission
System):
These two schemes were entrusted to Reliance Power
Transmission Ltd. (RPTL) in Dec.’09. These two projects
awarded to Reliance transmission Company are pending in
CERC and there is no progress on the ground since the
companies, viz., North Karanpura Transmission Company
Ltd. (NKTCL) and Talcher Transmission Company Ltd.
(TTCL) have filed a petition in CERC seeking revision in
tariff and extension of time on the ground of force majeure
and Change of Law. The case is still with CERC and the
final order is yet to be received .
These systems are strengthening schemes. Commissioning
of various elements was to be made progressively from Sept.,
2012 onwards up to March, 2013. However, work on both
these schemes is yet to take-off due to the reasons indicated
above.
• The scheme at Sl. No. 3 i.e., East–North Interconnection
Scheme: The scheme was entrusted to M/s. Sterlite in
Jan., 10. The commissioning of various elements are
scheduled by March, 2013. The developer of this system
has also approached CERC claiming for relief due to
discrepancies with respect to the terminal station co-
ordinates. However, the work on the construction of
transmission lines is in progress.
• The scheme at Sl. No. 4 i.e.,  Raichur – Sholapur
Transmission System : The scheme has been awarded to
consortium of M/s Patel Engineering Ltd., M/s Simplex
Infrastructure Ltd. and M/s BS Transcom Ltd. The
implementing agency has been granted license in August,
2011. The completion schedule as per the award is January ,
2014. However, it has been learnt that the progress is poor
and the work has been slowed down considerably . It is
pertinent to mention here that this link shall be of vital
importance for synchronisation of Southern Region grid with
rest of Indian grid [North-East- West (New) grid]. Any delay
in its completion or underperformance shall have a direct
impact in the establishment and operation of the National
Grid.
• The schemes at Sl. No. 5 and 6 ( viz., Dharamjaygarh–
Jabalpur–Bina Transmission System; and Dharamjaygarh–
Jabalpur–Bina Transmission System):
The schemes were awarded to M/s Sterlite. Transmission
licence for both the schemes has been granted in October,
2011. The completion schedule as per the award is March,
2014.

49
• The schemes at Sl. Nos. 7 & 8 ( viz., Vemagiri Transmission
System; and Nagapattinam Transmission System):
The schemes have been recently bagged by POWERGRID
through bidding in March/April, 2012. Hearing for grant
of Transmission license and adoption of Tariff as per Section
63 of the Electricity Act is still going on. The completion
schedule for both the systems as per the award is March,
2015. Pre-award activities for the projects are under progress
and expected to be completed shortly.
(B) High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors (HCPTCs)
Regarding progress of 9 High Capacity Power Transmission
Corridors it may be mentioned that the various elements are being
implemented by POWERGRID (except projects at Sl. Nos.: 5 & 6 at
para “A” above which are also part of HCPTCs and executed through
Tariff based Competitive Bidding). The HCPTCs are progressing in a
phased manner matching with commissioning of generation projects.
Most of these HCPTCs are scheduled to be commissioned during XII
Plan i.e. by 2016-17.
A Joint Co-ordination Committee consisting of representatives from
Independent Power Producers (IPPs), Central Transmission Utility
(CTU) and Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is monitoring the
progress of these transmission corridors and report of the meetings of
this committee is regularly sent to the CERC.
Any over-head line needs approval of the appropriate Government
under Section 68 of the Electricity Act, 2003. Subsequent to the
approval under Section 68, the appropriate Government grants
approval under Section 164 of the Electricity Act, 2003 on request
made by the transmission developer. The Government of India has
laid out a procedure for processing the request of the transmission
developer for grant of approval under Section 164. The approval under
Section 68 is a primary approval which establishes the essentiality of
the over-head line. The route of the transmission line is not decided
at this stage. When the lines are bid out for implementation through
tariff based competitive bidding process, the approval under Section
68 is obtained by the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created for the
purpose. However, approval under Section 164 has to be taken by the
developer by following the specified procedure which includes detailed
survey and public notices intimating the detailed route.
The tariff to be quoted by the bidder is in two components, one
of which is escalable and is directly linked to the annual inflation
rate as specified by the Central Electricity Regulatory Authority
(CERC).Therefore, the specified bidding format is in order in this

50
respect. It is up to the bidder to not quote aggressively so that they
do not have to back out later on. It may be appreciated that the
bidders need to quote responsibly considering the risks involved
and should not under-quote for the sole purpose of winning the
award.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Trading of Electricity
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that Electricity Act, 2003 has recognized the
transaction involving purchase and sale of electricity as a distinct
licensed activity. Prior to that the electricity industry recognized
generation, transmission and supply as the three principal activities.
The SEBs/Discoms who have the obligation to provide electricity to
their consumers mainly rely on supplies from long-term contracts.
However, it is neither feasible nor economical to meet short term,
seasonal or peaking demand through long term contracts. Be it a
deficit scenario or otherwise, power trading is essential for meeting
the short-term demand at an appropriate cost. Similarly, power trading
is essential for distribution utilities for selling short term surpluses in
order to optimize the cost of procurement. A few captive generating
plants participate in trading in order to optimize their operating cost
and in the process, supply electricity to the grid.
The responsibility of developing the market in electricity has been
vested with the Regulatory Commissions. CERC grants inter-State
trading licence, which is mandatory under the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003, to electricity traders and registration with the
power exchanges. It constantly monitors the function of these
institutions through regular reporting of transactions undertaken by
them. In case of traders, the trading margin charged by them is also
monitored. The Committee were informed that there are two Power
Exchanges operational presently namely Indian Energy Exchange and
Power Exchanges of India Limited. These are operational from June,
2008 and October, 2008 respectively. Regarding benefits of electricity
trading the Committee were apprised that the power prices in the
short term market have decreased in the last three years and the
volume has increased. Both DISCOMS and open access consumers,
who participate in this market actively, have benefited due to the
price decrease in this market. The Committee express their satisfaction
over the fact that trading has helped bringing down the power price.
However, the Committee feel that the electricity trading in the country
is still at rudimentary stage, characterized by low volume and fewer
number of transactions limited to specific section of society and

51
absence of favourable rule and regulations attracting more traders to
take part in the process. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Government/CERC should take steps in framing such set of rules
and regulations that should prove not only conducive for electricity
trading and invite more and more players in this field to make it
more competitive but also effectively prevent/tackle any malpractices
by big players of the sector.
Reply of the Government
The action taken for creating conducive environment for electricity
trading and invite more and more players in this field to make it
more competitive are given below—
1. The Central Commission has formulated specific regulations
to promote development of markets and trading in power
thereby creating fair, transparent and competitive market
for trading in electricity. The following regulations have been
notified in this regard:-
(a) Procedure, Terms and Conditions for grant of trading
licence and other related matters Regulations, 2009—To
issue licence to electricity traders, define the business
conduct and monitor their business.
(b) Fixation of Trading Margin Regulations, 2010—To
regulate the short term trading margin of electricity.
(c) Power Market Regulations, 2010—To issues licences to
power exchanges and the overall market structure and
definite market structure.
(d) Open Access in inter-State Transmission Regulations,
2008—To provide open access to distribution companies
generators and large consumers to power efficiently.
2. The Commission has created a Market Monitor Cell (MMC)
under the Economics and Power Markets division for market
oversight and market surveillance. The MMC which
regularly monitors inter-State trading undertaken by
electricity traders and the transactions in the power
exchange. All transactions undertaken by trader and power
exchange are reported to the MMC. Monthly market reports
are published by the MMC for information dissemination
purpose.
3. Further steps being taken to prevent malpractices:
The Commission has recently amended the grant of trading
licence regulations and included non-serious and serious
category of offences depending on the gravity of the

52
violation. Penalties commensurate with the gravity of the
violation have been added. These will act as appropriate
deterrents on malpractice if any to ensure that strict
compliance by market participants. Penalty clauses like
debarring a trader from trading for a certain period, etc.
have been introduced. Further, the Commission is in the
process of formulating regulations on prevention of market
dominance by market player defined under Section 60 of
EA 2003. This will help prevent abuse of dominant position
or any action which is anti-competitive.
Power markets in India are growing at a rapid pace. The nature
of the participants is varied with divergent interests and the complexity
of transactions is increasing. The market oversight and surveillance
will be one of the key focus areas of the Central Commission to
ensure that markets remain fair and competitive.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Open Access
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee observe that the concept of open access is central
to bring about competition in distribution power. After de-licensing
of generation a generator can sell its power anywhere in the country.
For consumers also it is beneficial to have a choice to procure power
from a reliable and efficient source. This can be achieved through
open access besides facilitating flow of power from surplus to deficit
areas. National Electricity Policy states that non-discriminatory open
access shall be provided to the competing generators supplying power
to licensees. As a result, during last five years the share of private
sector in total generation has increased from 11% to 23%. In the last
two years alone 12000 MW generation has come up from private
sector.
Open access in transmission has helped make generation more
competitive and has provided choice to DISCOMS as well as open
access consumers. This is helping many captive generators as well as
open access consumers to buy and sell electricity in the short-term
market. Over 1000 open access consumers are buying power through
Power-Exchanges. Electricity traders and Power Exchanges have started
functioning. Short term trading in electricity through traders and power

53
exchange has provided an alternative market for electricity other than
long term PPA. This has reduced the DISCOM default risk for
generators significantly. However, problems are also staring the system.
They have been identified as difficulty of market access for buyers
and seller of electricity, problems of evacuation infrastructure for
seamless flow of electricity and safe and secure operation of Grid etc.
These bottlenecks have been attempted to be resolved through
regulations and orders for short-term open access in transmission and
the regulations of “grant of connectivity, long-term access and medium
term open access in inter-State transmission”. CERC has also provided
for the deemed concurrence of SLDCs for open access if their decision
is not given within a specified time frame. Short-term open access
provides generators and open access buyer access to transmission
corridors for period upto three months while the long-term and
medium-term open access regulation provide upcoming generators grid
connectivity to inter-State transmission grid to a period from 12 years
to 25 years and medium-term from 3 months to 3 years respectively.
The short-term open access regulation has facilitated development of
short-term power market where trader, power exchange are allowed
to indulge in electricity transactions. Also in medium term and long-
term frame work the generator is allowed access to the national market
and sell power to any buyer across the country. The Committee feel
that all these developments are welcome sign but the entire frame
work of open access is of limited significance to the majority of the
consumers in the country. So long as the generation does not out
pace the demand in the country, the benefits of open access will be
a distant dream to an ordinary consumer. Presently, the mechanism
of open access does not provide any safety to common man from
exploitation from high tariff of electricity. It is only the power
exchanges, electricity traders, generators who have been benefited by
the exercise of open access and its achievements so far. Although
distribution licensees and DISCOMS are also within the periphery of
the open access but the gap between the demand and supply nullifies
the benefits to common consumers that may have possibly accrued to
them due to the presence of the multiple distribution licensees. Besides
the network of distribution licensees wherever it exist is mostly
monopolized and hence to conceive the situation of consumer having
options of choosing a distribution company of his own choice at a
competitive rate will remain a far cry in coming decades. While
acknowledging the efforts made by the CERC to ease the system in
electricity sector the Committee express their dissatisfaction over the
fact that no strategy has been thought of to assess the possibility
whether this sector can be developed on the lines of
telecommunications sector providing multiple options to consumers.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that despite the inherent
bottlenecks, efforts should be made to strategize the sector in such a
fashion wherein this could be developed with the objective of

54
benefiting the common consumer having option to choose the agency
of his preference amongst the multiple distribution companies.
Reply of the Government
As per 6th proviso of Section 14 of the Electricity Act “the
Appropriate Commission may grant a licence to two or more persons
for distribution of electricity through their own distribution system
within the same area, subject to the conditions that the applicant for
grant of licence within the same area shall, without prejudice to the
other conditions or requirements under this Act, comply with the
additional requirements relating to the capital adequacy, credit-
worthiness, or code of conduct as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and no such applicant who complies with all the
requirements for grant of licence, shall be refused grant of licence on
the ground that there already exists a licensee in the same area for
the same purpose”.
Further, the para 5.4.7 of the National Electricity Policy (NEP)
defines the minimum area of supply which stipulates that “for grant
of second and subsequent distribution licence within the area of an
incumbent distribution licensee, a revenue district, a Municipal Council
for a smaller urban area or a Municipal Corporation for a larger
urban area as defined in the Article 243(Q) of Constitution of India
(7th Amendment) may be considered as the minimum area”. This
will ensure that second distribution licensee does not resort to cherry
picking by demanding unreasonable connection charges from
consumers.
In order to have two different types of distribution licensees, the
power granted to Appropriate Commission, under Section 14 to grant
a distribution licence, the Working Group on 12th Five Year Plan on
Power, has recommended that the provision may be amended to the
affect it can grant two difference types of distribution licences stating
that it is felt that the present requirement of laying network by the
second licensee may not result in minimum engineering cost. This
issue is under consideration of the Committee constituted under the
Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority on the proposed
amendments in the Electricity Act, 2003.
As regards the comparison between telecom sector and electricity
sector is concerned, it may be noted that there is a basic difference
in requirement of infrastructure and technology for the services
provided by a telecom company and by a distribution licensee. Where
telecom services rely more on wireless technology for transmission,
electricity is transmitted by flow of electrons through wires.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]

55
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that the function of Central Commission in
accordance with section 79 of the Act is to regulate the inter-State
transmission of electricity and other role of the Commission (under
section 66 of the Act) is development of market in power including
trading. For power market development, it is necessary that open
access is facilitated through regulations. Hence Commission brought
out Open Access Regulation, 2004 and later Open Access in Inter-
State Transmission Regulation, 2008 was issued. Also, Grant of
Connectivity, Long Term Access and Medium term open Access, 2009
was issued. Open Access regulations also provide DISCOMs and
eligible consumers the choice of contracting powers to meet demand
on long term medium and short term basis. However, regulation
provides that the concurrence of States load dispatch center for open
access can be denied only when surplus transmission capacity is not
available in the State network or metering infrastructure is not
available for energy metering and accounting in accordance with the
Grid Code. The Committee are of the opinion that it will take a long
time before the concept of Open Access, as envisaged, become a reality
for common consumer. Presently, it is available in a limited manner,
to generators giving them certain perceived protections with regard
to evacuation of electricity, default payment, operation and liquidity
risk etc. and also to certain extent in the inter-State transmission of
electricity. The short term transaction of electricity facilitated through
Open Access during the last three years is 9 per cent, 10 per cent and
11 per cent respectively of the total electricity generated. This amplifies
that even at the market level the concept of Open Access is yet to
bloom. As if, this was not enough, some States have issued orders
under section 11 or section 108 of the Electricity Act, 2003 for
restricting the sale of surplus power of the State thereby, prohibiting
the sale to the consumers and utilities outside the State. They have
also fixed the price for sale of power to the distribution licences in
the State. This has been done despite the ruling of the CERC on the
matter which is contrary to the stand taken by these States. This
exercise by some States negates the very concept of Open Access. The
Committee feel that such issues can be settled only through bodies
like FOR having enough power to deal with such issues. The action
by some States is well within the foreseeable possibilities and cannot
be handled by invoking section of the Electricity Act. It has to be
dealt with within the ambit of ground realities and making the
electricity sector a competitive and commercially viable entity. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the limited scope of
Open Access which has developed hitherto should be ensured to grow
as conceived. It cannot be allowed to be mired into legal wrangling
sending disappointing signals to stakeholders and efforts should be
made to resolve the issues without invoking legal devices.

56
Reply of the Government
Open access is central to bringing about competition in the power
sector. The Central Commission is responsible for facilitating inter-
state transmission of electricity. Open access at intra-State level remains
the responsibility of SERCs. Though open access has been one of the
important drivers of reforms for market development, it has not been
implemented in the same spirit as envisaged in the Act. The primary
reason being existing cross subsidization between consumer categories.
Open Access consumers are generally subsidizing consumers and their
exit affects the distribution licensees Perpetuating Single Buyer Model
in many States also allow distribution licensee to restrict open access
with the help of SLDCs.
Ring fencing of SLDCs from Utilities and empowerment of Load
dispatch centres would remove the hurdles from Open Access
Implementation. Some States invoked Section 11 of Electricity Act to
disallow open access to the generators within the State. As per the
Act, Section 11 is meant to be invoked only in extraordinary
circumstances. ( e.g. threat to security of State, public order, natural
calamity etc.) and is not meant to restrict open access. CERC has
raised the issue in its statutory advice to the government. The Central
Government has also filed SLP in the Hon’ble Supreme Court against
the order of the High Court of Karnataka and the matter is
sub-judice. The Hon’ble Minister of Power has written letter to the
State Governments in 2010 to ensure that no steps are permitted in
their State which come in the way of operationalising open access in
the transmission and distribution networks.
Further, the Ministry of Power in consultation with M/o Law &
Justice/Ld. Attorney General of India has issued clarification vide letter
dated 30.11.2011 that “ all 1MW and above consumers are deemed to be
open access consumers and that the regulator has no jurisdiction over fixing
the energy charges for them ”. All concerned including State Governments,
have been requested to take necessary steps for implementing the
provisions relating to open access in the Electricity Act, 2003 in light
of the said opinion. A workshop was also held under the chairmanship
of Secretary (Power) on this issue on 29.2.2012 where the officers of
State Government and Power Utilities also participated to assess the
progress made by States in respect of above legal interpretation. During
the workshop it was clarified that the opinion on the subject of open
access circulated by Ministry of Power vide letter dated 30.11.2011
based on the legal interpretation done by the first Law Officer of the
country is final.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]

57
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Tariff regulations
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that provisions of section 79 read with 61
and 62 of the Electricity Act, 2003 empowers the CERC to determine
the tariff as per the provisions of the Act for supply of the electricity,
transmission of the electricity, wheeling of the electricity and retail
sale of the electricity. With a view to discharge this task the
Commission notified terms and conditions of tariff initially for a period
of three years with effect from March, 2001. After the enactment of
the Electricity Act, 2003 new terms and conditions of tariff were
notified in March, 2004 for a period of five years providing for
determination of generation tariff, station-wise and transmission tariff
line-wise. The terms and conditions contain financial as well as
technical norms. Capital cost of the projects being starting point for
tariff calculation is called cost plus tariff. Introduction of Availability
Based Tariff (ABT) and Multi Year Tariff (MYT) are also implemented
by the CERC based on certain principles. ABT mechanism allows a
generator to recover the fixed cost only if it is able to make its capacity
available for use. The Committee find that the parameters which form
basis for determining annual fixed charges and energy charges are
not uniform and have been changing from time to time. Tariff
regulation 2004-09 provided for computation of base energy charge
rate by the Commission based on preceding three months price and
Gross Calorific Value (GCV) of fuel and also provided fuel price
adjustment formula for month to month variation in fuel price and
GCV of fuel. However, tariff regulation 2009 has provided a formula
for energy charge rate calculation on month-to-month basis based on
specified operational norms and monthly price and GCV of fuel.
However, specified operational norms have not been illustrated and it
has also not been stated as to what prompted the change in formula
adopted in the year 2004. It has also not been clarified whether the
latter formula is more consumer friendly. Similarly, regarding energy
charge rate, the Committee have been apprised that the energy charges
depends on scheduled generations, gross stations heat rate, auxiliary

58
energy consumption, gross calorific value of fuel and price of fuel.
Simultaneously, it has also been stated that the Central Commission
does not have control over the quality and price of the fuel used for
power generation and the fuel prices are passed through in tariff.
The Committee are amazed at the gear sifting about the norms laid
down for determination of tariff. Though, it is technical and relatively
complex issue for common man yet the bottom line theory is the cost
(inclusive of all factors of fixed cost and energy charges) of the project
including the trading or profit margin that should form the parameter
for determination of the tariff. Despite the so-called elaborate formula
laid down for tariff fixation, the general perception about it reflects
that it is an extremely mystifying exercise devoid of transparency and
accountability. Reported involvement of the common people, NGOs,
Resident Welfare Associations in the process is superficial cover and
therefore needs to be taken in meaningful and realistic manner. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the tariff fixation is
an exercise having pervasive consequences about the sector to the
extent of exploiting larger segment of stakeholders whereas enriching
or thriving the minuscule percentage of stakeholders and hence
requires to be undertaken in a truly participatory and transparent
manner leaving no scope for any apprehension as to the genuineness
of the exercise about the tariff fixation. All the stages and various
constituents involved in the process should be clearly spelt out with
a view to allay any misgiving in the mind of the people for an
objective handling of the entire process.
Reply of the Government
The tariff fixation exercise is being undertaken in two stages. First,
the tariff regulations are being made for a control period of five years
after extensive stakeholder consultation and participation and by
following the due process of law. Second, based on the tariff regulation,
the tariffs are being determined. Section 178 (3) provides that the
Commission shall comply with the conditions of the previous
publication while making the regulations. The conditions of the
previous publication have been prescribed in the General Clauses Act
and Electricity (procedure for previous publication) Rules, 2005. It
provides that the Commission shall publish a draft of the regulation
likely to be affected in such manner as deemed to be sufficient and
a notice regarding the date on or after which that draft regulation
will be taken into consideration. After consideration of objections or
suggestions received from any person with respect to that draft and
finally, the Commission shall publish the regulation in the official
gazette. As per the procedure being followed by the Commission, a

59
draft regulation is prepared along with the explanatory memorandum
containing the assumptions and the philosophy and the necessity for
the regulation. The said draft regulation along with explanatory
memorandum are posted on the website of the Commission inviting
comments or suggestions from the stakeholders; wide publicity is given
through the newspaper with regard to the proposed regulation
specifying a date by which the comments or suggestions are to be
received. Public hearings are held to listen to the views of the
stakeholders and the consumers and after consideration of the
comments or suggestions, the regulations are finalized and notified
and published in the official gazette. Along with the final regulation,
a Statement of Reasons is published which deals with the comments
or objections of the stakeholders and the decision of the Commission
thereof. As a step in furtherance of transparency, the Commission
posts, on the website, the comments received from the stakeholder
for the information of all concerned and create an atmosphere of
informed debate and discussion. On the tariff fixation side, the
Commission staff carries out technical validation of the tariff petitions.
In the process, the generating company and transmission licensee are
required to serve the copies of the replies to the beneficiaries. That
way, the beneficiaries are made acquainted with the various aspects
of the prudence check which is carried out in the process of tariff
determination. After completion of the technical evaluation, open
hearing is held in which, apart from the beneficiaries, the consumers
and any other persons interested are free to participate. In accordance
with the Section 94 (3) of the Electricity Act, the Commission has
identified certain consumer organizations to represent views of the
consumers during the proceedings of the Commission. Thereafter, the
tariff orders are issued after carrying out the prudence check in
accordance with the provisions of the tariff regulations. The Conduct
of Business Regulations of the Commission also provides opportunity
to any person to inspect the judicial records of the Commission and
take copies thereof.
The Commission facilitates stakeholder interaction on all the issues.
The expenses of select consumers/representative organizations/NGOs
are reimbursed for coming to public consultation processes.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee find that Multi Year Tariff (MYT) regime are meant
for generating companies and transmission licensees. This kind of
tariff is determined as per the terms and conditions based on financial

60
and technical norms. This tariff is usually called the cost plus tariff
because the capital cost of the project is the starting point for the
tariff calculation. In this formula except for the actual capital
expenditure most of the financial and technical parameters adopted
for tariff are normative and not actual. The tariff calculations are
quite elaborate as various elements going into the tariff are computed
to arrive at full tariff. This tariff is different for each generating station
depending on its admitted capital cost, base fuel price, gross calorific
value and applicable norms for the efficient operation. This exercise
is done to ensure that the utilities do not misuse their dominant
position to strike the high price from the buyer besides making them
function in an efficient and economic manner. The MYT implies that
various financial and operational norms specified by the Commission
would remain valid and unchanged during the controlled period
during the MYT regime. The principle of Availability Based Tariff has
been adopted by the Commission for adoption in MYT period since
its introduction. Thus ABT principles are like any other principle that
remains in force during the currency of MYT period. The Committee
are surprised to find that normally the terms and conditions of the
tariff for five year period remains the same but in some exceptional
cases the same may be reviewed also. Similarly, it is also not
convincing that whereas the tariff principles and their applications
generally remains same during the tariff period, the annual fixed
charges and the energy charges do not remain static and vary from
year to year and month to month respectively on account of inflation
and increase in O&M cost, changes in interest rate and due to variation
in quality and price of fuel. It is self-contradictory that various financial
and operational norms specified by the Commission would remain
valid and unchanged during the controlled period of MYT regime
and the factors responsible for these norms have been stated to be
changing on monthly and yearly basis. This incoherence provides the
scope for tweaking in the tariff structure without any justification.
More so when the ABT principle has also been included in it. The
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the concept of MYT
should be re-evaluated with a view to provide stability in tariff regime
and consistency to its different tariff structure.
Reply of the Government
The Multi Year Tariff (MYT) was envisaged to incentivize efficiency
improvement and to address investors concern of regulatory risk
arising from possibility of frequent changes in the principles of the
Annual Review Process. The objective for MYT framework was to
bring in more clarity and stability in the tariff fixation process. The

61
cost plus regime required more stable structure with well defined
trajectories to monitor the performance of the utility to incorporate
incentives and penalties for the same. MYT Framework recognizes
the need to allocate risk between the stakeholders based on controllable
and uncontrollable factors.
Tariff Policy also provides that the uncontrollable costs, which
would include (but not limited to) fuel costs, costs on account of
inflation, taxes and cess, variations in power purchase unit costs
including on account of hydro-thermal mix in case of adverse natural
events, should be recovered speedily to ensure that future consumers
are not burdened with past costs. These uncontrollable costs always
lead to change in tariffs each year.
The Commission is guided by the Electricity Act, 2003 for framing
Tariff Regulations. Section 61 of Electricity Act, 2003 stipulates the
guiding principles of terms and conditions for determination of tariff
and section 61(f) of the Electricity Act, 2003 specifies the principle of
multi-year tariff. Based on the above mandate, the Commission has
consistently adopted the principle of multi-year tariff beginning from
2001-04, continued during 2004-09 and presently 2009-14.
The basic outlines of multi-year tariff principle start with the
prudent capital expenditure which truly reflects the cost to be serviced
during the life of the project by way of multi-year tariff. Looking into
importance of the crucial parameter, the Commission has recently
developed benchmark hard cost (tangible assets) parameters of thermal
generating plants, transmission lines and sub-stations of various
specifications. This benchmark would be useful for prudence exercise
in cost determination which in turn would enrich in house
knowledgebase.
Once the prudent cost is determined, the Commission prescribes
certain broad normative parameters for tariff determination which do
not change throughout the duration of multi-year tariff period. These
parameters are prescribed after detailed analysis and after balancing
the views of various stakeholders. Some of them are debt equity ratio,
rate of return on equity, duration of various components of working
capital, rate of depreciation, method of recovery of depreciation,
operation and maintenance expenses, target availability, compensation
allowance, operational norms of station heat rate, auxiliary energy
consumption, specific fuel oil consumption, lime consumption for
lignite base stations etc.

62
There are, however, certain parameters influencing the tariff during
multi-year tariff block which vary due to external factors. This aspect
has been recognized in the section 62(4) of Electricity Act. Some of
such parameters are interest movement in the debt market, variation
in corporate/MAT tax rate, inflation rate, foreign exchange rate
variation, fuel prices variation, etc. These factors are uncontrollable
and cannot be predicted for a MYT period of 5 years. Hence, tariff
parameter being affected by these factors would undergo change
during the tariff period. The treatment of uncontrollable cost has also
been recognized in the tariff policy at Para 5.3 (h) (4) which mentions
that uncontrollable cost should be recovered speedily to ensure that
future consumers are not burdened with the past cost. Uncontrollable
cost would include (but not limited to) fuel costs, cost on account of
inflation, tax and cess, variation in power purchase cost including on
account of Hydro-Thermal mix in case of adverse natural events.
In the light of above mentioned facts, variation in tariff on year
to year basis during MYT period due to uncontrollable costs is
unavoidable but it does not affect the overall stability of multi-year
tariff regime.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]

63
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Mandate vis-à-vis Performance of CERC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that regulatory provisions under the Electricity
Act 2003 are being implemented through of the CERC. Functions of
CERC relate to important areas of power sector, viz. regulating tariff
of generating companies owned and controlled by the Central
Government, of such companies having composite scheme for
generation and sale of the electricity in more than one States,
regulating interstate transmission of the electricity, determining tariff
for inter-state transmission of the electricity, issuing licenses to
transmission licensees and the electricity traders with respect to their
inter-state operations, specifying grid code, levying fee, specifying and
enforcing quality, continuity and reliability of services by the licensee,
fixing inter-state trading margin etc. The Commission is also
responsible for balancing consumer interest and promoting investments
besides being responsible for oversight of the market. In pursuit of
these objectives, the CERC has taken steps for formulating an efficient
tariff setting mechanism, improving the operations and management
of the regional transmission centres, facilitating open access in inter-
state transmission, facilitating inter-state trading, promoting
development of power market, facilitating technological and
institutional changes required for development of competitive market
in bulk power and transmission services, advising on removal of
barriers to entry and exit for capital and management etc. The
Commission has also adopted certain guiding principles which
inter-alia include protection of the interest of the society including the
consumer and supplier, remaining equitable in conflict resolution,
maintaining regulatory certainty, adopting participative process in
formulation of its regulation etc. The Committee feel that had these
activities been taken to their logical conclusion and been implemented
in letter and spirit, the consumers/citizens of the country would have
been in a better position than the prevailing situation in terms of cost
and availability of the electricity. Similarly, open access to the common

64
consumer is a far cry. The Committee are of the strong view that
with more effective role of CERC the scenario could have been
transformed phenomenally. Further, the collapse of Northern Grid on
July 30, 2012 affecting 7 States and again total breakdown of Northern,
Eastern and North-Eastern Grid on July 31, 2012 affecting 22 States
across the country has exposed the ineffectiveness of CERC as national
electricity regulator. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Commission should introspect and identify as to why the optimal
results are not coming forth. Such a detailed analysis should identify
whether there are legislative limitations, functional constraints, absence
of entrepreneurship, lack of resources, dearth of qualified manpower
or un-enabling environment, which jointly or severally, are hampering
the growth of the Sector. The Committee also strongly recommend
that reasons so identified be followed up with remedial measures
with utmost promptitude. The Government should not shy away from
bringing amendment to the Electricity Act, 2003 if such measures are
required to improve the efficacy of CERC. The Committee also
recommend that the Government should take necessary steps to
appoint an independent Committee of experts to review the
functioning of CERC and identify the areas which require
improvements in the working of the organization and limitations of
the autonomy and legislation. Needless to emphasize such an exercise
should be conducted in a time-bound manner and followed up with
necessary action wherever required.
Reply of the Government
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) engages
in continual review of its regulations and makes amendments based
on the demands of time and need for facilitation of reforms in the
sector. For instance, the Commission issued first Multi Year Tariff
regulations for the control period 2001-04 and subsequently made
changes in the regulations for the next two control periods of
2004-09 and 2009-14 based on the prevailing market conditions. The
parameters of tariff were finalized after detailed analysis and wide
stakeholder consultations during each of the control period.
The Commission has been discharging its mandated functions in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Government Policies and
the resources available. Section 66 of the Electricity Act, 2003 mandates
the Appropriate Commission to promote development of market in
power. The Tariff Policy also emphasized on development of market
and regulations on power exchanges. Accordingly, the Central
Commission facilitated establishment of two power exchanges and
made power market regulations.

65
CERC has mentioned constraints affecting the Commission in
bringing optimal results which have been brought out as follows
alongwith the response of the Government:—
(C) Legislative limitations
(i) Any regulatory policy adopted by the Commission can
translate into benefits to the end consumers only if such
policy is followed uniformly. In a federal structure, the State
Commissions are independent and the regulatory policy
initiatives taken by the Central Commission are not binding
on the State Commissions.
(ii) In the matter of grid discipline and UI payments, there is
a need for ensuring full and quick compliance of the
directions of the Commission by the erring entities. To
ensure this, the Commission not only needs to have power
to take actions against the erring entities and the officers in
charge of such entities but should have the power to impose
penalty commensurate with the nature and gravity of the
offense. At present, the Commission has the power to impose
penalties upto an amount of Rs. 1 lakh for non-compliance
of the orders and directions of the Commission and upto
Rs. 15 lakh for non-compliance of the orders of the Regional
Load Despatch Centre. These powers need to be increased
commensurate with the nature and gravity of offense so
that it acts as an effective deterrent for future violations.
(iii) The Commission should be vested with powers to penalize
officers in charge of the erring entities by way of vicarious
liability. The Commission does not have power to execute
its own decisions except to initiate action under Section 142
of the Act for non-compliance of its earlier order imposing
the penalty. The Commission needs to be armed with powers
of execution of a Civil Court so that its orders can be
executed through due process of law.
(iv) Recently open access has been thwarted in many cases on
account of two reasons. First, State Commissions have
issued notifications under Section 11 of the Act to prohibit
generators from selling electricity outside the State citing
the ground of scarcity of power. Secondly, the SLDCs are
not operating independently and are denying open access
on some pretext or the other. There is a need to make the
SLDCs independent so that they can discharge their

66
functions impartially and in accordance with the Act and
regulations. Section 11 needs to be suitably amended to
specifically exclude shortage of electricity as the ground
for invocation of the power of the State Government under
the said provision.
With regards to the legislative limitations affecting the Commission
in bringing optimal results, it is stated that amendment in Section 11
& 142 are under consideration of the Committee under that
Chairmanship of Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority, constituted
for examination for proposed amendments in the Electricity Act, 2003.
(D) Autonomy of Regulator
It has been stated by CERC that there are constraints arising out
of lack of autonomy on the following issues relating to:—
• staffing,
• operationalisation of separate fund,
• flexibility in addressing needs for skill building involving
foreign visit.
Staffing: It may be stated the sufficient staff strength and
compensation package etc. have been finalized as per the functional
requirement and on the lines of other regulatory bodies. The
Government has been responsive to the difficulties faced by CERC
due to inadequate staff-strength. In October 2005, 20 additional posts
under various categories were created for the Commission. The present
sanctioned staff strength of CERC is 80. Further, certain restrictions
imposed while creating the additional posts that some of the posts
should be filled up from CEA only on deputation, have been removed
by the Government in October, 2012 for the smooth functioning of
the Commission. In addition as per section 91(4) of the Electricity
Act, CERC has powers to appoint Consultants required to assist the
Commission in discharge of its functions. Accordingly, CERC has been
appointing a number of consultants under the provisions of CERC
(Appointment of Consultants) Regulations, 2008 from time to time.
CERC Fund: As per the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act,
Rules regarding constitution of the CERC Fund have been issued by
the Government vide Notification dated 22.10.2007. The Fund is
operational as per the provisions of the said Rules. CERC had recently
made a representation that releases from CERC Fund should not be
treated as grant-in-aid (General). This was examined in consultation

67
with Department of Economic Affairs and Controller General of
Accounts who did not agree to the views of CERC in the light of the
provisions of the Act and Rules made thereunder. Views of Department
of Economic Affairs and Controller General of Accounts have since
been communicated to CERC.
Skill building needs for staff: It has been stated by CERC that
they should also be delegated the powers of deciding and approving
the needs for skill enhancement of officers/staff including those
involving foreign visits. In this regard, it may be mentioned here that
earlier proposals of Chairperson and Members of CERC for
undertaking foreign visits used to go to the Screening Committee of
Secretaries for approval. This has been done away with vide
amendment made in the service Rules. At present, Chairperson, CERC
powers for approving training programmes for skill enhancement of
the officers/staff of the Commission except their foreign deputation
for which approval are accorded by the Government in line with
austerity measures of the Government (Ministry of Finance/
Department of Expenditure) from time to time.
The Commission has initiated to undertake impact assessment of
regulations framed by it. However, to start with, Regulatory Impact
Assessment (RIA) inter alia , of only CERC tariff regulations for all the
three control periods shall be carried out. The following activities
shall be carried out under the assignment:—
(a) Study of methodologies adopted for regulatory impact
assessment by other Indian and Foreign regulators.
(b) Development of RIA tools for impact assessment.
(c) Comparative analysis of 2009 regulations vis-à-vis previous
regulations.
(d) Impact analysis of tariff norms, financial as well as technical,
on generating companies, transmission companies and
beneficiaries.
(e) Impact analysis of external factors like Government policies
and taxes, duties, funding etc.
(f) Comparison of Tariff norms vs. Actual Economic/Financial
Conditions and operation efficiency .
(g) Impact on investment promotion and environment.
(h) Way forward to tariff regulations.

68
Further, the Working Group on Power for 12th Plan has
recommended that through suitable legislative changes, a Multi-
disciplinary body shall be constituted comprising of representatives
from Centre and States to review the performance of the Regulatory
Commission periodically on the basis of a performance evaluation
matrix and report to the appropriate Government for necessary
corrective action. The same is being examined by a Committee under
the Chairmanship of Chairperson, CEA constituted for examination of
various proposals for amendment in Electricity Act, 2003. Therefore,
there appears to be no need for appointment of an independent
Committee of experts to review the functioning of CERC and identify
the areas which require improvements in the working of the
organization and limitations of the autonomy and legislation as
recommended by the Standing Committee.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Establishment of CERC
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee find that the evolutionary process of CERC dates
backs to early 1980s when the National Development Council
recommended the constitution of independent professional tariff Boards
at the regional levels for regulating the tariff policies of public and
private utilities. The need was further reiterated in 1996 in the
Conference of Chief Ministers which felt that reforms and restructuring
of State Electricity Boards are urgent and must be carried out in
definite time frame and identified the creation of regulatory
commission as a step in this direction. In 1998 with the enactment of
the Regulatory Commission Act, way was paved for the creation of
regulatory commissions at Centre and in the States with the objective
to distance the Government from tariff regulation which was later
replaced by the Electricity Act, 2003. The Commission functions in a
quasi-judicial manner and consist of a Chairperson, three full time
Members and the Chairperson of Central Electricity Authority as
ex-officio Member. Owing to the efficient functional requirement the
Act mandates that Chairperson and the Members shall be persons
having adequate knowledge and experience in Engineering, Law,
Finance, Management, Commerce etc. The Chairperson and the

69
Members are appointed by the President of India on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee as prescribed under the
Act. The Act also provides for the appointment of a Secretary of the
Commission whose powers and duties are defined by the Commission.
The Committee find that given the functions of the Regulatory
Commissions to transform the electricity sector, the constitution of a
Board was enshrined in the Act itself to make these Commissions the
proper bodies with adequate powers to develop and regulate the
sector. However, over the years it has been found that the spirit of
the Act has not been carried in the right perspective. Most of the
Regulatory Commissions have become the refuge for the
superannuated but influential officials. Their primary objective is to
remain in employment rather than making any meaningful contribution
with regard to the activities of the Commissions in the pursuit of
their objectives. Hence these bodies have lost sheen and the authority,
which they were designed to represent. In the process they have also
lost the autonomy, which the Act has provided them for functional
purposes. Had these Commissions acted as mandated under the Act,
there would have been hardly any justification for languishing
electricity sector in the Country. The Committee is inclined to infer
that Regulatory Commissions have squarely failed in performing their
assigned duties. The Committee, therefore, recommend that with a
view to revolutionize the Sector it has become imperative to recast
these Commissions at Board level. These establishments should not
become the sanctuaries for senior citizens to secure sinecure positions
without any accountability and stakes. Hence, these positions should
be manned by the senior technical brains of the respective areas who
are alive in services, having sense of accountability.
Reply of the Government
It is understood that by constitution of Board, constitution of
Commission is implied. Section 76(5) of the Electricity Act, 2003
provides for composition of the Central Commission as under:—
(a) a Chairperson and three other Members;
(b) the Chairperson of the Authority who shall be the Member,
ex officio .
The Chairperson and Members of the Central Commission shall
be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of
the Selection Committee. Composition of the Selection Committee for
appointment of Chairperson and Members of CERC has been provided
in the Electricity Act, 2003. The qualification and experience

70
requirements for appointment to these posts are also provided in the
Act. As per the provisions of the Act, the Central Commission shall
consist of a Chairperson and three other members who shall be
persons having adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or shown
capacity in dealing with the problems related to engineering, law,
commerce, finance or management. The Chairperson and Members of
the Central Commission have been appointed in pursuance of the
provisions of the Act. A glance through the experience of Chairperson
and members appointed by the Central Commission in the past and
at present would reveal that the persons having proven track record
in finance, engineering, accounts, management and law have been
appointed as chairperson and members of the Commission. With their
contribution, the Commission has been able to create regulatory culture
in the country and at present, the regulations and the decisions of the
Central Commission are one of the guiding factors in the development
of the power sector in the country. Further, the recommendations have
been noted.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Forum of Regulators
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that The Forum of Regulators (FoR) was
constituted vide the Ministry of Power’s Notification dated
16th February , 2005 in pursuance of the provision under section 166(2)
of the Electricity Act, 2003 with the primary objective of harmonization
of regulation in the power sector. The Forum consists of Chairperson
of CERC and Chairpersons of SERCs. The Chairperson of CERC is
the Chairperson of the Forum. The Committee were informed that
FoR provides a platform for the regulators at the Centre and State
level to exchange ideas and best practices. Issues of importance (at
inter-state level or intra-state level) are discussed and consensus is
evolved in FoR. In order to encourage uniformity of regulations among
SERCs, the Forum has evolved several Model Regulations which can
be adopted by the State Regulatory Commissions. The Committee
were also informed that the FoR has issued various guidelines/
regulations for implementations of Open Access, reduction of AT&C
losses, Grid Discipline, rationalization of tariff, etc.

71
The Electricity being the concurrent subject, the Committee find
FOR a vital instrument to bring all the State Regulatory Commissions
at a platform where consensus can be built for smooth and effective
implementation of regulations meant for bringing reforms, restructuring
and revitalizing of power sector of the Country. However, to the agony
of the Committee, the FoR has miserably failed to achieve the desired
result due to some or other reasons. The Committee find that in
regard to implementation of model regulations on various issues, viz.
open access, rationalization of tariff, reduction of AT&C losses etc.
there is great disparity in States as some have done well while the
others’ performances are far from being satisfactory. It is matter of
concern that even regulations made with consensus are either not
being implemented satisfactorily or not being implemented at all. The
Committee are surprised that FoR has failed to enforce even the
decisions/regulations arrived at through consensus among SERCs. The
present situation somehow indicates to the ineffectiveness of the Forum
as it has reduced itself to a platform of unsubstantive deliberations
with executive power to give a new orientation and definite direction
to power sector. The area which require utmost attention of FoR is
area of reduction of AT&C losses where there is hardly any progress
across the country. This single issue has damaged the sector most
and has blurred the reforms. And here FoR has done precious little
to make any impact. This has raised questions about the usefulness
of this body itself. The Committee, therefore, recommend that that
the Government should come up with some orders/regulations
providing much needed teeth to the Forum to make it effective in
enforcing the model regulations/guidelines prepared by FoR itself in
all the participant States in a time bound manner. The Committee,
further desire that the FoR should meet more frequently to discuss
issues/obstacles coming in way to implementation of regulations/
guidelines of FoR in respect of promotion of open access,
implementation of R-APDRP to reduces the distribution losses, grid
discipline, tariff regulations, etc. so that the remedies for their speedy
and effective implementation can be chalked out. The Committee also
desire that the SERCs should be given due autonomy as envisaged
under the Electricity Act, 2003 enabling them to discharge their
mandated duties effectively without any pressure from respective State
Governments.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power made a reference to the Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity raising the issues of tariff revisions and tariff adequacy
and Appellate Tribunal of Electricity (APTEL) in its judgment

72
dated 11th November, 2011 has inter-alia ruled that fuel and power
purchase cost is a major expense of the distribution company which
is uncontrollable. Every State Commission must have in place
mechanism for fuel and power purchase cost in terms of Section 62
(4) of the Act. The fuel and power purchase cost adjustment should
preferably be on monthly basis on the lines of the Central
Commission’s Regulations for the generating companies but in no
case exceeding a quarter. Any State Commission which does not
already have such formula/mechanism in place must within 6 months
of the date of this order must put in place such formula mechanism.
The Ministry has also requested all the State Governments to take
necessary action accordingly.
FoR provides a platform for the regulators at the Centre and
State level to exchange ideas and best practices. The frequency of
meeting of the Forum has been increasing continuously. In the last
two years the Forum has held meetings on an average every two
months. In FY 2012-13, the Forum has already held 4 meetings in the
first six months. A detailed account of meetings held in the last five
years is presented in the table below:
Financial Year No. of Meetings
2008-09 5
2009-10 5
2010-11 6
2011-12 6
2012-13 4
Issues of importance facing the sector (at inter-state level or intra-
state level) are discussed and consensus is evolved in FoR. In order
to encourage uniformity of regulations among SERCs, the Forum has
evolved several Model Regulations. These help bring regulatory
certainty in the sector. Some of the important Model Regulations are
mentioned below:—
• Model Regulations for Multi Year Distribution Tariff.
• Model Regulations for Protection of Consumer Interest.
• Model Terms and Conditions of Intra-State Open Access
Regulations.
• Model DSM Regulation for SERCs.
• Model Regulation for SERCs for Renewable Energy
Certificate (REC) Framework.

73
• Model Regulation on Standards of Performance for
Distribution Licensees.
• Model Supply Code.
A brief account of some of the initiatives/decisions of the Forum
is as follows:—
•T ariff revision and tariff adequacy are the primary issues
with respect to the financial viability of Distribution
companies. The financial viability of State Distribution has
been deliberated at length in various meeting of FoR. In
this regard the Forum of Regulator conducted a study—
Assessment of Financial viability of DISCOMS which
analysed the tariff orders of various State Commissions and
the reasons for increasing revenue gap in State utilities.
• The detailed study carried out for ten States revealed that
the revenue gap of utilities has been increasing due to non-
revision of tariff, absence of true-up mechanism, shortfall
or delay in payment of subsidy by the State Governments
and dis-allowance of the legitimate cost in tariff. Based on
the diagnosis of the problems facing the distribution sector,
the Forum evolved consensus on the need for taking
corrective measures to restore the health of this critical
element of distribution of electricity. Consequently, the
Forum evolved Model Tariff Regulations to address the
issues revealed by the ten State study.
• The proposal for inclusion of additional Unscheduled
Interchange (UI) charge imposed on the utilities under
CERC’s UI Regulation for overdrawal during the time blocks
when frequency was below 49.2 Hz. was discussed by the
Forum. It was decided that the SERCs should not allow the
same in the Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR).
• Another significant achievement of the Forum in renewable
energy sector was in terms of evolution of the Renewable
Energy Certificate (REC) mechanism.
• The Forum also deliberated and evolved consensus on
measures for encouraging Demand Side Management and
Energy Efficiency (DSM & EE). The Forum endorsed the
proposal from the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) for
regulated Multi-State DSM Programme.
•Y et another initiative of the Forum was on the development
of benchmark capital cost for distribution.

74
• The Forum has also submitted its proposal on amendments
to Electricity Act, 2003 after evolving consensus on various
issues which is under examination by the Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of Chairperson, Central
Electricity Authority.
Further, Ministry of Power has also written to the State
Governments to peruse the model regulations on ‘Terms & Conditions
on Intra-state Open Access’ and ‘Model Tariff Regulations’ framed by
the Forum of Regulators and take necessary action for notification of
regulations on similar lines by the State Regulatory Commission.
From the number of meeting and action taken by FoR as brought
out above it is inferred that FoR has successfully performed their
functions as per the mandate given in the Electricity Act. Central
Government has also supplemented and forwarded the
recommendations/model of FoR from time to time to States. This has
helped in adoption of enabling regulations by SERCs.
As regards granting more powers to FoR, it is brought out that
the powers and responsibilities of the statutory authorities have been
appropriately balanced in the Act whereas, the SERCs and CERC have
been made accountable to State Legislatures/Parliament through the
process of laying of Annual Report, regulations and are subject to
Questions/Detailed examination by Committee, etc., no such
mechanism for accountability for FoR has been provided. In view of
the same, granting powers to FoR without any accountability may
not be desirable and may also disturb the existing framework.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

75
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
Promotion of Renewable Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that section 86(1)(e) of the Electricity Act
mandates the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions to promote,
inter-alia, generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy
by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and
sale of electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of
electricity from such sources, a percentage of the total consumption
of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee. The Committee
were informed that a number of SERCs have already specified such
percentage of the electricity to be procured in the area of a distribution
licensee and have also notified cost plus tariff for different technologies
of renewable energy exploitation. However, the Committee found that
the level of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO), i.e. the percentage
of electricity to be procured from such sources varies significantly
from State to State. A few States like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have
already achieved a RPO level of more than 10%, but there are number
of States which have not even touched RPO level of 2%. Further, the
Committee were informed that though Delhi Electricity Regulatory
Commission has prescribed two per cent but actually Delhi is not
using any green energy. To overcome the issue of mismatch between
availability of RE Resources in a State and the requirement of the
obligated entities to meet the Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO),
the Secretary of CERC stated that they have come up with a
mechanism of renewable energy certificates under which States
endowed with abundant renewable energy potential generates more
power than required under RPO and can sell the certificate of excess
generation to States bereft of renewable energy source so that they
can fulfil their RPO. The Committee while endorsing this concept feel
that it is a step in the right direction to promote the optimum
utilization of renewable energy as it incentivises the production of
energy from renewable sources and will encourage the endowed States
to fully utilize their renewable sources. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that RPO should be fixed uniformly for each State at 7%
for the year 2012 and thereby increasing 1% every year to reach 15%

76
in year 2020 as envisaged under National Action Plan on Climate
Change (NAPCC) in year 2008. The Committee expect that the
Government will take sincere and prompt action in this regard under
their intimation.
Reply of the Government
The responsibility of promoting cogeneration and generation of
electricity from renewable sources of energy has been entrusted on
the Appropriate Commission in section 61 and in particular to the
State Commissions under section 86(1)(e) of the Electricity Act, 2003.
Pursuant to this provision of the act, the tariff policy stipulates that
the Appropriate Commission shall fix minimum percentage of purchase
of power from such sources taking into account the availability of
renewable resources in the region and its impact on the retail tariff.
Accordingly, almost all State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(SERCs)/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commissions (JERCs) have
specified the Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPOs) for their licensee
distribution companies. Specified RPO varies across the States.
In order to accelerate the large-scale deployment of renewable
energy, the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
envisages dynamic renewable purchase obligation target of 5% at
national level for 2010 with annual increase in trajectory over long
term so as to reach around 15% RPO target by 2020 at national level.
The Ministry of Power also amended the Para 6.4(1) of Tariff
Policy which inter-alia States that purchase of energy from non-
conventional sources of energy should take place more or less in the
same proportion in different States and for achieving this objective in
the current scenario of large availability of such resources only in
certain part of the country, an appropriate mechanism such as
Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) would need to be evolved.
The Tariff Policy was amended on 20.1.2011 for fixing a minimum
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a
distribution licensee from solar energy in accordance with the National
Solar Mission strategy. The minimum percentage for purchase of solar
energy will go up to 0.25% by the end of 2012-2013 and further up
to 3% by 2022.
In this connection in order to bring in an element of harmony in
approach, the FoR had, in 2010, carried out a study to assess the
feasible renewable energy potential in different States to enable setting
the possible RPO trajectories and its likely impact on consumer tariff.

77
This study had revealed that to achieve the NAPCC suggested target,
availability of renewable energy capacity would not be a constraint to
meet the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) target of
10% by 2015 and around 45000 MW RE generation capacities will be
required. Further study report revealed that the pan India incremental
impact of increasing RPO by a uniform rate of 1.2% every year from
the present level of 4% would not be substantial and the incremental
impact was estimated to be less than 1.5 paise per unit which reduces
to almost zero in 2015. Almost 25000 MW capacities are required to
be added in the next 4 years to achieve 10% target as suggested by
NAPCC by FY 2015, in accordance with the above referred study. In
June, 2012 another study was carried out by FOR for suggesting RPO
trajectories based on resource assessment for the period from 2012 to
2017.
Further, in order to accelerate development of Renewable Energy
through legislative & policy changes and to evolve competitive bidding
guidelines for procurement of power from renewable energy by
distribution licensees under section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 and
also to suggest measures for addressing the issues relating to
connectivity and evacuation infrastructure for large scale deployment
of renewable energy, a Committee has been constituted in the Ministry
of Power.
The recommendation of the Committee regarding prescribing
uniform RPO in line with the NAPCC will be examined for further
action in this regard in consultation with States as the same is likely
to have financial implications on the distribution utilities.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 27/7/2010 (Vol.-IV)-R&R
dated 18.03.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
26 August, 2013 Chairman,
04 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

78
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH  SITTING  OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2012-13)
HELD ON 22ND AUGUST, 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘G-074’ PARLIAMENT LIBRARY
BUILDING, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to 1035 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
4. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
5. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
6. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
7. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
8. Smt. Pratibha Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Y .S. Chowdary
10. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
11. Shri K.C. Tyagi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure
and conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.

79
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and in
particular Smt. Pratibha Singh who has been nominated to the
Committee w.e.f. 13.08.2013. He appreciated the work done by the
Committee during its current term. Thereafter, he briefly apprised
them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took up for
consideration of the draft 38th Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in 30th Report on
the subject ‘Functioning of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(CERC)’.
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Report with minor
modification.
5. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Report and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.

80
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
30TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 16
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15
Total: 10
Percentage 62.5%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8
Total: 02
Percentage 12.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
the replies of  the  Government  have  not  been
accepted by the Committee  and  which  require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2, 3 and 5
Total: 03
Percentage 18.75%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which
final reply of the Government is still awaited:
Sl. No. 16
Total: 01
Percentage 6.25%