STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Transmission and Distribution Systems and
Networks”]
23
TWENTY THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TWENTY THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Transmission and Distribution Systems and
Networks”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


COE No. 217
Price : Rs. 55.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
14
31
35
40
43
44
45
47
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) .............................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report.....................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government....................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies......................................................................
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and require reiteration..........................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise coverage and achievement of electrification
of villages and release of BPL connections for the
sanctioned projects unders RGGVY ..........................
II. State-wise coverage and achievement of electrification
of villages and release of BPL connections for the
sanctioned projects under RGGVY in North Eastern
region......................................................................
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
21st December, 2011...............................................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
14th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................
PAGE
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P.C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal V ora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 23rd Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 14th Report of the Standing Committee on
Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on "Transmission and Distribution Systems and
Networks".
2. The 14th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 18th March,
2011 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
12th July, 2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 21st December, 2011.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 14th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-ll.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
(v)
 N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADA V,
21 December , 2011 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
'Transmission and Distribution Systems and Networks' pertaining to the
Ministry of Power.
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
18th March, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 19 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Replies in respect of all the nineteen Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19.
Total-12
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
Serial Nos. 8, 9 and 11.
Total-03
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 4, 5 and 10.
Total-03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply
of the Government is still awaited:
Serial No. 2.
Total-01
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
and final reply to the Observation/Recommendation contained in
Chapter-V of the Report in respect of which Government has
submitted interim reply, may be furnished to the Committee within
three months of the presentation of this Report. The final reply to
the Observation/Recommendation contained in Chapter-V of this
Report may be furnished in coordination with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that require
reiteration or merit comments.
A. National Grid and Regional Transmission System
(Recommendation SI. No. 3)
6. The Committee in their Fourteenth Report had observed that
development and upkeep of the National Grid, which is an important
component for facilitating the delivery of electricity without congestion,
was not being given the importance it deserves. The Committee had found
that the capacity of the National Grid was only 20,750 MW and the
anticipated growth of inter-regional transmission capacity by March, 2012
(i.e. end of the 11th Plan) was reportedly 32,650 MW. In view of the
revised capacity addition target of 62,000 MW in the 11th Plan, the
Committee were apprehensive of the inadequacy of the transmission system
and had emphasized upon the proper development and efficient upkeep
of the National Grid for transfer of power from surplus to deficit areas
along with the creation of High Capacity Transmission Highway Corridors
for smooth transmission of power in peak periods. Considering the huge
electricity generation targets for the 12th Five Year Plan, the Committee

3
had recommended the Ministry to fix the matching growth and enlargement
of the National Grid in the 12th Plan period.
7. In their action taken replies, the Ministry of Power inter-alia
have stated:—
"...Till date, National Power Grid with an inter-regional power
transmission capacity of about 22,400 MW has been established to
meet inter-regional power transfer requirement of the country. It is
pertinent to mention that no power evacuation constraint has been
faced in the country for central sector generation projects for want
of POWERGRID transmission system."
The Ministry of Power have added:
"In order to meet the growing power demand of the country, the
Government of India has envisaged generation capacity addition
through private sector participation and a number of Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) have been setting-up/plans to set-up power
generation plants of different capacity with various time schedules
in the country. These power generation plants are mainly coming-
up in resource rich States, i.e. Orissa, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. and the power generated is required to
be transmitted to load centers located across the States and Regions.
For this, to grant connectivity and Long Term Access to the IPPs,
POWERGRID, the Central Transmission Utility has been made the
nodal agency. Till April 2011, POWERGRID has granted Long Term
Open Access to 135 Nos. of IPP projects. These IPP projects propose
to add generation capacity of about 1,16,000 MW and have been
granted long term access for about 90,000 MW.
Keeping in view of staggered commissioning schedule of generation
projects and techno economic feasibility for transfer of power from
these generation projects to load centers, 9 Nos. of High Capacity
Power Transmission Corridors (HVDC links/765 kV EHV AC) have
been evolved in consultation with CEA, IPPs & beneficiaries
catering to Orissa, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,

4
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu etc. The expected cost of these
transmission highways is about Rs 58,000 crore."
They further informed that
"Regulatory approval has been accorded by Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission for implementation of these corridors and
POWERGRID is in the process of developing these high capacity
transmission corridors. Implementation of these transmission
corridors is being taken up in phased manner matching with the
generation capacity addition to the extent possible. In this regard,
investment approval has already been accorded to 2 high capacity
corridors of Orissa & Sikkim and accordingly, these have been taken
up for implementation. Other corridors are under various stages of
finalization/approval and shall be taken up matching with the
generation capacity addition."
8. The Committee in their recommendation had emphasized
upon proper development and efficient upkeep of the National Grid
for smooth transmission of power all over the country in view of
massive capacity addition targets during the 11th and 12th Five Year
Plans. While acknowledging the steps taken by the Ministry to
improve inter-regional power transfer, the Committee feel that a lot
more requires to be done in this regard. It has been noted that
the Government has planned considerable capacity addition through
private sector participation and a number of projects by Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) are being set up in different parts of the
country adding the generation capacity of about 1,16,000 MW. For
transfer of power from these generation projects to load centers,
9 Nos. of High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors (HVDC links/
765 kV EHV AC) have been evolved with the expected cost of about
Rs. 58,000 crore. The Ministry has stated in its reply that
implementation of these transmission corridors is being taken up
in phased manner matching with the generation capacity addition
to the extent possible. It has also been brought to the notice of
the Committee that investment approval has already been accorded
to the two high capacity corridors and other seven corridors are under

5
various stages of finalization/approval. However, from the replies of
the Ministry, the Committee are unable to clearly comprehend
whether the proposed expansion of high capacity power transmission
corridors would be adequate to match the massive targets of 11th
and 12th Five Year Plans for capacity addition regarding generation
of power and whether the source of required funds to the tune of
Rs. 58,000 crore for the transmission projects have been firmed up.
Though the Ministry has categorically stated that no power evacuation
constraint had been faced in the country for central sector generation
projects for want of POWERGRID transmission system, the
Committee nevertheless strongly feel that there is acute need to
evolve and establish an effective National Grid in a time bound
manner for smooth transmission of electricity to every nook and
corner of the country so as to complement the rapidly growing power
sector. In view of the foregoing, the Committee re-emphasize the
necessity of proper development and efficient upkeep of the National
Grid for transfer of power from surplus to deficit areas and for
smooth transmission of power in peak periods.
B. Sub-Station Programmes
(Recommendation Serial No. 4)
9. The Committee had observed that achievement of target under
the transformation capacity of sub-stations programme and achievement
for 11th Plan in the 765 kV and 
+500 kV HVDC had been very poor
(achievement of only 20% & below) in the first three years of the Plan
period and was far from satisfactory. The Ministry was asked to identify
the reasons for such a dismal performance in the sector and take necessary
steps to avoid the recurrence. Besides, the Committee had emphasized
upon a focused approach and concerted efforts with proper planning for
a well developed transmission system for achieving the targets set for
the programme.
10. The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply has inter-
alia stated that transformation capacity and sub-station addition programme
is finalised based on the system requirement for dispersal of power to
various beneficiaries. Commissioning of transmission projects comprising

6
various elements of different voltage levels depends on commissioning of
generation projects in various regions and therefore year-wise achievements
may vary.
Regarding establishment of +500 kV HVDC, the Ministry stated:
"With regard to establishment of +500kV HVDC, it may be mentioned
that due to deferment of Barh generation project (anticipated now
in June'2012 from its original schedule of Mar., 2009), transmission
system associated with Barh generation project was slowed down
to match the generation project. However, considering the fact that
the system can be used for facilitating exchange of operational
surpluses from ER to NR constituents, POWERGRID, with the
concurrence of regional power utilities, has already put in operation
1st pole of Balia-Bhiwadi HVDC line (1500 MW) during FY 2010-11
and 2nd pole (1500 MW) is expected to be added during
FY 2011-12."
11. On the basis of the data provided by the Ministry, the
Committee in their recommendation had strongly commented on poor
performance of the Ministry under the transformation capacity of
sub-station programme and during first three years of the 11th Plan
and had urged the Ministry to identify the reasons for dismal
performance and take remedial actions. However, the Committee find
that the Ministry instead of critically examining its under-
performance, has chosen to vehemently defend it in the camouflage
of (delay in) commissioning of generation projects in various regions.
Similarly, poor show in the establishment of 
+500kV HVDC has been
attributed to deferment of Barh generation project. The Committee
do understand that delay in generation project affects the pace of
establishment of transmission system, yet they do not agree that
this is the sole reason for a poor achievement, that is 20% below
the target. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that the
Ministry must revisit and re-analyze the execution of transmission
system so as to achieve the balance targets during the remaining
months of the 11th Five Year Plan itself. This would certainly achieve
the objective of timely completion of the National Grid and Regional

7
Transmission system. The Ministry should address the reasons
responsible for its low performance and come up with proper planning
in future particularly for the 12th Five Year Plan as well as focus
on timely execution of transmission system.
C. Open access in inter-State Transmission
(Recommendation Serial No. 5)
12. The Committee in their Fourteenth Report had noted that CERC
had issued regulations for grant of connectivity, long term access and
medium term open access in inter-state transmission and related matters
with provision for sale and purchase of power under medium term open
access up to a period of three years. Further the rates for such Bilateral
Exchange of Power would be mutually negotiable and for collective
transactions, the rates were determined through power exchanges. The
Committee had urged the Ministry to encourage open access in transmission
and also to devise some mechanism to facilitate Bilateral Exchange of Power
safeguarding the interest of consumers in view of some States selling
electricity in peak times at very high rates to deficit States. The Committee
had recommended the Ministry to frame necessary suitable guidelines in
this regard.
13. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have
stated:—
"In order to meet the growing power demand of the country, the
Government of India has envisaged generation capacity addition
through private sector participation and a number of Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) have been setting-up/plans to set-up power
generation plants of different capacity with various time schedules
in the country. These power generation plants are mainly coming-
up in resource rich States, i.e. Orissa, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. and the power generated is required to
be transmitted to load centers located across the States and Regions.
For this, to grant connectivity and Long Term Access to the IPPs,
POWERGRID, the Central Transmission Utility has been made the
nodal agency. Till April 2011, POWERGRID has granted Long Term

8
Open Access to 135 nos. of IPP projects. These IPP projects propose
to add generation capacity of about 1,16,000 MW and have been
granted long term access for about 90,000 MW.
Keeping in view of staggered commissioning schedule of generation
projects and techno economic feasibility for transfer of power from
these generation projects to load centers, 9 nos. of High Capacity
Power Transmission Corridors (HVDC links/765 kV EHV AC) have
been evolved in consultation with CEA, IPPs & beneficiaries catering
to Orissa, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu etc.. The expected cost of these transmission
highways is about Rs. 58,000 crore.
The High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors includes:
1. Transmission System Associated with Phase-I Generation
Projects in Orissa.
2. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Jharkhand.
3. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Sikkim.
4. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Bilaspur
complex, Chhattisgarh & IPPs in Madhya Pradesh.
5. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Chhattisgarh.
6. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Krishnapatnam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
7. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Tuticorin
Area, Tamil Nadu.
8. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Srikakulam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
9. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Southern
Region for transfer of power to other regions.
Regulatory approval has been accorded by Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission for implementation of these corridors and

9
POWERGRID is in the process of developing these high capacity
transmission corridors. Implementation of these transmission
corridors is being taken up in phased manner matching with the
generation capacity addition to the extent possible. In this regard,
investment approval has already been accorded to 2 high capacity
corridors of Orissa & Sikkim and accordingly, these have been taken
up for implementation. Other corridors are under various stages of
finalization/approval and shall be taken up matching with the
generation capacity addition."
14. The Committee in their Fourteenth Report had raised an
important issue of sale and purchase of power under medium term
open access in inter-state transmission and had expressed concern
over selling of electricity by some States at very high rates in peak
times to deficit States. In this backdrop, the Committee had asked
to the Ministry frame necessary suitable guidelines. But the
Committee are astonished to find that the Ministry in their
belaboured reply, instead of replying to an important issue of Bilateral
Exchange of Power, has reproduced a major portion of repeated reply
as furnished to some other Recommendations regarding development
and upkeep of the National Grid. The Committee are very clear that
the two issues viz. development of the National Grid reflected in
Recommendation Sl. No. 3 and that of issuing guidelines for power
exchange in inter-State transmission dealt with in Recommendation
Sl. No. 5 are two distinct issues. The Committee therefore, expect
that the Ministry's replies to the recommendation of the Committee
are specific and to the point. They therefore, reiterate that the
Ministry should encourage open access in transmission and devise
some fair and transparent mechanism to facilitate Bilateral Exchange
of Power safeguarding the interest of consumers by framing some
suitable guidelines in this regard. The Committee would await
Ministry's specific reply to this vital recommendation of the
Committee.
D. Distribution — Implementation of R-APDRP
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10)
15. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee had noted that the
Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme

10
(R-APDRP) was launched in 2008 with the focus on actual, demonstrable
performance in terms of Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) loss
reduction. The Programme with budget outlay of Rs. 51,577 crore was
divided in two parts. The Committee were given to understand that the
entire amount of loan for Part-A projects covering baseline system and
IT applications would be converted into grant on the completion of projects
and up to 50% (90% for special category States) loan of Part-B projects
(i.e. regular distribution strengthening projects) would be converted in to
grant on achieving the 15% AT&C loss in the project area on a sustainable
basis. In view of the fact that the projects under Part-B were sanctioned
in only 70% of the towns, the Committee had recommended to make
special efforts to sanction projects under Part-B of the scheme in all the
towns and also to take up periodic monitoring of the programme to ensure
that the targets set are achieved within the stipulated time with a view
to encourage those States where improvements are significant whereas
slow improving areas should be brought in for some harsh remedial
measures.
16. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have inter-
alia stated that as on 31.03.2011, Part-B schemes worth scheme cost
of Rs. 15,975 crore had been sanctioned for 823 of 1100 eligible towns
in the country viz. in 75% of eligible towns and an amount of Rs. 2,236
crore had been disbursed. Further Part-B schemes in balance 277 eligible
towns are envisaged to be sanctioned by September 2011.
17. The Committee in their Fourteenth Report had shown their
concern over slow pace of sanction as well as implementation of
R-APDRP projects at various places and had recommended to take
up periodic monitoring of the programme to ensure that the targets
set are achieved within the stipulated time with a view to encourage
those States where improvements are significant whereas slow
improving areas be brought in for some harsh remedial measures.
They are, however, dissatisfied with the replies furnished by the
Ministry as the replies do not cover the entire gamut of the
Committee's well considered issues in their recommendation. It
appears that the Ministry has adopted a complacent and tentative

11
approach towards the recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee would like the Ministry to take action on their
recommendation in letter and spirit and furnish an updated follow
up action on their recommendation.
E. Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14)
18. The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) was
launched in March, 2005 with an objective to electrify over one lakh un-
electrified villages and to provide free electricity connections to 2.34 crore
rural BPL households. It was informed by the Ministry that a provision
of Rs. 28,000 crore capital subsidy was made during the 11th Five Year
Plan against the proposed requirement of Rs. 42,000 crore for
comprehensive rural electrification in the country. The Committee had
observed from the data supplied by the Ministry that 67.9% of un-electrified
villages and 46.24% of BPL households were covered by May, 2010. The
Committee had also found that the sanctions by REC under T&D which
include short term loan and RGGVY were negligible for the States of Bihar,
Jharkhand, Orissa and West Bengal in the year 2009-10 and 2010-11. In
view of this, the Committee had desired that the Government should
sanction the funds as required under the scheme so that the scheme did
not suffer for want of funds. As a large number of villages remained
to be electrified especially in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand, Assam, Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar, the Committee had recommended to deal with these
States as high priority areas and the implementation and execution of the
projects be monitored under the aegis of the Ministry of Power and other
related Central Government Departments in coordination with concerned
State Governments.
19.   The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply has inter-
alia informed that as on 31st March, 2011, the electrification works in
96,562 number of un/de-electrified villages (86.09%) and 159.80 lakh
number of BPL households (66.11%) have reportedly been completed under
the scheme.

12
It has also been informed that all the available projects from the
States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh were already
sanctioned before 2009-10. The Ministry further added:
"Progress is regularly monitored and reviewed by Ministry of Power
(MoP), Monitoring Committee on RGGVY and Rural Electrification
Corporation (REC), the nodal agency for RGGVY with the
implementing agencies of the States. With the concerted efforts of
all the stakeholders, good progress in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand,
Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar has been reported. The details are
as under:
Sl.  Name of Proposed Coverage Revised Coverage Cumulative
No.  the State Achievement
Un/De- BPL Un/De BPL Un/De- BPL
electrified HH's electrified HH's electrified HH's
villages villages villages
1. Assam 8525 991656 8307 983587 6019 574771
2. Bihar 23211 2762455 22658 2762173 20981 1744098
3. Jharkhand 19737 1691797 19639 1889319 17181 1161158
4. Orissa 17895 3185863 16584 3277470 13187 2229813
5. Uttar Pradesh 30802 1120648 27727 851388 27759 871920
20. With regard to the implementation of Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), the Committee feel that
the Ministry still have a long way to go. Even at the end of the
financial year 2010-11, around 13 per cent of un-electrified villages
and 34 per cent of BPL households were yet to be covered under
the scheme. The Ministry had itself admitted that due to limitation
of funds under RGGVY, a significant area of the country could not
be covered for providing access to electricity, especially larger and
smaller hamlets in the States of Assam, Bihar, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh and smaller hamlets in other States. The Committee had,

13
therefore, raised the issue of sanction of funds as required under
the scheme particularly in the Eastern States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Orissa and West Bengal where sanction of funds by REC under T&D
were negligible during the last two years. The Ministry has informed
in their Action Taken Replies that all the available projects from
the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and U.P. were already
sanctioned before 2009-10. Apart from sanction of the projects in
these States, the Committee had urged the Ministry to deal with
these States as high priority areas and monitor the execution of the
projects under the aegis of the Ministry of Power and other related
Central Government Departments in coordination with concerned
State Governments. It has been informed by the Ministry in their
reply that the programme is regularly monitored and reviewed by
the Ministry of Power, monitoring Committee on RGGVY and REC
with the implementing agencies of the States. The Ministry appears
to be satisfied with their efforts and content with the results by
stating that good progress in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand, Assam,
U.P. and Bihar has been reported. However, the scrutiny of the data
supplied by the Ministry reveals that as on 31st March, 2011, free
electricity connections were provided in only 58.43% BPL households
in Assam, 63.14% in Bihar, 61.46% in Jharkhand and 68.03% in
Orissa and less than 80% un-electrified villages were covered for
electrification in Assam and Orissa even if the revised targets are
taken in to consideration. In other States also, a substantial quantum
of work is left to be done. Against this backdrop, the Committee
desire that the Ministry should make all efforts to complete the
remaining work of the first phase of the RGGVY during the current
financial year itself. The Committee also would like the Ministry
to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission for making requisite funds available for the 12th Plan
to take up intensive electrification of villages in the next phase.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Serial No. 1)
Achievement of Targets in the Transmission Sector (10th and 11th
Five Year Plans)
The Committee note that the targets for inter-regional transmission
during the 10th Plan (2002-07) was kept as 15,400 MW, which was later
revised to 12,200 MW due to the rescheduling of the Barh generation
project. However, the total achievement was only 8,300 MW. No year-
wise target for the 10th Plan was fixed. The Committee also find that
the 11th Plan initially had a target of 18,600 MW only. No year wise
target was fixed for 2007-08 and 2008-09 (the achievement being
2400 MW in 2007-08 and 3300 MW in 2008-09 respectively). Against
a target of 2600 MW for 2009-10, the achievement was 1000 MW. The
target for the year 2010-11 was kept at 1600 MW. The Ministry have
further informed that the PGCIL has planned to add 7200 MW in the
Financial Year 2010-11 and 2011-12 and a balance 4700 MW inter-regional
capacity addition is under various stages of implementation, and it may
slip to 12th Plan. The reasons for this have been attributed to deferment
of Sasaram - Fatehpur line (2100 MW) and delay in generation and capacity
addition in the Eastern Region like North Karanpura, Barh, Nabinagar. The
South West Inter-regional link (1000 MW) is also likely to be commissioned
in early 12th Plan. The Committee are dismayed to note that till the
10th and early 11th Plan periods yearly targets for inter-regional
transmission systems were not fixed by the Ministry. The failure to fix
adequate targets may have lead to lower achievement of only 8300 MW
as against 15400 MW in the 10th Plan period. Similarly achievement in
the first two years of the 11th Plan has been only 5700 MW (2400 MW
in 2007-08 and 3300 MW in 2008-09). However, it sharply fell in the
year 2009-10 to 1000 MW, 7200 MW are planned to be added in the
Financial Years 2010-11 and 2011-12 which again appears to be a very

15
high target compared to assigned target of only 1600 MW in the year
2010-11. No cogent reasons have been furnished for such a sharp decline
in maintaining even the previous year achievement. Now, the Government
plan to aichieve 7200 MW in the remaining years of the 11th Plan. However,
the target for 2010-11 has been fixed to be 1600 MW only. Thus, as
to how the cumulative target of 7200 MW will be achieved during the
remaining period of the plan i.e. upto March, 2012 is beyond any
comprehension. The Ministry is also giving very varying figures with
regard to the target of 2010-11 and 2011-12. It has not been clarified
whether 1600 MW through competitive bidding transmission capacity
will be achieved out of 7200 MW earmarked for the years 2010-11 and
2011-12 or otherwise. The Committee regret to note that 4700 MW is
likely to slip in the 12th Plan. The main reasons adduced by the Ministry
being deferment of Sasaram - Fatehpur line (2100 MW) and delay in
addition of generation capacity in the Eastern region. Considering the
performance in transmission sector in the year 2009-10 and the target
for 2010-11, it will be Utopian target of 7200 MW to be achieved by
the end of the 11th Plan. The Committee recommend that realistic yearly
targets need to be fixed in the transmission sector based on basic
assessment parameters like generation time, transmission from projects,
availability of clearances etc. as these can be well foreseen and are not
insurmountable. For new projects of transmission and distribution
synchronization is needed with the Ministry of Power, State Government,
PSUs and all parties involved ( i.e. Stakeholders) to overcome all major
hurdles of non-achievement of targets. Similarly, the Committee find that
land acquisition policies with regard to transmission lines and projects
differs from State to State with variations in J&K and Kerala vis-a-vis
other States. The Ministry should take up this issue with the State
Governments so as to develop a uniform pattern in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In the 1990's, transmission planning was shifted from mere generation
evacuation system planning to integrated system planning leading to
formation of National Power Grid in the country. The inter-regional power
transmission capacity addition has been planned and implemented as part
of transmission systems for generation projects considering the power
supply situation in various regions and development of projects with

16
beneficiaries located in more than one region and/or beneficiaries in a region
other than where the generation project is located. Therefore, the inter-
regional power transmission capacity addition depends upon commissioning
of generation projects in various regions and every year achievements may
vary.
The initial target for intjr-regional transmission capacity during 10th
Plan was to add 15,400 MW and due to rescheduling of Barh generation
project from 10th Plan, the target was revised to 12,200 MW. As against
12,200 MW, the actual achievement was addition of 8,300 MW as given
below:—
Sl.No. Regions Tar get (MW) Achievement (MW)
1. ER-SR 3,000 2,500
2. ER-NR 5,700 3,300
3. ER-WR 2,400 1,400
4. NR-WR 1,100 1,100
Total 12,200 8,300
The shortfall of 3,900 MW in achievement of 10th Plan target was
on account of non completion of (a) upgradation of Talcher-Kolar (500
MW), (b) Ranchi-Sipat 400 kV D/C (Double Circuit) (1,000 MW),
(c) Biharshariff-Balia 400 kV D/C quad (1,600 MW) and (d) one circuit
of Patna-Balia 400 kV D/C (quad) line (800 MW), which was mainly
on account of slippages in generation projects.
During 11th Plan (2007-12), inter-regional transmission systems of
18,600 MW capacity were planned. It was intimated to the Committee
that 4,700 MW of inter-regional power transmission capacity addition was
likely to slip to XII plan. Out of the balance programme of 13,900 MW
for 11th Plan, 9,700 MW has been added till date i.e. 2,400 MW capacity
was added during 2007-08, 3,300 MW during 2008-09 and 1,000 MW
during 2009-10, 1,600MW [Barh-Balia 400 kV D/C (Quad)] during
FY 2010-11 and 1,400 MW during the current financial year i.e.,
(Rourkela-Raigarh 400 kV D/C (2nd) Line — 1400 MW.

17
It is expected that balance addition of 4,200 MW — 765 kV
S/C Gaya-Balia Line — 2100 MW and 765 kV S/C Sasaram-Fatehpur
Line — 2100 MW is likely to be achieved in FY 2011-12.
The generation addition capacity during the XII Five Year Plan is
being worked out on corresponding inter-regional transmission capacity
is also being assessed.
For all matters relating to the Land Acquisition and the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, the Ministry of Rural Development
is the Nodal Ministry and therefore, a consultation with the aforesaid
Ministry is a pre-requisite before taking any policy decision which may
lead to deviation from the established Policy/Law/Guidelines.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
(Recommendation Serial No. 3)
National Grid and Regional Transmission System
The Committee note that except for the Southern Region, the rest
of the country operates at single synchronous frequency. The transmission
systems of regional grids facilitate delivery of power to the State grids,
the National Grid is an important component for facilitating the delivery
of electricity without congestion. The Committee find that development
and upkeep of the National Grid is not being given the importance it
deserves. As the exploitable energy resources of our country are
concentrated in certain pockets and transfer of power becomes important
to the other regions which do not have adequate natural resources for
setting up power plants. The Committee also find that efforts are not
being made to create high capacity transmission highways corridors for
smooth transmission of power. The Committee find that four major power
regions in the country namely, North-Eastern, Eastern, Western and
Northern are operating in one synchronous grid, the Southern region is
yet to be attached to the Grid. The Committee are also anguished that
the present capacity of the National Grid was only 20,750 MW and the
anticipated growth of inter-regional transmission capacity by March, 2012
(end of XI Plan) is 32,650 MW. With a capacity addition target of 62,000
MW, the committee are not very sure that the system would be able to

18
cope up with the demand. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
the proper development and efficient upkeep of the National Grid for
transfer of power from surplus to deficit areas alongwith the creation
of High Capacity Transmission Highway Corridors for smooth transmission
of power in peak periods. Considering the huge electricity generation targets
for the 12th Five Year Plan the Committee recommend that matching
growth and enlargement of the National Grid in the XII Plan period need
to be fixed.
Reply of the Government
During the 1980s, regional grids were developed with construction
of power evacuation lines planned and implemented as associated
transmission system of central sector generation schemes for benefits
within the regions. The initial set of inter-regional links developed for
building inter-State infrastructure was utilized to facilitate exchange of
operational surpluses among the various regions in a limited manner because
the regional grids were operated independently and had different operational
frequencies and the power exchanges on these inter-regional links could
take place only in radial mode.
Subsequently, transmission planning was shifted from earlier
generation evacuation system planning to integrated system planning leading
to formation of National Power Grid in the country based on the perspective
planning done by CEA. Considering the then prevailing operational regime
in all the regions, to start with asynchronous connections between the
regional grids were established to enable exchange of regulated quantum
of power. Accordingly, asynchronous HVDC back-to-back links of
500 MW between the Northern Region and the Western Region at
Vindhyachal, 1000 MW between Western Region and Southern Region at
Bhardawati, 1000 MW between Eastern Region and Southern Region and
500 MW between Eastern Region and Northern Region at Sasaram were
established during 90s and early 2000s.
Subsequently, considering the power profile of various regions and
projects with beneficiaries in more than regions, synchronous inter-
connection between regions was taken up. The Eastern Region (ER) and
the North-Eastern Region (NER) have been operating in parallel since 1992.
Western Region (WR) was inter-connected to ER-NER system

19
synchronously in 2003. The Northern Region was also synchronously
integrated with the ER/NER/WR system in August, 2006. Presently, four
regions namely, North-Eastern, Eastern, Western, and Northern Regions,
out of five regional grids are operating in synchronous mode (at same
frequency).
Southern Region (SR) is well connected with neighboring regions
i.e. ER & WR through HVDC & HV AC links having total inter-regional
power transfer capacity of 5,350 MW. SR Grid is likely to be connected
synchronously ( i.e. operating at the same frequency) with rest of the
regions by early XII Plan as per materialization of planned generation
capacity addition.
Presently, POWERGRID carries about 50% of the total power of
the country through various EHV transmission lines and has transformation
capacity of more than 90,000 MV A. POWERGRID facilitate transfer of
power within and across the regions for optimum utilisation of generation
resources and for meeting power demand in various parts of the country.
Till date, National Power Grid with an inter-regional power transmission
capacity of about 22,400 MW has been established to meet inter-regional
power transfer requirement of the country. It is pertinent to mention that
no power evacuation constraint has been faced in the country for central
sector generation projects for want of POWERGRID transmission system.
Through its State-of-the-art Regional Load Despatch Centres and
deployment of modern Operation and maintenance techniques like
Emergency Restoration Systems, Hot Line Maintenance, Live line washing
of insulators through helicopters, POWERGRID has been maintaining its
Regional Grids and National Grid without any major grid disturbances since
last more than 8 years.
POWERGRID has been facilitating transfer of power from one part
of the country to any other part and has been successfully managing grid
parameters, viz. voltage and frequency as per IEGC code.
In order to meet the growing power demand of the country, the
Government of India has envisaged generation capacity addition through
private sector participation and a number of Independent Power Producers
(IPPs) have been setting-up/plans to set-up power generation plants of

20
different capacity with various time schedules in the country. These power
generation plants are mainly coming-up in resource rich States, i.e. Odisha,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, etc. and the power
generated is required to be transmitted to load centers located across the
States and Regions.
For this, to grant connectivity and long term access to the IPPs,
POWERGRID, the Central Transmission Utility has been made the nodal
agency. Till April, 2011, POWERGRID has granted long term open access
to 135 nos. of IPP projects. These IPP projects propose to add generation
capacity of about 1,16,000 MW and have been granted long term access
for about 90,000 MW.
Keeping in view of staggered commissioning schedule of generation
projects and techno economic feasibility for transfer of power from these
generation projects to load centers, 9 nos. of High Capacity Power
Transmission Corridors (HVDC links/765 kV EHV AC) have been evolved
in consultation with CEA, IPPs and beneficiaries catering to Odisha,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, etc. The expected cost of these transmission highways is
about Rs. 58,000 Crore.
The High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors includes:—
1. Transmission System Associated with Phase-I Generation
projects in Odisha.
2. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Jharkhand.
3. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Sikkim.
4. Transmission   System  Associated  with  IPP  projects   in
Bilaspur complex, Chhattisgarh and IPPs in Madhya Pradesh.
5. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Chhattisgarh.
6. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Krishnapatnam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
7. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Tuticorin
Area, Tamil Nadu.

21
8. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Srikakulam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
9. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Southern
Region for transfer of power to other regions.
Regulatory approval has been accorded by Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission for implementation of these corridors and
POWERGRID is in the process of developing these high capacity
transmission corridors. Implementation of these transmission corridors is
being taken up in phased manner matching with the generation capacity
addition to the extent possible.
In this regard, investment approval has already been accorded to
2 high capacity corridors of Odisha and Sikkim and accordingly, these
have been taken up for implementation. Other corridors are under various
stages of finalization/approval and shall be taken up matching with the
generation capacity addition.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 6)
The Committee also learn that some special schemes have been
launched by the Government for strengthening the transmission system
in the country i.e. for instance, the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana in Bihar
and inter-State transmission system of Jammu and Kashmir has been
included in the Prime Minister's Reconstruction Plan sanctioned in 2007.
However, the Committee note that AT&C losses even after these schemes
were taken up have not comedown. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that special attention be given under the special schemes for
reduction of AT&C losses in the States.
Reply of the Government
AT&C losses in the States are taken care of under the R-APDRP
scheme of the Ministry of Power.

22
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the
"Restructured APDRP" for XI Plan as a Central Sector Scheme in its
meeting held on 31.07.2008. The focus of the programme is on actual,
demonstrable performance in terms of AT&C loss reduction. As approved
by CCEA note of R-APDRP, towns and cities having population greater
than 30,000 (10,000 in case of special category States) as per 2001 Census
are eligible for assistance under the programme. All APDRP towns satisfying
above criterion are also eligible under the scheme.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
(Recommendation Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that recently a Power System Operation
Corporation (POSOCO) has been registered as a wholly owned subsidiary
of Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. All the employees of RLDCs and
NLDC who are now POWERGRID employees will become the employee
of POSOCO which will be responsible for the operation and management
of NLDC and RLDCs. The Committee would like the Ministry/PGCIL to
review and monitor the working of POSOCO to ensure that the aims and
objectives for which POSOCO has been set up are achieved fully.
Reply of the Government
Power Operation System Co. Ltd. (POSOCO), a wholly owned
subsidiary of Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, was established
to look after the grid management functions of the company. POSOCO
has been fully operationalised in October, 2010 and currently it operates
National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC) and five Regional Load Despatch
Centers (RLDCs). For monitoring the performance, recently POWERGRID
has signed MoU with POSOCO detailing various targets to be achieved
for 2011-12 as per guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises.
Quarterly monitoring of the progress vis-a-vis targets is an integral part
of the MoU. The MoU shall serve the dual purpose of guidance as well
as monitoring the progress made by POSOCO. Further, CMD,
POWERGRID is the Chairman of POSOCO and also have its Director
(Operations) on the Board of POSOCO to review and monitor the working
of POSOCO.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG, dated 12.7.2011]

23
(Recommendation Serial Nos. 12 and 13)
The Committee are also anguished to learn that R-APDRP is not
applicable in States where privatization has taken place and distribution
companies have been established. These will be considered under the
scheme after two years from the date of sanction of the R-APDRP. The
Committee recommend that private players who performed well to achieve
the objective of the scheme should also be given a chance to benefit from
the scheme. The Committee would like to know about the policy in this
regard as two years of commencement of the scheme are already over.
Further, the Committee desire that projects relating to renovation of existing
lines and feeder separation programmes should also be covered under the
scheme.
The Committee note that about 8 years have passed since enactment
of Electricity Act, 2003. One of the measures aimed at in power reforms
was to provide open access to create competitiveness in the supply of
electricity. From the material furnished, the Committee observe that
there is hardly any progress in this matter. The Committee, therefore,
would like to be informed about the status of implementation of this vital
aspect.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power has already held a preliminary meeting on
9th March, 2011 on the issue of extending R-APDRP assistance to private
distribution companies. In the meeting, Power Finance Corporation,
designated as nodal agency for operationalising R-APDRP, presented draft
discussion paper regarding R-APDRP assistance to private distribution
companies and all members were requested to forward their comments.
Once the comments from all members are received and discussions with
CERC and other stakeholders is complete, the draft discussion paper shall
be suitably modified and presented to CCEA for their consideration.
The projects relating to renovation of existing lines and feeder
separation programmes in R-APDRP project areas are already covered for
assistance under Part-B of the scheme.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]

24
(Recommendation Serial No. 14)
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
The Committee note that the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY) is a flagship endeavour of the Government to electrify
over one lakh un-electrified villages and 2.34 crore rural BPL households
was initiated in 2005. The scheme was taken up in the year 2005 and
9819 villages were electrified in the year 2005-06. The No. of villages
electrified in 2006-07 was 28.706 against a target of 40,000. The
Committee have been informed that the XI Plan was sanctioned by the
Government on 3rd January, 2008 with a provision of Rs. 28,000 crore
capital subsidy at that stage against the proposed requirement of Rs. 42,000
crore for comprehensive rural electrification in the country. The Ministry
in the data supplied to the Committee have informed that 67.9% of un-
electrified villages and 46.24% of BPL households have been electrified
by May, 2010. As seen from the Data available to the Committee, the
sanctions made by REC under RGGVY under loan and grant decreased
from the FY 2007-08 to FY 2009-10. Similarly, the sanctions under T&D
which includes Short term loan and RGGVY were negligible for the States
of Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and West Bengal in the year 2009-10 and
2010-11. The Committee desire that the Government should sanction the
funds as required under the scheme so that the scheme does not suffer
for want of funds. The Committee also find that the pace of scheme
should be monitored more stringently as achievement of targets is below
70% in case of village electrification and below 50% in the case of BPL
households. The Committee find that a large number of villages remain
to be electrified especially in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand, Assam, Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar. These States need to be deal with as high priority
areas and the implementation and execution of the projects need to be
monitored under the aegis of the Ministry of Power and other related
Central Government departments in coordination with concerned State
Governments.
Reply of the Government
So far, under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY),
573 projects have been sanctioned covering electrification of 1.18 lakh
un/de-electrified villages (provisionally revised to 1.12 lakh un/de-electrified

25
villages after field survey) and providing free electricity connections to
2.46 crore BPL households (provisionally revised to 2.41 crore BPL
households after field survey). The award cost of these projects is
Rs. 32,333.59 crore.
So far, fund flow for the sanctioned projects has been smooth
and significant progress has been made in respect of electrification of
villages and BPL households. As on 31.03.2011, the electrification works
in 96,562 number of un/de-electrified villages (86.09%) and 159.80 lakh
number of BPL households (66.11%) have reportedly been completed under
the scheme.
The sanctions under RGGVY decreased during 2009-10 because the
majority of the available outlay during the 11th Plan was committed during
2007-08 and 2008-09 itself so that majority of the work could be completed
during the current Plan. All the available projects from the States of Bihar,
Jharkhand, Orissa and U.P. were already sanctioned before 2009-10.
Progress is regularly monitored and reviewed by Ministry of Power
(MOP), Monitoring Committee on RGGVY and Rural Electrification
Corporation (REC), the nodal agency for RGGVY with the implementing
agencies of the States. With the concerted efforts of all the stakeholders,
good progress in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand, Assam, Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar has been reported and details are enclosed at Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 15)
The Committee further note that the revised targets of the scheme
are to electrify one lakh villages and 1.75 crore BPL connections by March,
2012. The Government have attributed the delay in the scheme to the
fact that there was delay in sanction of continuation of scheme in the
XI Plan, some States took long time in awarding the projects, delay on
their part in allotment of land for new sub-stations, delay in release of
BPL lists by States, delay in forest clearances, delay in energisation and
delay in the taking over of completed villages. In the opinion of the
Committee these are the problems which can well be foreseen and

26
preemptive measures could be taken to ensure that pace of the scheme
and results to be achieved do not suffer on account of avoidable problems.
The Committee once again, reiterate that more effective coordination is
required between the State agencies and Rural Electrification Corporation
in execution of the projects. The Ministry of Power should help in
implementation process by becoming a facilitator for solving the issues
which hinder the implementation of the scheme in the States. Moreover,
the Committee as such feel that preparation of BPL lists should have been
a pre-requisite for implementation of the scheme to avoid the delay. The
Committee have also desired that the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission should in principle sanction phase II of the RGGVY so that
ground work in this area can be initiated and the hurdles experienced earlier
can be done away with when implementing Phase II of the scheme is
taken up.
Reply of the Government
Progress under RGGVY is regularly monitored and reviewed by
Ministry of Power (MOP), Monitoring Committee on RGGVY and Rural
Electrification Corporation (REC), the nodal agency for RGGVY with the
implementing agencies of the States. REC is also conducting review
meetings at State level; especially in the focused States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Orissa and North-eastern States, to resolve the bottlenecks hampering the
progress. Ministry had also advised States to constitute a State level
Committee headed by State Chief Secretaries to resolve inter-departmental
issues. States, where such Committees have regular meetings, have shown
better progress.
Preparation of BPL lists in advance may be considered as prerequisite
in restructuring of RGGVY in 12th Plan. Ministry of Power and Planning
Commission have initiated the planning work for extension of RGGVY
in the 12th Plan.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
(Recommendation Serial No. 16)
It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that out
of 84618 villages where works have reportedly been completed under the
scheme village electricity infrastructure, in 66497 villages electrification has

27
been energized. The Committee find no logic in mere completion of the
process of RGGVY without actual availability of electricity in these villages.
The Ministry have attributed the delay to reasons such as delay in statutory
clearances by Electrical inspectorate due to limited electrical inspectors,
delay in completion of new sub-stations due to non-acquisition of land,
inadequate capacity of back up transmission and sub-transmission system
in some States, shortage of manpower with concerned State Power utility
for energizing and operations and delay in deployment of franchisees to
manage the rural distribution etc. The Committee hope that the Ministry
of Power/REC and concerned States will work in a tandem to solve these
problems and ultimately help in bringing electricity to the villages which
may have access to the infrastructure without electricity for lack of
coordination and other technical reasons. The Committee once again stress
that a strong regional transmission system should have been a pre-requisite
for implementation of the RGGVY scheme and therefore the Committee
would like the Ministry to sanction more schemes for improving the
regional transmission network with Central Sector funds and grants.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has constituted a working group for expediting energisation
of villages where village electricity infrastructure has been completed. In
order to ensure timely energisation of completed villages, the working group
has finalized a schedule of 3 months for various activities involved in
energisation process viz. (i) submission of documents to respective State
power utility/Electrical Inspectorate, (ii) Inspection and reporting
deficiencies, if any, by the inspecting authority, (iii) Rectification of defects,
if any reported by the inspecting authority and (iv) Energisation of
completed works. Accordingly, all implementing agencies have been advised
to adhere to the prescribed schedule and ensure energisation of completed
villages within 3 month from completion of works. The working group
also looked into the various issues hindering the process of energisation
and found that energisation of 6319 villages could not be taken up to
due to various reasons like inadequate backup sub-transmission and
transmission system, pending forest clearance, pending railway crossing
clearance, theft of conductor etc. which are not directly under control
of implementing agencies. The implementing agencies have also been advised
to resolve such issues with the support of concerned State Government,

28
and State power utilities. The status of energisation as on 31.03.2011 with
respect to progress as on 31.12.2010 is as under:—
Works completed as on 31.12.2010 : 89675
Energisation affected due to various reasons : 6319
Villages available for energisation (w.r.t. 31.12.2010) : 83356
Villages reported Energised as on 31.03.2011 : 78810
Effective Gap as on 31.03.2011 w.r.t. progress : 4546
of 31.12.10
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
(Recommendation Serial No. 17)
Although the Ministry have informed that considering the poor status
of rural electrification in the NE region and districts having international
border all projects have been sanctioned in these areas irrespective of their
costs. They are being implemented by State Agencies, except 6 in Assam
and 2 in Tripura which are being implemented by PGCIL. The Committee
hope that the progress in these projects will pick up as achievement so
far has been quite low i.e. 31% villages and 34% BPL households have
been covered in the North East Region of the country. The Committee
hope that the Ministry will work more aggressively to achieve their targets
in this region of the country which is still lacking in basic infrastructure
and development.
Reply of the Government
Specific review meetings have been conducted in North-eastern States
like Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura keeping
in view the diverse geographical, climatic and economic conditions of the
areas and also to closely understand and resolve the various issues hindering
the progress under the scheme. As on 31.03.2011, the achievement with
respect to revised coverage of villages and BPL households has increased
to 54% and 50% respectively. The State-wise progress is enclosed at
Annexure-II.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG, dated 12.7.2011]

29
(Recommendation Serial No. 18)
As brought out in preceding paragraphs, the Committee, strongly
recommend that owing to the importance of the scheme and consequent
benefit accruing to the end beneficiary of the scheme as envisaged, a
holistic view covering the entire gamut of activity separately as well as
collectively need a revisit to refurbish the scheme based on the past
experience and rectifying inaccuracies that have been experienced hitherto.
To sum up it should be ensured that there are no paucity of funds in
implementing the scheme. The reasons enumerated for non energisation
of large number of villages should have been addressed before
commencement of the projects as they are not insurmountable in nature.
A clear and authentic availability of data on BPL households/ families,
availability of a strong regional transmission system, special attention to
electrification of border villages in the NE region in a definite time frame
and introduction of accountability factor in RGGVY is required for
successful and timely implementation of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Consultation process for restructuring the RGGVY for 12th Plan has
been started by the Ministry. Ministry will try to rectify various issues,
which affected the implementation during 11th Plan.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
(Recommendation Serial No. 19)
It has come to the notice of the Committee that projects relating
to RGGVY programme are assigned to various utilities in different States.
These utilities are sub-contracting the work and the sub-contractors are
further sub-contracting the job which, in turn, has reportedly affected the
quality of the work of the projects completed under the Scheme. The
Committee, taking a serious view in the matter, would like the Government
to examine this aspect and issue necessary guidelines to the implementing
agencies so that the only reliable/experienced/reputed agencies with proven
track record are assigned the jobs/projects.

30
Reply of the Government
Projects under the scheme are being implemented by the implementing
agencies through turnkey contracts. Implementation on turnkey basis has
been prescribed under the scheme so that reputed firms with adequate
project management and engineering capabilities execute the works
efficiently and effectively. However, keeping in view the local conditions
and to ensure speedy execution of works, the turnkey contractors have
also associated local sub-contractors. Assignment and subletting of contract
is permissible under guidelines for procurement of goods and services for
implementation of Rural Electrification Projects issued by REC. Further,
to ensure quality of material and execution of works, a 3-tier quality control
mechanism has been put in place.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]

31
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
(Recommendation Serial Nos. 8 and 9)
Distribution of Electricity
The Committee note that distribution is the key segment of electricity
supply chain. The distribution system should be such that it caters to
the rural and urban populations satisfactorily. The Committee feel that the
two areas have to be dealt with in specific manner quite different to each
other. The rural distribution is characterized by low paying capacity of
the people, large number of subsidized customers, practical difficulties,
low load etc. whereas the urban distribution is characterized by high density
and higher growth rate of load. The Committee are happy to know that
two major schemes of the Government i.e. the Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) and Rajeev Gandhi
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) have been launched to look into these areas.
The Committee note that the Electricity Act, 2003 had heavily stressed
on the unbundling/corporatisation of the distribution sector. The Ministry
have been informed that 19 of the 29 States have unbundled their
distribution sector, three States i.e. Jharkhand, Kerala and Bihar have
State Electricity Boards and Electricity Departments exist in J&K,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Goa. Six
Union Territories also have Electricity Departments Andaman and Nicobar,
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep, Daman, Diu, Chandigarh and
Puducherry. The Committee hope that each State would be able to take
care of their specific problems in their own way and ensure rationalization
of tariff, increase in billing efficiency and lowering AT&C losses as also
independent Energy accounting and auditing and prevention of theft of

32
electricity. Needless to point out that all these steps are also aimed at
passing the benefit to the consumers at large.
The Committee have been informed that the APDRP scheme was
launched in 2002-03 as additional Central assistance to the States for
strengthening an upgradation of Sub-transmission and distribution systems
with the main objective of reduction of AT&C losses, improve quality and
reliability of supply of power. The original scheme had 574 projects and
the total fund utilized was Rs. 14,077.86 crore. The 10th Plan APDRP
was closed on 31.3.2009 except in Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee
find that there was only a marginal decrease in the AT&C losses at national
level from 38.86% in 2001-02 to 28.44% during 2008-09 and most of
the States have not been able to bring down the loss below 15%. However,
feeder metering and consumer metering improved in the country. 25 States
also constituted their State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs).
AT&C losses have been reported below 20% in 215 APDRP towns in
the country and below 15% in 163 towns after implementing the APDRP,
however the Ministry have pointed out that no specific study has been
made to assess the currency of AT&C losses of towns covered under
the 10th Plan APDRP. The Committee feel that a meaningful study for
change in the format of APDRP scheme should have included the towns
covered under the 10th Plan APDRP.
Reply of the Government
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the
"Restructured APDRP" for 11th Plan as a Central Sector Scheme in its
meeting held on 31.07.2008. The focus of the programme is on actual,
demonstrable performance in terms of AT&C loss reduction. As approved
by CCEA note of R-APDRP, towns and cities having population greater
than 30,000 (10,000 in case of special category states) as per 2001 Census
are eligible for assistance under the programme. All APDRP towns satisfying
above criterion are also eligible under the scheme.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG, dated 12.7.2011]

33
(Recommendation Serial No. 11)
The Committee also note that presently the AT&C losses in the
country are to the tune of 28.44% whereas the shortage of power in
the country was 12.6% in the year 2009-10. The Committee recommend
that a detailed study should be carried out to assess the impact of loss
reduction under the APDRP and R-APDRP schemes and how this would
help in bridging the Demand and Supply position of power in the country.
Reply of the Government
••••• Energy losses occur in the process of supplying electricity to
consumers due to technical and commercial reasons. A
combination of technical and non-technical factors are
contributing to AT&C losses including the Commercial losses.
Technical losses can be reduced up to a certain limit and the
extra energy can be made available for supply to consumers
by reducing the technical losses. In case of commercial losses,
the energy is being used but not paid for. As such , the reduction
of commercial losses would only result in the increase of
revenue realization of Discoms and not the increase in energy.
••••• AT&C losses in the country during FY 2008-09 are 28.44%,
while in 2009-10, the energy shortages were 12.6%.
••••• Government of India launched Restructured-Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme (R-APDRP) during
11th Plan period as a Central sector scheme to reduce the AT&C
losses upto 15% and to encourage energy audit and accounting
through IT intervention in power sector. The programme size
of the R-APDRP scheme is Rs. 51,577 crore. The focus of
R-APDRP Scheme is on actual demonstrable performance by
utilities in terms of sustained AT&C loss reduction. Projects
under the scheme are being taken up in two Parts. Part-A
includes the projects for IT applications for energy accounting/
auditing, GIS, consumer indexing, SCADA & IT based

34
consumer service centers etc. and Part-B includes regular
distribution strengthening projects including separation of
agricultural feeders from domestic and industrial ones and
High V oltage Distribution System (HVDS) etc.
The R-APDRP scheme is under various stages of implementation in
all the states and the achievements would be known only after the
completion of the works.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
(Recommendation Serial No. 4)
The Committee are unhappy to find that achievement of target under
the transformation capacity of sub-stations programme and achievement
for XI Plan in the 765 kV and +500 kV HVDC has been very poor
(achievement of only 20% & below) in the first three years of the plan
period and is far from satisfactory. The reasons for such a dismal
performances in the sector should be identified and necessary steps taken
to avoid their recurrence. A focused approach and concerted efforts with
proper planning are essential for a well developed transmission system
for achieving the set targets set for the programme.
Reply of the Government
Transformation capacity and sub-station addition programme is
finalised based on the system requirement for dispersal of power to various
beneficiaries. Commissioning of transmission projects comprising various
elements of different voltage levels depends on commissioning of generation
projects in various regions and therefore year-wise achievements may vary.
As far as POWERGRID is concerned, the achievement of
transformation capacity addition vis-a-vis the targets finalised under
Memorandum of Understanding signed between POWERGRID and MoP
has been satisfactory. Achievement of Transformation capacity addition/
ready for commissioning during 11th plan is furnished below:—
FY Target (Very Good) Achievement
12 3
2007-08 11,280 13,075

36
12 3
2008-09 5,655 6,400
2009-10 9,000 10,290
2010-11 5,010 5,010
2011-12 16425 —
(proposed)
With regard to establishment of + 500kV HVDC, it may be mentioned
that due to deferment of Barh generation project (anticipated now in
June'2012 from its original schedule of Mar'. 2009), transmission system
associated with Barh generation project was slowed down to match the
generation project. However, considering the fact that the system can be
used for facilitating exchange of operational surpluses from ER to NR
constituents, POWERGRID, with the concurrence of regional power
utilities, has already put in operation 1st pole of Balia-Bhiwadi HVDC line
(1500 MW) during FY 2010-11 and 2nd pole (1500 MW) is expected
to be added during FY 2011-12.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 11 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that CERC has issued regulations for grant of
connectivity, long term access and medium term open access in interstate
transmission and related matters with a provision for sale and purchase
of power under medium term open access up-to a period of three years.
The rates for such Bilateral Exchange of power will be mutually negotiable.
For collective transactions, the rates are determined through power
exchanges. The Committee hope that the Ministry would encourage open
access in transmission and also devise some mechanism to facilitate Bilateral
Exchange of power safeguarding the interest of consumers as some States

37
sell electricity in peak times at very high rates to deficit States and therefore,
some suitable guidelines should be framed in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In order to meet the growing power demand of the country, the
Government of India has envisaged generation capacity addition through
private sector participation and a number of Independent Power Producers
(IPPs) have been setting-up/ plans to set-up power generation plants of
different capacity with various time schedules in the country. These power
generation plants are mainly coming-up in resource rich States, i.e. Orissa,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. and the power
generated is required to be transmitted to load centers located across the
States and Regions.
For this, to grant connectivity and Long Term Access to the IPPs,
POWERGRID, the Central Transmission Utility has been made the nodal
agency. Till Apr. 11, POWERGRID has granted Long Term Open Access
to 135 nos. of IPP projects. These IPP projects propose to add generation
capacity of about 1,16,000 MW and have been granted long term access
for about 90,000 MW.
Keeping in view of staggered commissioning schedule of generation
projects and techno-economic feasibility for transfer of power from these
generation projects to load centers, 9 nos. of High Capacity Power
Transmission Corridors (HVDC links/ 765 kV EHV AC) have been evolved
in consultation with CEA, IPPs & beneficiaries catering to Orissa,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Ckhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu etc.. The expected cost of these transmission highways is
about Rs. 58,000 Crore.
The High Capacity Power Transmission Corridors includes:
1. Transmission System Associated with Phase-I Generation
Projects in Orissa.
2. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Jharkhand.
3. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Sikkim.

38
4. Transmission   System  Associated  with  IPP  projects  in
Bilaspur complex, Chhattisgarh and IPPs in Madhya Pradesh.
5. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Chhattisgarh.
6. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Krishnapatnam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
7. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Tuticorin
Area, Tamil Nadu.
8. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in
Srikakulam Area, Andhra Pradesh.
9. Transmission System Associated with IPP projects in Southern
Region for transfer of power to other regions.
Regulatory approval has been accorded by Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission for implementation of these corridors and
POWERGRID is in the process of developing these high capacity
transmission corridors. Implementation of these transmission corridors is
being taken up in phased manner matching with the generation capacity
addition to the extent possible.
In this regard, investment approval has already been accorded to
2 high capacity corridors of Orissa & Sikkim and accordingly, these have
been taken up for implementation. Other corridors are under various stages
of finalization/approval and shall be taken up matching with the generation
capacity addition.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 10)
The Committee are aware of the fact that the distribution of power
is the primary responsibility of the State Governments and financial

39
assistance to States under APDRP is limited to project areas only. The
Committee have been informed that Re-structured APDRP (Revised) was
approved on 31.7.2008, keeping the size of the programme is Rs. 51,577
crore. Expected investment in part A (Baseline System) would be
Rs. 10,000 crore and part B would be Rs. 40,000 crore. The Committee
note that the entire amount of loan for part ‘A’ projects would be converted
into grant on the completion of the projects and upto 50% (90% for special
category States) loan of achieving the 15% AT&C loss in the project area
on sustainable basis. The Committee have been informed that part ‘A’ and
part ‘B’ projects can be implemented simultaneously with a gap of three
to six months which is needed to establish the baseline figure of AT&C
loss of the project areas by installing boundary (import/export) energy
meters and collecting revenue data for three billing cycles. However, the
Committee find as per the data given by the Ministry part 'B' has been
sanctioned in only 70% of the towns and the balance projects are likely
to be sanctioned in March, 2011. The Committee therefore, strongly
recommend that special efforts be made for sanctioned part 'B' of the
project as successful implementation will greatly help in reducing the AT&C
losses. Periodic monitoring of the programme should be taken up to ensure
that the targets set are achieved within the stipulated time with a view
to encourage those States where improvements are significant whereas
slow improving areas should be brought in for some harsh remedial
measures.
Reply of the Government
As on 31.3.2011, Part-B schemes worth scheme cost of Rs. 15975
crores have been sanctioned for 823 of 1100 eligible towns in the country
viz. in 75% of eligible towns and an amount of Rs. 2236 crores have
been disbursed. Part-B schemes in balance 277 eligible towns are envisaged
to be sanctioned by September 2011.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AW AITED
(Recommendation Serial No. 2)
Environment and Forest Clearance for the Transmission Sector
The Committee note that the clearance from the Ministry of
Environment and Forests are also required for the transmission projects.
The Ministry have informed that one inter-regional transmission line namely
400 kV D/C Ranchi, Rourkela, Raigarh line associated with East West
Transmission corridor strengthening got delayed on account of forest
clearance. However, recently the matter has been resolved and as a special
case the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) have permitted the
PGCIL to go ahead with construction activity pending final clearance. The
Committee also find that the first stage clearance for transmission projects
takes about one year. However, as per recent MoEF circular dated July/
August, 2009, written consent of all Gram Sabhas in transmission line
route is compulsory under the Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights Act, 2006) (FRA 2006).
The Ministry have brought out difficulty in obtaining these clearances which
are lengthy and complex. The Committee are anguished at the attitude
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. They have remained non
responsive to the request of the Ministry of Power to the issue of forest
clearances of PGCIL transmission projects. It is amazing that every possible
and conceivable obstacle has been put vide MoEF Circular
11-09-1988/FC/PT 3rd August, 2009 in granting forest clearance for
transmission projects. The environment impact of transmission projects
are minimal and hence all efforts should be made to pave the way for
smoother and faster clearance and the extraneous exercise of getting
clearance from endless Gram Sabhas with its own appendixes is bound
to adversely impact the timely completion of the projects. The Committee

feel that obtaining such clearances will be cumbersome and as there is
no acquisition of land for construction of transmission lines, the Ministry
of Environment and Forests should look into this matter so as to make
the procedure streamlined and that the laying of transmission lines can
progress without much hassles. The Committee therefore, recommend that
being a public sector entity PGCIL should be allowed to start work as
soon as First stage clearance is obtained and an undertaking should be
taken by them to comply with the other requisite conditions. The Committee
also lay stress on the fact that any inordinate delay in the commissioning
of transmission lines would result in bottling of generated power and heavy
losses and therefore, to resolve this all clearance related issues need to
be taken up on priority basis. Generally the laying of transmission lines
has negligible impact on Forests and there is no alteration of land use
patterns, therefore, existing stringent procedure for according clearance
need to be reviewed. The Committee therefore, also recommend that the
MoEF should deal with the transmission related issues more liberally so
that work is not hampered for want of clearances. It has been stated
that laying of transmission lines underground will not be cost effective
but it has not been explained as to how this will be so. With the
advancement of technology efforts should be made to explore as to how
the cost involved therein can be rationalized as laying of underground lines,
wherever possible and suitable will not only be safer but will also invite
less opposition from the concerned villages and other stakeholders.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding forest clearance issues
has been communicated to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)
on 3rd June, 2011. The comments of the MoEF are awaited.
Besides, Minister of Power has taken up with the Minister of State
(Independent Charge) of Environment and Forests vide DO letter dated
16.6.2011 requesting that transmission projects may be exempted from
the purview of the circulars of Ministry of Environment and Forests dated
3.8.2009 and 30.7.2009 as a special case relating to compliance of
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of
Forest Rights Act, 2006) for transmission projects. He has also requested
41

42
  N EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
21 December , 2011 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.
that Ministry of Environment and Forests may consider formation of a
Joint Task Force for facilitating clearance of Forest Rights Act cases for
transmission projects.
In case of Extra High V oltage (EHV) cable line (400kV/765kV level),
charging current i.e. reactive power generation is much higher than
overhead transmission line (typically in the range of 13-14 times).
Therefore, for long distance EHV cable circuit, the reactive power
management to control the voltages and ensure grid security under different
operating conditions is of major concern. For this, unlike overhead line,
suitable reactive power compensation devices are to be provided at number
of intermediate locations along the route of long EHV cable circuit. This
requires development of new establishments at a number of intermediate
locations to accommodate reactive compensation devices besides reactive
compensation devices at the cable terminal substations. Such arrangement
would increase the cost of transmission through long distance cable line.
In addition, for long distance underground cable transmission there
will be number of cable joints to be provided in order to maintain continuity.
However, the joints are prone to failure which may interrupt power supply
and shall affect the reliability of the transmission system. Further, cost
of EHV cable is much higher than that of overhead transmission lines.
All the above aspects shall result into increased cost of transmission in
turn will lead to high transmission tariff to the end consumers.
However, upto 220kV level, POWERGRID has used underground
cables of short length in some of the substations like Maharani Bagh,
Gurgaon etc. and shall be using in substations where it has been practically
impossible to obtain Right of Way (RoW) for termination of lines in very
densely populated city areas like Navi Mumbai, Manesar etc..
[Ministry of Power OM No. 9/3/2011-PG , dated 12.7.2011]

43
ANNEXURE I
(vide page 25 Chapter II of Report)
State-wise coverage and achievement of electrification of villages
and release of BPL connections for the sanctioned projects
under RGGVY
(as on 31.03.2011)
Sl.  Name of Proposed Coverage Revised Coverage Cumulative
No.  the State Achievement
Un/De- BPL Un/De- BPL Un/De- BPL
electrified HH's electrified HH's electrified HH's
villages villages villages
1. Assam 8525 991656 8307 983587 6019 574771
2. Bihar 23211 2762455 22658 2762173 20981 1744098
3. Jharkhand 19737 1691797 19639 1889319 17181 1161158
4. Orissa 17895 3185863 16584 3277470 13187 2229813
5. Uttar Pradesh 30802 1120648 27727 851388 27759 871920

44
ANNEXURE II
(vide page 28 Chapter II of Report)
State-wise coverage and achievement of electrification of villages
and release of BPL connections for the sanctioned projects
under RGGVY in North Eastern region
(as on 31.03.2011)
Sl.  Name of Proposed Coverage Revised Coverage Cumulative
No.  the State Achievement till date
Un/De- BPL Un/De- BPL Un/De- BPL
electrified HH's electrified HH's electrified HH's
villages villages villages
1. Arunachal 2129 40810 2129 40810 679 10172
Pradesh
2. Assam 8525 991656 8307 983587 6019 574771
3. Manipur 882 107369 882 107369 271 9393
4. Meghalaya 1943 116447 1866 109696 150 31976
5. Mizoram 137 27417 137 27417 36 8507
6. Nagaland 105 69900 105 69899 57 17802
7. Sikkim 25 11458 25 11458 20 7187
8. Tripura 160 194730 81 77448 78 58971
Total 13906 1559787 13532 1427684 7310 718779

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 21st DECEMBER, 2011 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri P.C. Chacko
4. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
6. Shri Baliram Jadhav
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri C. Rajendran
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
12. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Govindrao Adik
14. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
15. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
16. Shri Mohammad Shafi
17. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
45

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
*** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken
on the recommendations contained in the 14th Report on "Transmission
and Distribution Systems and Networks".
3. The Committee discussed the draft Report on the subject and
the Action Taken Replies of the concerned Ministry in detail. Thereafter,
the Committee adopted the aforementioned Action Taken Report without
any amendment. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
*** **
*** **
*** **
The Committee then adjourned.
46

47
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FOURTEENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 19
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18 and 19
Total: 12
Percentage 63.16%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Sl. Nos. 8, 9 and 11
Total: 03
Percentage 15.79%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which the replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 4, 5 and 10
Total: 03
Percentage 15.79%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
Sl. No. 2
Total: 01
Percentage 5.26%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”