CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Twenty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Availability of Identified Non-Conventional Resources of Energy-Their
Potential vis-à-vis Utilization'.
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 24th
August, 2012 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14
        Total - 13
        Chapter-II
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Nil
Total - 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Nil
Total-00
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
Serial No. 13
Total - 01
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V
of the Report may be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Solar Energy
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
6. The Committee had felt the need to identify and specify the
exact potential spots of solar energy to locate projects so that they
become viable. The Committee had been informed that to strengthen
the solar resource assessment and to meet the requirement of
availability of solar radiation data, 51 solar radiation monitoring stations
have been set up at sites of high potential in the country. The
Committee were also apprised that the first draft of the Solar Atlas
under preparation would be completed by December, 2012 and the
second version by December, 2013. Finding that data in the atlas would
be useful for both the Government and the investors, the Committee
had recommended that the preparation of Solar Atlas be expedited so
that the stake holders/private sector participants are aware of the
potential sites which will facilitate them to make large scale capital
investment in solar energy projects/applications.
7. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action
Taken Reply have stated as under:
“This is to inform the Committee that a data policy has been
brought out by C-WET, who is implementing the Solar Radiation
Resource Assessment (SRRA) project, to make available the
captured data to all the stakeholders.  Work on developing initial
draft of solar atlas is going on and efforts are made to use all the
data available from SRRA stations as well as IMD stations”.
8. The Committee were earlier apprised that the first draft of
the Solar Atlas under preparation by the Ministry would be
completed by December, 2012 and the second version by December,
2013. The Committee find that data policy has been brought out by
C-WET, the implementing agency for  the Solar Radiation Resource
Assessment project, to make available the captured data to all the
stakeholders. They also find that work on developing initial draft of

3
solar atlas is going on. The Committee would like to emphasize
that work on Solar Atlas is not moving on at desired pace and
setting up of Solar Radiation Resource Assessment Stations also
needs a review for mid-course correction; if required. The Committee
expect the work to pick up the required pace and would like  to
know the status and future programme relating to finalization of
Solar Atlas urgently.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
9. The Committee had noted that high cost of solar power is one
of the barriers in harnessing the solar energy potential of the Country
and had expressed their concern over the high prices and the poor
quality of the solar equipment. The Committee had also felt  that
drastic reduction in the cost of solar energy will be possible through
promotion and strengthening of R&D activities in a big way. The
Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Government should
not only provide adequate financial stimulus to the solar sector but
also involve/promote/strengthen the various centres and institutions
involved with R&D activities and also to encourage international
cooperation mainly for technological advancements and technology
transfer with particular emphasis on indigenization of technology with
the objective of lowering cost of harnessing solar energy.
10. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their Action
Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The R&D policy of the Ministry is quite comprehensive having
full scope of the participation of industry and academia within
the country as well as from abroad.  In addition to having focus
on development of products and devices, it allows to bring
advanced technologies into the country for field demonstration
and performance validation under Indian conditions.  This is aimed
at to lead adaptation of the foreign technologies with indigenization
to the extent possible. The academic institutions who implement
MNRE sponsored R&D projects are provided support under various
heads including manpower, equipment and machinery,
consumables and travel. As a part of JNNSM, the following Centers
of Excellence have been sanctioned by the Ministry:
• IIT Bombay: Research and education in the area of
photovoltaics
• IIT Rajasthan: Research and education in the area of solar
thermal

4
• IIM Ahmedabad: Technology incubation and development
of entrepreneurship
• CEPT University, Ahmedabad: Solar passive architecture and
green building technologies
• Amrita Nano Science Centre for next generation solar cells
In solar photovoltaics research, the leading countries are Japan,
Germany, Australia and USA. In India also, the Ministry has
sponsored a number of projects aiming at new and emerging
technologies (viz. dye sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells)
with better efficiencies and reduced cost.  In solar thermal, various
power technologies such as solar tower and parabolic dishes are
being developed in collaboration with leading international experts.
Some technologies for industrial process heat requirements from
abroad, such as parabolic troughs and non-imaging concentrators,
are being evaluated under Indian conditions as a part of MNRE
sponsored projects. In addition, bilateral initiatives including Indo-
Spanish and Indo-US collaborations for development of technologies
have been initiated.
The Ministry has also set up a high powered Solar Energy Research
Advisory Council headed by Dr. Anil Kakodkar to guide Ministry
on various aspects of leading R&D in the country.”
11. The Committee note the Ministry's initiatives regarding R&D
policy focusing on development of products and devices. They also
note that the Ministry are providing support to the academic
institutions in multiple  ways who are implementing their sponsored
R&D projects such as manpower, equipment, machinery, consumables
and travel. While the Committee take note of the efforts made by
the Ministry in terms of technology advancement, they would like
to emphasis that the objective and the essence behind the
recommendation of the Committee to strengthen the various centres
and institutions involved with R&D activities and also to encourage
international cooperation is for reduction in the cost of solar energy
for tapping maximum available potential. The Committee are in fact
concerned about the high cost of production of solar energy which
is stated to be one of the barriers in harnessing the potential. The
Committee, therefore, re-emphasize their recommendation that the
Government should strengthen the various centres and institutions
involved with R&D activities and also encourage international
cooperation mainly for technological advancements and technology
transfer with particular emphasis on indigenization of technology

5
with the objective of lowering cost of harnessing solar energy.  They
also note that a high powered Solar Energy Research Advisory
Council has been set up to guide the Ministry on various aspects of
leading R&D activities in the country.  The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard and the time
frame within which it is likely to submit its report.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
12. The Committee had noted that the project of solar resource
assessment is being implemented by C-WET, Chennai, an autonomous
institution of the Ministry. The Committee were unable to comprehend
as to how the work related to solar energy was assigned to C-WET
instead of SEC. The Committee had observed that solar potential
assessment is the primary function of the Solar Energy Centre and
had also felt that all activities related to solar energy should have
been entrusted to SEC. C-WET which is a specialized body meant for
assessment and development of wind energy technology in the country
itself is finding difficult to manage its own affairs efficiently because
validation of their own wind atlas revising the wind potential is yet
to be finalized. The Committee, had therefore, recommended that SEC
should be conscious of its elementary responsibilities and be well-
equipped to handle them deftly. No organization can come up strongly
without proper base work and hence all the activities  with regard to
solar energy-resource assessment, development, harnessing, and
periodic technological upgradation should be handled in an integrated
and coordinated manner by the Solar Energy Centre itself
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:
“It is true that CWET is an autonomous and specialized institution
of the Ministry in the area of wind resource assessment and wind
technology development. Being conscious of the capabilities of
CWET in managing wind resource assessment stations in various
parts of the country and their experience in understanding needs
of the project developers for resource data, the Ministry entrusted
task of solar radiation resource assessment also to CWET in a
project mode. The project has capacitated C-WET to implement
the project in professional manner involving all stakeholders
including Solar Energy Centre and India Meteorological
Department. The project has been implemented successfully by
C-WET and data is available to the developers and other
stakeholders. There is a proposal in advanced stage to convert
solar energy centre into National Institute of Solar Energy, an
autonomous institution, where all activities pertaining to solar
energy are likely to be consolidated”.

6
14. The Committee note that Solar Energy Centre (SEC) is a
premier institute for research, technology evaluation and
demonstration facility of the Ministry and also works on science
and engineering aspects of solar energy technologies. However, the
Committee note that the Ministry had entrusted task of solar
radiation resource assessment to C-WET in view of the latter's
capabilities in managing wind resource assessment stations in various
parts of the country and their experience in understanding needs of
the project developers for resource data. In this context, the
Committee had strongly recommended that SEC should be conscious
of its elementary responsibilities and be well-equipped to handle
them deftly and  the activities related to solar energy should have
been entrusted to SEC. The Ministry have now informed that the
solar radiation resource assessment was entrusted to C-WET in project
mode which has now been successfully implemented after involving
all developers/ stakeholders including SEC and Indian Meteorological
Department. Further the data is now available to all developers/
stakeholders. The Committee are satisfied that solar radiation
assessment work has been shared with all developers/stakeholders.
However, they recommend that in future all activities related to solar
energy viz. resource assessment development, harnessing and periodic
technological upgradation should be entrusted to SEC only so as to
bring about better co-ordination and effective realization of the
objective with which it has been set up.
The Committee also note that the Ministry now proposed to
convert Solar Energy Centre into National Institute of Solar Energy,
an autonomous institution, where all activities pertaining to solar
energy are to be consolidated. The Committee trust that with
converting SEC into a National autonomous Institute to deal with
all aspects of solar energy, the sector would get a desired boost.
They, therefore, would like the Ministry to implement the proposal
in a time frame.
B. Biomass Energy
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
15. The Committee found the overall exploitation of biomass
potential in the country was very low and felt that more systematic
and objective planning in coordination with States is required for  better
organization of the resources and maximum utilization of the biomass
potential. The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should critically review their own performance and work out
a concrete action plan to motivate and/or persuade the potential States

7
which have shown lack of interest in the biomass power sector and
also to interact with these States and advice the State Governments to
provide suitable incentives so as to attract more private investment in
usage of biomass power and instill confidence in the investors. The
Committee had also been informed that the MNRE has constituted a
number of sub-groups to study relevant issues relating to biomass
power sector. The Government had been asked to apprise the
Committee of the status and outcome of the sub-groups  constituted
in this regard. The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry
should specially focus on dissemination of information and give wide
publicity about the authentic data on surplus biomass residues and
also to publicise the Biomass Resource Atlas so that the issue of
assessing surplus agro residue availability is resolved.
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:
“The Ministry has been continuously pursuing with the biomass
power potential States to create setting up of a single window
clearances system to provide speedy clearance required from
various departments/agencies for setting up of various biomass
power projects. The Ministry is monitoring the progress for setting
up of various biomass power projects through periodic review
meetings with state governments.
The Ministry is also interacting with CERC and SERC's for tariff
related issues and requesting them to rationalize the tariff. In this
context, CERC has formed an Expert Committee for undertaking
detailed study on "Performance/viability of biomass based plants
operating in the country including prevailing biomass prices". The
1st meeting of this Committee has taken place recently and has
solicited views on committee various stakeholders.
In order to initiating various biomass based power programmes
during the 12th plan based on the recommendations of Sub-Groups
set up by the Ministry, a target of 2100 MW power projects (1400
MW for bagasse cogeneration, 500 MW for biomass power and
200 MW for small tail end projects) have been proposed. The 12th
Plan is yet to be approved by Planning Commission.
A Biomass Resource Atlas for India has been prepared for surplus
agro residues which have been placed on the website of the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore (http://lab.cgpl.iisc.ernet.in/Atlas).
The Biomass Resource Atlas has been periodically updated and
now includes surplus forestry wastes for power generation. The
Biomass Resource Atlas has provided good quality information on

8
different crop residues through GIS maps. Based on this, the
promoters are advised ascertain existing uses of biomass for thermal
applications in boilers, furnaces, kilns etc. before finalizing location
of the power project in potential states.
The Ministry is continuously making its efforts to create awareness
through organizing seminars, workshops, business meets, etc. under
biomass power programmes in biomass potential states to create
awareness amongst various stake holders including financial
institutions”.
17. The Committee are satisfied to note that a ‘Biomass Resource
Atlas’ for India has been prepared. They also find that it has been
placed on website and the Ministry is continuously making efforts
to create awareness among the stakeholders including financial
institutions for larger use of these resources. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should continue the awareness campaign with
greater effectiveness.
The Committee also note that with regard to tariff related issues
of biomass power, the Ministry/CERC have formed an Expert
Committee for undertaking detailed study on performance/viability
of biomass based plants operating in the country including prevailing
biomass prices. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
recommendations of the Expert Committee and follow-up action by
the Government therever in due course  in this regard.
C. Geo-Thermal Energy
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13,  Para No. 2.14)
18. The Committee had noted that the Government has not made
any efforts to enhance awareness or provide  incentives or benefits to
attract investment in the geothermal sector or induce private parties
to explore and harness the untapped energy in this sector. They had
also felt that the sector need more research and innovation with
escalating environmental problems with the growing needs of energy,
the country cannot ignore exploration and exploitation of the huge
geo-thermal energy potential. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry should focus their efforts in early
exploitations of the existing potential and explore more potential sites
and also to take concrete steps to promote and provide adequate fiscal
and financial incentives  so as to attract investment in geo-thermal
sector. The Committee had also asked the  Ministry to proactively
initiate geothermal based model project in collaboration with other

9
successful countries in the sector and promote technology transfer from
each collaboration to develop indigenous technology.  The Committee
also desired the Ministry to take aggressive steps in educating the
significance of the geo-thermal energy in present scenario to general
public and especially to the  major industrial participants by organizing
awareness programmes, conferences etc.
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:
“The Government has signed Memorandum of Understanding with
Governments of Australia, Iceland and Philippines for scientific
co-operation, research in renewable energy sector and to explore
the potential of Geo-thermal in India. Indian Companies have
Collaboration Agreements with Foreign Companies in Geothermal
Energy Sector i.e. these are (i) Reykjavik Geothermal, Iceland and
Thermax, India (ii) Icelandsbanki, Iceland; Mannvit, Iceland and
Bhilwara Group, India have set up a Joint-Venture i.e. Bhilwara
Mannvit Green Energy Ltd (BMGEL) (iii) Kaldara Iceland and
Hindustan Turbomachinery, Bangalore (iv) NTPC-Mitshubishi,
Japan (v) ONGC-Talboom, Belgium.
To exploit the geothermal energy sources, we need to map the
deep surface structure and to demarcate the area of geothermal
heat trapped inside the surface so that decisions regarding deep
drilling, estimation of its potential, number of years for which the
resource can be profitably tapped etc. can be taken. So far we
have been able to undertake only shallow bore hole drilling at
some of our geothermal fields.
Magneto-telluric (MT) studies were assigned to National
Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad to assess the
deep reservoir temperature of potential sites at Puga geothermal
field located in the north-west Himalayan range in Ladakh and
Tatapani geothermal field in the Sarguja district of Chhattisgarh.
Further, a project on MT investigations for assessing the geothermal
potential in Satluj-Spiti, Beas and Parbati valley in Himachal
Pradesh, Badrinath-Tapovan in Uttarakhand and Surajkund in
Jharkhand was assigned to NGRI has shown promising geothermal
potential at Surajkund in Jharkhand and Badrinath-Tapoban area
in Uttarakhand
There is a good potential of geo-thermal energy in the Ladakh
region. However, due to high altitude, difficult terrain, harsh
weather conditions, very short working period, difficulty in taking
transmission lines to load centers and high cost the projects for

10
tapping geo-thermal energy could not be taken up so far. Jammu
and Kashmir State Power Development Corporation Limited
(JKSPDC) in collaboration with M/s Thermax and Reykjavik
Geothermal, Iceland have initiated an action for setting up of
5 MW Geothermal Power Plant at Puga. Recently an International
Seminar was held at Leh, Ladakh, where experts from Australia
were also present. The other stakeholders including Nodal
Agencies, NGRI, ONGC, DRDO including MNRE were present. In
the brainstorming session it was opined to take-up collaborative
projects to explore potential available in Ladakh region.  It is also
proposed to undertake activities for setting up of at least one
multipurpose R&D-cum technology demonstration energy power
generation project in each of the potential States namely, Andhra
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and others”.
20. The Committee acknowledge the initiatives of the Ministry
in terms of scientific co-operation and research for exploration and
exploitation of geo-thermal potential in the country. The Committee
also note that the Ministry have proposed to undertake activities for
setting up of at least one multipurpose R&D-cum technology
demonstration energy power generation project in each of the
potential States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, West
Bengal and others. They would like to be apprised of the
development in this regard.
The Committee had also recommended the Ministry to provide
adequate fiscal and financial incentives to attract investment in
geo-thermal sector. The Ministry is, however,  silent on this aspect
of the Committee's recommendation. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the detailed provisions of fiscal and financial
incentives proposed by the Government for development and
harnessing of geo-thermal sector.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
Non-conventional Energy Resources - Potential vis-à-vis Utilization
So far there was no definite figures for the available potential of
non-conventional energy sources in the country. The MNRE has now
estimated the renewable energy power potential in the country to be
around 1,89,900 MW of which the solar energy constitute more than
50 per cent followed by wind, biomass, small hydro etc. The
achievement till the 11th Plan period have been stated to be near
about 25000 MW put together all forms of energies under this sector.
This is about 13 per cent realization of the estimated potential. As the
solar energy constitute a lion share in the total potential of the sector
and the development of solar energy is yet to take off in a significant
way, the renewable energy sector has failed to register its presence in
the total electricity production of the country. In the entire Indian
power sector, as on date the renewable energy contributes only about
12 per cent which shows that the sector is to march ahead henceforth.
The Committee have been apprised that there is constant increase in
the pace of renewable energy development since 9th Plan onwards in
terms of MW, it has increased to about 25,000 MW at the end of 11th
Plan (31.3.2012) from about 3,900 MW in the year 2003. Out of this,
wind energy has contributed substantially with a shore of 17353 MW.
The Committee feels that renewable energy programme is primarily
private sector driven and it offers significant investment and business
opportunities and hence a conducive atmosphere for attracting private
entrepreneurs would give much needed fillip to the sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that those segment of the renewable
energy which have partially developed should be supported by research
and development, fiscal incentives and financial support, for increasing
the percentage contribution of the renewable energy in the total
electricity generation capacity. Simultaneously, the pace of development
in the solar energy sector should also be expedited as unless this
sector grows the renewable energy will not have the significant
presence in the total electricity scenario of the country and will ever
remain a marginalized entity.

12
Reply of the Government
The total installed capacity from various renewable energy sources
as on 31st October, 2012 is 26,267 MW. The renewable energy installed
capacity in the country is now more than the installed capacity from
gas and nuclear energy. A capacity addition of about 30,000 MW is
being targeted during the 12th Plan from various renewable energy
technologies. Wind energy is targeted to contribute about 15,000 MW,
followed by solar power (10,000 MW) small hydropower (2100MW),
biomass power (2700 MW). With this, about 29% of the renewable
energy potential will be realized by the end of 12th Plan.
Various sub-group set-up to formulate 12th Plan for Renewable
Energy have recommend steps to attract private sector and create
business opportunities to accelerate pace of development of renewable
energy in the coming years. The Ministry is giving special emphasis
on the R&D in the areas where commercial development is yet to be
achieved. The budget for R&D is proposed to be doubled in the 12th
Plan. Apart from focused R&D in Solar Energy, Hydrogen energy,
Fuel cells, Bio fuels, Geothermal are the areas receiving attention of
the Ministry. Areas and sub-areas of research in these new technologies
have been identified. The Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
aims to install 20,000 MW solar power by 2022; 2000 MW of off-grid;
20 million sqm of solar thermal collector area and 20 million rural
households to have solar home lighting by 2022.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the potential of renewable energy sources
identified in the country is 1,89,900 MW, in which the share of solar,
wind power, small hydro power (upto 25 MW), biomass, bagasse,
waste to energy is 1,00,000 MW, 49,000 MW, 15,000 MW, 17,000 MW,
5,000 MW and 3,900 MW respectively. Further the revised potential of
wind energy by C-wet has been estimated to be around 1,00,000 MW
at 80 m. height (yet to be validated). After validation of revised wind
potential the total potential of renewable energy in the country would
be about 2,50,000 MW. However, the achievement from the resources
have been far from satisfactory. As of now wind power has the major
contribution followed by small hydro amongst the renewable energy
sources. The achievement in other areas are minimal. A scrutiny of
state-wise data reveals that the performance in the States with huge
potential has been extremely unsatisfactory as the achievement has

13
either been nil or negligible. About 5311 MW potential of wind power
is available in the State of Jammu and Kashmir with nil achievement.
Likewise, under biomass a potential of 1044 MW and 1364 MW have
been identified in the States of Kerala and  Madhya Pradesh, but the
achievement in these two States are nil and only 8.5 MW respectively.
The potential under geo-thermal and tidal energy is yet to be assessed.
The Committee feel that most of the renewable energy potential is
either under-utilized or not utilized at all. The approach of the
Government into this sphere leaves much to be desired. The
Government projection of installed capacity at the end of 12th Plan is
also not satisfactory. Even if the projected figure of 54,414 MW
(cumulative) capacity is achieved (if at all) the total installed capacity
will be around only 29 per cent of the identified potential. This
percentage will further go down substantially if the revised potential
of wind energy is validated and more potential sites are identified
with regard to other sources. The Committee while acknowledging
the efforts of the Ministry, recommend the Ministry to come out with
a multipronged strategy to fully exploit the identified potential of the
renewable energy sources and also to focus in the areas where potential
have been identified but achievements are less. The Committee also
recommend the Ministry to put sincere efforts for identification and
evaluation of new potential sites for maximum exploration of huge
potential lying untapped.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has prepared strategic plan for faster development
of Renewable Energy in the Country. The 12th Plan of the Ministry
has outlined strategy to accelerate exploitation of Renewable Energy
potential in the Country. Taking into constriction the realistic pace of
implementation and subject to availability of funds, the target for 12th
plan have been fixed at 30,000 MW.
Renewable energy sector in India is now seen as significant player
in the grid connected power generation and an essential player for
energy access.  Renewable energy is supporting the government agenda
of 'inclusive growth’ and will be part of the solution to meet the
nation's energy needs. Identification of new sites is an on-going process.
All technology areas have programmes for identification of new
potential sites/areas.  This activity is being further strengthened and
enlarged, more so in the areas of wind and solar energy. It may be
mentioned that resource assessment activity in both wind energy and
solar energy is receiving special attention of the Ministry in the 12th
Plan Period.  The entire country is proposed to be covered through

14
additional wind masts and solar radiation measurement equipments
for better and more accurate resource assessments.  Wind resource
assessment is also being planned at 80 m mast height.  50 more new
solar radiation measurement stations are now proposed to be set up.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the main constraints put forward by the
Ministry in bridging the gap between potential and achievement are
inherent intermittent nature of renewable energy sources, grid
synchronization limitations on account of intermittent nature of supply,
higher capital investment, requirement of preferential tariffs, difficulties
in servicing and maintenance in difficult areas, etc. The Committee
feel that the obstacles highlighted by the Ministry are neither
unforeseen nor insurmountable and the implementation of the various
projects under the renewable energy programme of the Ministry cannot
be left to suffer on account of these administrative and functional
bottlenecks. The Committee feel that every sector has certain obstacle
and these have to be dealt with a view to ensure attainment of the
goals. Hence, the Ministry is duty bound to ensure that the issues are
addressed from all angles and a practical and pragmatic solution is
worked out in coordination with all concerned in order to harness the
indentified potentials optimally. The Committee take note of the fact
that to overcome these constraints the Government has taken various
steps and measures which include support of R&D activities,
development of new technologies and products that are cost effective,
affordable and reliable, provision of fiscal and financial incentives and
encouraging private investment. While acknowledging the efforts of
the Ministry in mitigating the hurdles, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry should take concerted efforts to strengthen the sector on
policy front, pricing mechanism, single window clearance, technology
inflow, investment models and above all nurturing the spirits of all
stakeholders to ensure that the target set for generation of electricity
from renewable energy sources are achieved within stipulated time
frame. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to adopt a
comprehensive policy for ensuring adequacy of required funds,
technological framework, strict and enforceable time schedule, required
skilled manpower, time-bound clearances and conducive atmosphere
for entrepreneurs.  Besides, sufficient public awareness about the
importance of renewable energy should also be created with attractive
proposals for attracting investments in the sector.

15
Reply of the Government
The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
Ministry is making efforts in all directions to accelerate pace of
implementation of renewable energy programmes. The Ministry is
regularly interacting with CERC on the policy front. It has also
participated in the meetings of Forum of Regulators to ensure suitable
policy regime including RPOs, tariff etc. in the States to encourage all
technologies for power generation from renewable. The Ministry is
organizing periodic meetings with the States and other stake holders
to address State specific issues and also monitor implementation of
various projects and programmes. R&D efforts pertaining to various
renewable energy technologies have been considerably stepped up by
the Ministry in the last two-three years. This pace of R&D is proposed
to be accelerated in the 12th Plan also. With persistent efforts with the
Planning Commission, the Ministry is hopeful of getting substantial
increase in the budget for the 12th Plan in comparison to the 11th
Plan, which will help in enlarging scope of various renewable energy
programmes in the country. As part of 12th Plan, the Ministry has
also drawn specific programmes for manpower development through
the involvement of various academic institutions, universities, IITs, ITIs.
The Ministry is giving special emphasis towards projecting renewable
energy achievements and conducive policy environment in India, at
international forums to attract investments in the renewable energy
sector. In this direction, an international seminar was organized in
New Delhi on 8th-9th October 2012 where Ministers of about 40
countries participated.  Further, a meeting of ASEAN countries was
also organized on 5th-7th November to showcase strength of India in
the renewable energy sector. Indian delegations are also participating
in investment meets organized in various countries.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4,  Para No. 2.5)
Wind Energy
The Committee note that wind energy is the fastest growing
renewable energy technology for generating grid connected power
amongst various renewable energy sources. Reportedly, a total capacity
of 17,353 MW has been established up to  March, 2012 which is 70
per cent of the cumulative deployment of grid interactive renewable
power. The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the achievement
so far under the sector. Despite the fact that it is 70 per cent of the

16
total grid-interactive power, it is approximate one-third of its own old
estimated potential i.e. 49130 MW. With the validation of wind energy
potential at 1,00,000 MW, the achievements in the sector would look
very ordinary. In this sector too, the performance in States like Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Karnataka
and Gujarat is far from satisfactory. The installed capacity in Andhra
Pradesh and Karnataka is only 245 MW and 1933 MW against the
estimated potential of 5394  MW and 8591 MW respectively. Further,
estimated potential of capacity has not been reported from the States
of Central, Northern and North-Eastern regions of the country. The
Committee trust that the revised wind atlas must have included the
aforementioned potential areas of the country. The Committee
accordingly recommend that the Ministry should take urgent steps for
validation/approval of revised wind atlas and to initiate projects for
the new identified areas across the country.
Reply of the Government
In spite of power being concurrent subject of the State and Centre,
the achievement of 17353 MW installed capacity has been mainly driven
by Government of India’s promotional policies and preferential tariffs
of the State Governments. Almost entire investment in wind power
projects has come from private investor. The installations in few States
like AP and Karnataka being less is due to the choice of locations by
the investors on account of wind availability and state policies.
Investor's choice of site for wind power development is not under the
control of Government of India.
As per the Wind Atlas for India prepared by C-WET, the estimated
potential for the States of Central, Northern and North-Eastern regions
are shown in the table below:
Region State 50m (Validated) @ 80m level
level MW* MW*
12 3 4
Northern States Haryana - 93
Himachal Pradesh 20 64
Jammu & Kashmir 5311 5685
Uttarakhand 161 534
Uttar Pradesh 137 1260

17
Central Madhya Pradesh 920 2931
Maharashtra 5439 5961
Jharkhand - 91
Bihar - 144
Chhattisgarh 23 314
North-Eastern Arunachal Pradesh 201 236
Assam 53 112
Manipur 7 56
Meghalaya 44 82
Nagaland 3 16
Orissa 910 1384
Sikkim 98 98
*MW- Mega Watt
In order to validate the above results, Ministry/CWET have already
initiated the process and so far, 45 nos. of Wind Monitoring Stations
of 80 m height have been commissioned and are in operation. The
Ministry/CWET have also initiated a project to install 75 nos. of Wind
Monitoring Stations at 100 m level in 7 states (Tamilnadu, Andra
Predesh ,Karnataka,Maharastra,Gujarat, Rajasthan & Madhyapredesh).
Ministry had also allowed Private developers for carrying out
Winds measurements in 2008. The private developers have installed
more than 400 wind monitoring stations and the same are being vetted
by CWET as per the guidelines prepared by MNRE.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note with satisfaction that the expenditure in the
11th Plan period under wind energy sector has been on the expected
lines except for the year 2008-09 where it was Rs. 8.41 crore against
the allocation of Rs. 14 crore. There has been increase in the plan
12 3 4

18
outlay of the 12th Plan which has been pegged at Rs. 1,600 crore and
for the financial year 2012-13 it has been placed at Rs. 100 crore.
However, approval is only Rs. 45 crore. About the constraints, land
availability, procedure for land allotment, infrastructure for power
evacuation and transmission have been cited to be major problems in
the development of the sector. The Committee have been apprised
that to encourage installation of wind power projects in the country,
the Government provides various incentives, viz. fiscal incentives, tax
holiday on income from generation, concessional custom duty on
import of specified components, excise duty exemption from
manufacture of wind electric generators, preferential tariff and
Generation Based Incentive (GBI). The Committee appreciate the
Ministry's initiatives towards promotion of wind power generation.
The Committee are also given to understand that the cost of production
of wind energy in India is lower as compared to most other countries.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend the Ministry to
play a pivotal role for maximum generation of power from wind
energy through private entrepreneurs by giving them conducive
atmosphere. The Committee also desire the Ministry to strengthen its
mechanism through State Nodal Agencies/State Governments for
identification of more potential sites and assessment of wind resource
and also ensure proper functioning of the projects installed.
Reply of the Government
The Wind Resource Assessment programme, since the financial
year 2008-2009, has been implementing as per a new set of improved
guide lines. As per the new guidelines, C-WET's role is limited to
providing technical expertise in selection of sites and assistance at
various stages of implementation of the project to the SNA (State
Nodal Agencies). Under this, SNA has greater responsibility in
identification of sites, clearances from the various statutory agencies,
making land available, procurement of masts, custody of material etc.
Hence, a periodical review on the status of implementation of the
Wind Resource Assessment projects in their respective states are
conducted by Ministry/CWET by inviting the officials from various
State Nodal Agencies. The requisite training has been provided to the
officials on various facets of Wind Resource Assessment such as
handling of GPS, Data-logger, Wind Sensors and identification of
suitable sites for wind monitoring studies etc.
Recently in the second week of October, 2012, a special training
programme was organized by CWET for officials from 16 State Nodal
Agenices and imparted training to the SNAs officials on “Wind

19
Resource Assessment Methodology and Techniques” and about 25
officials attend the aforesaid training programme in CWET, Chennai.
CWET also planned to impart training to North East region SANs
official at their office during November second week. With all these
efforts, it is expected that more potential sites will be identified to
install wind power projects in the country.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
Small Hydro Power
The Committee note that hydro power projects upto 25 MW
capacity are classified as small hydro projects and potential of about
15000 MW has been estimated from 5718 identified sites in the country.
Of this potential,  about 50 per cent lies in the States of Himachal
Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Jammu Kashmir and Arunachal Pradesh.
Maharashtra, Chhatisgarh, Karnataka and Kerala are also stated to be
having sizeable potential. As on 31st March, 2012, 3395 MW capacity
has been installed and projects of about 940 MW are in various stages
of implementation. Thus present capacity is about 22 percent of the
estimated potential. In Committee's view, the achievement in this regard
is far from satisfactory. The Committee, however, acknowledge the
efforts of the Ministry for achieving the target of 1400 MW set for
11th Five Year Plan. In view of this, the Committee believe the Ministry
would be able to achieve its 12th Plan target of 2000 MW and would
also strive to achieve more than the target set.  The Committee take
note of the initiatives taken by the Government for faster exploitation
of SHP potential in the country which among others include formation
of a separate sub-group to draw the 12th Plan and the Action Plan
for achieving 12th Plan targets and another sub-group to look into the
issues of transmission/evacuation infrastructure and environmental
aspects including land and forest clearance issues. AHEC, IIT Roorkee
has also been asked to prepare a roadmap in this regard. The
Committee find that the sub-group has made suggestions for  actions
required to accelerate pace of exploitation in this sector such as
reviewing State policies to ensure momentum of private sector
participation, continuation of subsidies to 12th Five Year Plan for
covering risks and making small hydro projects economically viable
and enhancing the scope of micro hydel and water mill scheme.  The
sub-groups constituted to look into the issue of transmission/evacuation
infrastructure, environmental aspects including land and forest clearance
issues for renewable energy based power projects has also suggested
prudent practices for faster statutory clearances for renewable energy
based power projects. The Committee also note the steps taken by the

20
Ministry to study specific areas of concern. The Committee desire the
Ministry to consider the observations and recommendations of the
sub-groups seriously and implement the same in letter and spirit so
that the initiatives of the Ministry are more result oriented. Further,
the Committee recommend that for maximum exploitation of SHP
potential, more vigorous and all out efforts should be undertaken by
involving State Governments and agencies responsible for small hydro
development in the identification and utilization of available potential.
The Committee also recommend that  the Working  Group constituted
having representatives from MNRE, CEA, the Ministry of Power,
Central Water Commission and some of the State Governments may
be asked to expedite the work relating to identification of the potential
of small hydro sites in the country.
Reply of the Government
The total installed capacity of small hydro projects, as on 31.10.2012
is 3452 MW and projects of about 1300 MW are in various stages of
implementation. During the 11th Plan a capacity of 1419  MW was
added and a target of 2100 MW has been fixed for the 12th Plan. As
recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is working  to accelerate
pace of exploitation of small hydro in the country.  In this direction,
the Ministry has stepped up its efforts to closely interact with the
States and emphasized on establishing a method of regular project-
wise monitoring. It is strongly felt that project wise monitoring and
regular interaction with the States and SHP developers can help to
increase pace of implementation  of the projects. Apart from regular
interaction with the States with high small hydro potential, the Ministry
has also interacted with the States with moderate potential to set up
SHP projects. Now quarterly review meetings are been held with the
States for close monitoring of projects. Information regarding allotment
of potential sites to the private sector, their implementation schedules
and their Plan for next five years or so has been collected.
The Ministry is working on the recommendations of the sub-group
for accelerated development of small hydro. The new scheme proposed
to be announced for the 12th Plan Period would be based on the
recommendations of the sub-group. It may be mentioned that the
working group constituted for examining the potential has completed
its task and the revised potential of small hydro in the country, based
on sites allotted by the States, is now estimated at about 20,000 MW.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]

21
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7,  Para No. 2.8)
Solar Energy
The Committee note that India is endowed with a vast solar energy
potential where most part of the country receive 4-7 kilowatt hours of
solar radiations per square meter per day with 250-300 sunny days in
a year. The Committee was apprised that the total solar energy
potential in the Country has been estimated to be more than 1,00,000
MW which is more than 50% of the existing identified renewable
energy potential. The Committee were informed that under the first
phase of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) it has
been envisaged to set up 1,300 MW of grid connected & off grid solar
plants by March, 2013. The Committee were further informed that a
capacity of 3,000 MW has been proposed through Government support
and another 6,000 MW through mechanism of Renewable Purchase
Obligations (RPOs) and Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) during
the 12th Plan. The Committee have been given to understand that at
the end of the 12th Plan the cumulative solar energy capacity would
be 10,941 MW. Against this backdrop, the Committee note that as on
31st March, 2012, the total installed solar energy capacity in the Country
is only 941 MW which constitutes less than 4 % of the total renewable
energy installed capacity in the Country. Under Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission (JNNSM), as on 29th February, 2012, only 188
MW of grid solar power has been commissioned against the target of
1,100 MW. Whereas, projects of only 83.5 MW capacity have been
sanctioned against the target of 200 MW off-grid solar applications.
Under Solar thermal collectors, against the target of 7 million sq. meters
4.88 million sq. meters have been done.
The Committee take cognizance of the fact that the MNRE have
come a long way from 2 MW of grid connected solar power in 2009
to 941 MW in 2012. The Committee find that the solar energy sector
has got the much needed boost after the launch of JNNSM. The Mission
has facilitated to a considerable degree not only in the cost of setting
up solar energy projects but also in tariff bidding due to increase in
volumes and competition in the sector. However, the Committee feel
that there is need for constant monitoring and effective interventions
by the Government to ensure that targets sets are achieved fully. The
Committee also observe that in the first phase of JNNSM many new
and small players, not having much experience in the field, have
bagged most of the projects by quoting low tariff rate. The Committee
being a little apprehensive about their timely commissioning and proper
functioning of the awarded projects, strongly recommend that the

22
Government should not become complacent in regard to the monitoring
of these projects awarded under the first phase of the Mission. Rather
remedial/proactive measure should be taken to remove the present/
anticipated hurdles in commissioning of these projects as the success
of the first phase of the Mission will play a crucial role in shaping up
the remaining two phases of the Mission. Needless to emphasize the
impetuous the success of the Mission will provide to this sector in
bringing the cost down to attractive level. The Committee also
recommend that Government should make sincere efforts to convert
solar energy targets fixed for the 12th Plan into reality by taking
proactive measures to ensure proper funding of the coming up projects,
timely grant of various clearances, strict monitoring of the progress of
the development of the projects etc.
Reply of the Government
As on 31 October, 2012 the total installed grid- interactive solar
power generation capacity in the country has reached 1045 MW.
Under JNNSM as on 31-10-2012, 269 MW off grid solar power has
been commissioned  against  the target of  1100 MW. Whereas, off-
grid projects of 151 MWp capacity have been sanctioned against  a
target of 200 MWp of which projects of aggregate capacity of 43.59
MWp have been commissioned.  Due to scarcity of funds the targets
for sanctioning fixed under off-grid scheme has been reduced to 30
MWp from 100 MWp for the year 2012-13. Under Solar Thermal
collectors, against the target of 7 million sq.meters, achievement is
5.95 million sq.meter.
The Ministry is continuously monitoring the progress of
implementation of the projects allotted under Phase-I of the JNNSM
and making necessary interventions to ensure achievement of the set
target.  In case of the projects supported through NVVN, the Ministry
has constituted a review Committee chaired by the Joint Secretary
(Solar), MNRE and comprising of senior officials of Ministry of Power,
CEA and NVVN, which regularly takes stock of the projects progress
besides taking necessary action for resolving any bottlenecks.  In the
case of smaller projects supported under GBI scheme through IREDA,
a review Committee headed by the Joint Secretary (Solar), MNRE and
comprising officials of MNRE Finance, IREDA, CEA, SECI has been
set-up to review the projects progress and resolve bottlenecks.
With regards to the Committee's observations that in the first Phase
of the JNNSM many new and small players not having much
experience in the field have bagged most of the projects by quoting

23
low tariff rate, it is submitted that out of total 30 projects allotted
under Batch-I, 26 have already been commissioned while two were
cancelled initially and another two lapsed due to non-fulfillment of
stipulated  requirements. Furthermore, the projects allotted under Batch
II are mostly large projects in the range 5-20 MW and the same have
been bagged by mostly big players only.
The Ministry has noted the suggestion of the Committee for strict
monitoring of the projects, which will be made more rigorous.
Regarding the recommendation to ensure proper funding of the
projects, suitable mechanisms for the same are being worked out in
consultation with major stakeholders and will be incorporated in the
second phase of the Mission commencing from April 2013.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee observe that there has been a rough assessment of
the solar energy potential in the country. Though India is endowed
with abundant sunshine, it is vital to identify and specify the exact
spots to locate projects so that they become viable. The Committee
have been informed that to strengthen the solar resource assessment
and to meet the requirement of availability of solar radiation data, 51
solar radiation monitoring stations have been set up at sites of high
potential in the country. The data so collected will augment the existing
solar resource maps based on satellite imagery. The Committee were
also apprised that the first draft of the Solar Atlas under preparation
would be completed by December, 2012 and the second version by
December, 2013.  The Committee find that data in the atlas would be
useful for both the Government and the investors and latter would
base their projects on the authentic zone-wise data. The Committee,
therefore, desire that  the preparation of Solar Atlas should be
expedited so that the stake holders/private sector participants are aware
of the potential sites which will facilitate them to make large scale
capital investment in solar energy projects/applications.  Needless to
emphasize that soon after its finalization the Ministry would make
the Solar Atlas Data readily available and accessible to the State
Governments and potential investors.
Reply of the Government
This is to inform the committee that a data policy has been brought
out by C-WET, who is implementing the Solar Radiation Resource
Assessment (SRRA) project, to make available the captured data to all

24
the stakeholders.  Work on developing initial draft of solar atlas is
going on and efforts are made to use all the data available from
SRRA stations as well as IMD stations.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that the major constraints faced by the solar
sector is non- availability of the bank finance, change in the rate of
interest in the bank loans, lack of data on the performance and
operation and maintenance requirements of the projects. The Committee
also find that high cost of solar power is also one of the barriers in
harnessing the solar energy potential of the Country.  The high cost
has been attributed to lower volumes, higher capital cost and import
of equipments/technology. The Committee have expressed their
concern time and again over the high prices and the poor quality of
the solar equipment The Committee are given to understand that under
the JNNSM, R&D efforts are being made for accelerating ongoing R&D
efforts on different aspects of solar photovoltaic and solar thermal
technologies, including multi disciplinary research, with the objective
of improving the efficiency, systems performance and reducing the
cost. While acknowledging the R&D efforts under JNNSM, the
Committee recommend that R&D related centres and institutions may
also be functionally strengthened and financially equipped to meet
the various challenges of research and development. The Committee
feel that drastic reduction in the cost of solar energy will only be
possible through promotion and strengthening of R&D activities in a
big way. Though the indigenous equipments are cheaper in comparison
to imported, but they have the quality issue, whereas, the imported
counterparts are of good quality, but have exorbitant price.  The
Committee feel that in the given scenario focus of R&D activities on
development of quality product at cheaper rate is need of the hour.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
not only provide adequate financial stimulus to the solar sector but
also involve/promote/strengthen the various centres and institutions
involved with R&D activities. The Committee also recommend that
Ministry should encourage international cooperation mainly for
technological advancements and technology transfer with particular
emphasis on indigenization of technology with the objective of lowering
cost of harnessing solar energy.
Reply of the Government
The R&D policy of the Ministry is quite comprehensive having
full scope of the participation of industry and academia within the
country as well as from abroad. In addition to having focus on

25
development of products and devices, it allows to bring advanced
technologies into the country for field demonstration and performance
validation under Indian conditions.  This is aimed at to lead adaptation
of the foreign technologies with indigenization to the extent possible.
The academic institutions who implement MNRE sponsored R&D
projects are provided support under various heads including
manpower, equipment and machinery, consumables and travel.  As a
part of JNNSM, the following Centers of Excellence have been
sanctioned by the Ministry:
• IIT Bombay: Research and education in the area of
photovoltaics
• IIT Rajasthan: Research and education in the area of solar
thermal
• IIM Ahmedabad: Technology incubation and development
of entrepreneurship
• CEPT University, Ahmedabad: Solar passive architecture and
green building technologies
• Amrita Nano Science Centre for next generation solar cells
In solar photovoltaics research, the leading countries are Japan,
Germany, Australia and USA. In India also, the Ministry has sponsored
a number of projects aiming at new and emerging technologies (viz.
dye sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells) with better efficiencies
and reduced cost.  In solar thermal, various power technologies such
as solar tower and parabolic dishes are being developed in collaboration
with leading international experts. Some technologies for industrial
process heat requirements from abroad, such as parabolic troughs and
non-imaging concentrators, are being evaluated under Indian conditions
as a part of MNRE sponsored projects.  In addition, bilateral initiatives
including Indo-Spanish and Indo-US collaborations for development
of technologies have been initiated.
The Ministry has also set up a high powered Solar Energy Research
Advisory Council headed by Dr. Anil Kakodkar to guide Ministry on
various aspects of leading R&D in the country.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that the Government had approved the policy
framework and announced Jawahar Lal Nehru National Solar Mission
in January, 2010 with an objective to establish India as a global leader

26
in solar energy. Solar Energy Centre has also been in existence since
early 1982 as an umbrella organization to coordinate all activities with
regard to development of solar energy in the country. This Centre is
a premier research, technology evolution and demonstration facility of
the Ministry. It works on science and engineering aspects of solar
energy technology. SEC works in the development of solar energy
technologies and practices and contributes to the advancement of
related science and engineering. The Solar Energy Centre has also
undertaken a number of projects which can broadly be identified in
the following categories I) Solar Research Assessment ii) Solar Power
Generation iii) Solar Cooling iv) Solar Thermal Process Heat v) Solar
Lighting and vi) Referal Test Centre for solar energy devices. On a
question regarding role played by SEC in the field of technology
advancement it has been stated that the projects undertaken by SEC
serve the basic of objective of JNNSM. However, the Committee have
also been informed that in order to strengthen the solar resource
assessment and to meet the requirement of availability of Solar
Radiation data, 51 solar radiation monitoring stations have been set
up at sites of high potential in the country. This project is being
implemented by C-WET, Chennai, an autonomous institution of the
Ministry. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to how the
work related to solar energy was assigned to C-WET instead of SEC.
Regarding preparation of Solar Atlas, the Committee have been
informed that agreement on Shaving Satellite Data from ISRO would
begin from April 2012 and first draft will come out in December 2012.
Besides, Solar Energy Centre also works as a Referral Test Center for
solar energy devices, provides assistance for up-gradation of test
facilities to regional test centers etc. The Committee observe that solar
potential assessment is the primary function of the Solar Energy Centre.
Based on the success of this task, other activities of the Centre gets
validation.The Committee feel all activities related to solar energy
should have been entrusted to SEC. C-WET itself is finding it difficult
to manage its own affairs efficiently because validation of their own
wind atlas revising the wind potential is yet to be finalized. Moreover,
C-WET is a specialized body meant for assessment and development
of wind energy technology of the country. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that SEC should be conscious of its elementary
responsibilities and be well-equipped to handle them deftly. No
organization can come up strongly without proper base work and
hence all the activities with regard to solar energy-resource assessment,
development, harnessing, and periodic technological upgradation
should be handled in an integrated and coordinated manner by the
Solar Energy Centre itself. This will be in fulfillment of the objective
for which it has been set up.

27
Reply of the Government
It is true that CWET is an autonomous and specialized institution
of the Ministry in the area of wind resource assessment and wind
technology development.  Being conscious of the capabilities of CWET
in managing wind resource assessment stations in various parts of the
country and their experience in understanding needs of the project
developers for resource data, the Ministry entrusted task of solar
radiation resource assessment also to CWET in a project mode. The
project has capacitated C-WET to implement the project in professional
manner involving all stakeholders including Solar Energy Centre and
India Meteorological Department.  The project has been implemented
successfully by C-WET and data is available to the developers and
other stakeholders.  There is a proposal in advanced stage to convert
solar energy centre into National Institute of Solar Energy, an
autonomous institution, where all activities pertaining to solar energy
are likely to be consolidated.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
Biomass Energy
The Committee find that the estimated potential of biomass
including bagasse co-generation power in the country is 22000 MW
and the cumulative achievement is 3135 MW (as on 31.03.2012).  The
Committee are not impressed to find that only 14 percent of the
estimated potential has been exploited so far.  Although, the targets
set in for 10th and 11th Plan have been achieved yet the fact remains
that huge potential is still left untapped in most of the States.  Another
disquieting fact is the glaring non-achievement in the States of Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh & Punjab. In spite of 1044 MW, 1364 MW, 3472 MW
potential identified, the capacity installed in these states is nil, 1 MW
and 98.5 MW respectively. The Committee have been informed that
considerable time is taken in implementing biomass power projects
mainly due to lack of firm data on surplus biomass availability for
specific project area, interrupted supplies of biomass, steep price
variations in biomass supply due to competitive use of biomass as
fertilizer/manures etc., uncertainty associated with tariffs fixation in
some potential States/inadequate tariff support from regulatory bodies
and lack of working capital requirements for storing huge stock of
biomass materials for ensured year round operation, requirement of a
number of clearances by different departments of State Governments,

28
high price of biomass as well as variations in its price. For promotion
and creation of awareness in the field of biomass power, the Ministry
is providing central financial assistance to various States and organising
seminar, symposia, training programmes etc. The Committee also find
that the Ministry have been interacting with the States to identify
single agency to facilitate speedy approval and also has frequent
interactions with Forum of Regulators (FOR) and CERC to ensure
tariff revision etc. for better viability of the projects. The Committee
desire the Government to persistently follow up with concerned States
and concerned authorities for timely implementation of the projects.
While acknowledging the various initiatives and steps taken by the
Government, the Committee feel that a more systematic and objective
planning in coordination with States is required for  better organization
of the resources and maximum utilization of the biomass potential.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should critically review
their own performance  and work out a concrete action plan to
motivate and/or persuade the potential States which have shown lack
of interest in the biomass power sector. They should also interact with
these States  and advice  the State Governments to provide suitable
incentives so as to attract more private investment in usage of biomass
power and instill confidence in the investors. The Committee have
also been informed that the MNRE has constituted a number of sub-
groups to study relevant issues relating to biomass power sector. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the status and outcome of
the sub-groups constituted in this regard. The Committee further
recommend that the Ministry should specially focus on dissemination
of information and give wide publicity about the authentic data on
surplus biomass residues. They should also publicise the Biomass
Resource Atlas so that the issue of assessing surplus agro residue
availability is resolved.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been continuously pursuing with the biomass
power potential states to create setting up of a single window
clearances system to provide speedy clearance required from various
departments/agencies for setting up of various biomass power projects.
The Ministry is monitoring the progress for setting up of various
biomass power projects through periodic review meetings with state
governments.
The Ministry is also interacting with CERC and SERC’s for tariff
related issues and requesting them to rationalize the tariff. In this
context, CERC has formed an Expert Committee for undertaking

29
detailed study on “Performance/viability of biomass based plants
operating in the country including prevailing biomass prices”. The 1st
meeting of this committee has taken place recently and has solicited
views on committee various stakeholders.
In order to initiating various biomass based power programmes
during the 12th plan based on the recommendations of Sub-Groups
set up by the Ministry, a target of 2100 MW power projects (1400
MW for bagasse cogeneration, 500 MW for biomass power and 200
MW for small tail end projects) have been proposed. The 12th Plan is
yet to be approved by planning commission.
A Biomass Resource Atlas for India has been prepared for surplus
agro residues which have been placed on the website of the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore (http://lab.cgpl.iisc.ernet.in/Atlas/). The
Biomass Resource Atlas has been periodically updated and now
includes surplus forestry wastes for power generation. The Biomass
Resource Atlas has provided good quality information on different
crop residues through GIS maps.  Based on this, the promoters are
advised ascertain existing uses of biomass for thermal applications in
boilers, furnaces, kilns etc. before finalizing location of the power
project in potential states.
The Ministry is continuously making its efforts to create awareness
through organizing seminars, workshops, business meets, etc. under
biomass power programmes in biomass potential states to create
awareness amongst various stake holders including financial
institutions.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
Urban and Industrial Waste to Energy
The Committee note that there exist a potential of about 2600 MW
power from urban wastes and about 1300 MW from industrial wastes.
The Committee are dismayed to find that against the estimated
potential, a capacity of only 90 MW has been installed as on 31st
March, 2012. The Committee are not satisfied with the poor
performance of the Ministry under this sector.  Even the pilot projects
commissioned have not shown any encouraging results. In the
Committee’s view the waste to energy is an attractive initiative, as it
serves a dual purpose of waste disposal and energy production. Also,

30
the problems caused by solid and liquid wastes can be significantly
mitigated through the adoption of environment-friendly waste to energy
technologies that will allow treatment and processing of wastes before
their disposal. The environmental benefits of waste to energy, as an
alternative to disposing of waste in landfills, are clear and compelling,
as this would reduce the quantity of wastes, generate a substantial
quantity of energy from them, and greatly reduce pollution of water
and air, thereby offering a number of social and economic benefits
that cannot easily be quantified. The Committee also find that with
increasing industrialization/urbanization and changes in the pattern
of life due to economic growth there is generation of increasing
quantities of wastes leading to pollution and threat to environment.
The Committee note that the Ministry is promoting the generation of
energy from waste by providing incentives and subsidies to the
investors and project developers. However, seeing the actual
achievement under this sector, the Committee feel that the sector needs
revamp in all aspects. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
a detailed analysis of costs and availability of fund, promotion of the
research on type of waste and its technological option, studies on
resource assessment, technology up-gradation and active involvement
of private sector participants. Performance evaluation is also required
for effective and efficient implementation of the projects. The
Committee also recommend that systematic data should be computed
to the extent possible such as the value of recyclable, the amount of
environmental pollution from waste sources and quantity of industrial
waste generated so as to get a better understanding of this sector. The
Committee  further emphasise that there should be wide publicity
about the significance of using this source of energy besides making
available data and key statistics to the potential investors.
Reply of the Government
The Programme on Energy from Urban and Industrial Wastes has
been got evaluated by an independent agency. The study includes
benefit-cost analysis, performance assessment of projects, technology
assessment, etc. The report is under finalization and the programme
for the 12th Plan period will be developed accordingly. Further, a
National Master Plan on waste-to-energy, including resource and
technology assessment, has already been prepared.  As regards research
and development on waste-to-energy, it may be mentioned that while
technologies of biomethanation and combustion are already matured,
research and development has been taken up at Indian Institute of
Science, Bengaluru on development of gasification technology for waste-
to-energy.

31
As regards projects based on Municipal Solid Wastes is concerned,
a project of 16 MW capacity installed at Okhla, New Delhi, the first
of the five projects to be supported by the Ministry, has been working
successfully since January, 2012. Waste-to-Energy projects of an
aggregate capacity of over 60 MW are already under installation in
the cities of Bengaluru, Hyderabad, New Delhi, Pune and Solapur.
These projects are expected to lead to replication of similar projects in
other big cities in the country.
A detailed evaluation of Municipal Solid Waste-to-Energy projects,
including issues related to recyclables and environmental pollution,
would be carried out after successful commissioning of a few of these
projects.  The outcome of such an evaluation will form the basis for
future of municipal solid waste-to-energy programme in India.  While
workshops and seminars for publicizing waste-to-energy are organized
from time to time, an intensive programme to publicise the option of
Waste-to-Energy Projects can be taken up after the success of a few
projects based on municipal solid wastes.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
Tidal Energy
The Committee note that India has a long coast line of about 7500
Km. with the estuaries and gulfs where tides are strong enough to
move turbines for electrical power generation. They also note that the
estimated potential of tidal energy is about 8200 MW in the country
which includes about 7000 MW in the Gulf of Cambay and 1200 MW
in the Gulf of Kutchh in the State of Gujarat and about 100 MW in
the Gangetic Belt in the Sunderban region in the State of West Bengal.
The Committee find  that in the tidal energy sector also, India is still
in its nascent stage. The Committee find that no pilot project has been
set up so far in the tidal energy sector by the Government. In fact, the
demonstration tidal power project namely Durgaduani Creek the tidal
power plant in Sunderban, West Bengal (3x1.25MW) was sanctioned
to WBREDA in 2008 at an estimated cost of Rs.48 crore and targeted
to be completed in 33 months from the date of sanction. The WBREDA
entrusted NHPC to execute the project as per the MoU signed between
the two. The Committee find that the central financial assistance of
Rs. 3 crore was sanctioned by the Ministry in this regard. The
Committee are astonished to find that over the last four years there
has been no progress in regard to setting up of the project. On enquiry
of the same the Committee were informed that the cost of the project

32
estimate bids stands at Rs. 238 crore against the initial estimate of
Rs.48 crore and in view of this the Government of West Bengal has
decided not to continue with the project.  To the utter dismay of the
Committee, the project has been cancelled by the Ministry due to its
exorbitant cost.  The Committee do not approve of this course of
action. The initial unrealistic and totally unrelated projection of the
project cost reflected a poor estimation and improper planning. The
Committee feel that the matter has been unduly delayed thereby
escalating the project cost manifold.  It clearly reflects the non-serious
approach which the Ministry has adopted in harnessing the potential
in this sector despite the fact that so far not even a single pilot project
has taken.  While emphasizing  the significance of energy generation
through tidal power,  the Committee strongly feel that assessment of
economic feasibility and viability of the projects should be evolved in
the initial stage itself so that the estimated cost of the projects are
rationally fixed. The Committee, therefore recommend that a systematic,
scientific proper assessment of the tidal energy potential be worked
out especially with the help of State Nodal Agencies in the coastal
States forthwith.  This would provide relevant data and information
to the potential investors in the field.  The Committee also emphasize
that proper and adequate financial incentives should be given for
promotion of investment in the tidal energy sector so as to harness
the available potential in the sector. To start with a pilot project has
to be initiated by the Ministry in coordination with concerned State
Government to assure the private investors that the projects are viable.
Reply of the Government
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) conducted the economic tidal
power study during early 80's on Indian coastline mainly in the states
Gujarat and West Bengal based on barrage Technology. According to
the study, there is an estimated potential of tidal energy of the order
of 8000 MW in the country. This includes about 7000 MW in the Gulf
of Cambay and 1200 MW in the Gulf of Kutch in the State of Gujarat
and about 100 MW in the Gangetic Delta in the Sunderbans region in
the State of West Bengal.
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has policy guidelines for
Research, Development and Demonstration in the area of New and
Renewable Energy including tidal energy. The policy has provision to
provide financial support for resource assessment, research and
development and demonstration projects with financial incentives up
to 50% of the project cost to the State Implementing Agencies for the
development of tidal energy projects on cost sharing basis.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]

33
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
-NIL-

34
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-NIL

35
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
IS STILL AWAITED
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
Geo-Thermal Energy
The Committee note that geothermal energy is heat stored in deep
interior of the earth that can be used for producing electricity and
also for direct heat applications. Reportedly, Geological Survey of India
has identified about 340 geothermal hot springs with 10,000 MW
potential in the country which are perennial with surface temperatures
ranging from 37-90 C which is suitable for direct heat applications.
The Committee observe that the geothermal energy potential in India
has apparently not been scientifically and systematically assessed nor
any utilization reported.   The Committee find that the Government
has practically done nothing in geothermal sector.  Not only this the
Government has not made any efforts to enhance awareness or provide
incentives or benefits to attract investment in the geothermal sector or
induce private parties to explore and harness the untapped energy in
this sector as is done in other renewable energy sectors like wind
energy and solar energy. Regarding the assessment of the geothermal
energy potential in the country, the Committee have been informed
that the magneto-telluric (MT) studies were assigned to National
Geophysical research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad.  A good potential
of geothermal energy has also been reported in the Ladakh region of
Jammu and Kashmir. High altitude, difficult terrain, harsh wheather
condition, short working period, difficulty in taking transmission lines
to load centres and high cost of the projects are some reported
hindrances for tapping geothermal energy. The Committee find that
in geothermal energy sector, the country is in a seminal stage.  They
feel that the sector need more research and innovation with escalating
environmental problems with the growing needs of energy, the country
cannot ignore exploration and exploitation of the huge geo-thermal
energy potential. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should focus their efforts in early exploitations of the existing
potential and explore more potential sites. The Committee were
apprised that the Ministry has proposed to commission at least one
geothermal based power project in each of the potential States viz.

36
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir and Jharkhand during the 12th Plan period. The Committee
feel that commissioning of at least one pilot project of geothermal
energy would encourage investors and private participants in the sector.
The Committee, recommend that the Ministry should take concrete
steps to promote and provide adequate fiscal and financial incentives
so as to attract investment in geo-thermal sector. Further, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should proactively initiate
geothermal based model project in collaboration with other successful
countries in the sector and promote technology transfer from each
collaboration to develop indigenous technology. Also, the Ministry
should take aggressive steps in educating the significance of the geo-
thermal energy in present scenario to general public and especially to
the  major industrial participants by organizing awareness programmes,
conferences etc.
Reply of the Government
The Government has signed Memorandum of Understanding with
Governments of Australia, Iceland and Philippines for scientific
co-operation, research in renewable energy sector and to explore the
potential of Geo-thermal in India. Indian Companies have Collaboration
Agreements with Foreign Companies in Geothermal Energy Sector i.e.
these are (i) Reykjavik Geothermal, Iceland and Thermax, India (ii)
Icelandsbanki, Iceland; Mannvit, Iceland and Bhilwara Group, India
have set up a Joint-Venture i.e. Bhilwara Mannvit Green Energy Ltd
(BMGEL) (iii) Kaldara Iceland and Hindustan Turbomachinery,
Bangalore (iv) NTPC-Mitshubishi, Japan (v) ONGC-Talboom, Belgium.
To exploit the geothermal energy sources, we need to map the
deep surface structure and to demarcate the area of geothermal heat
trapped inside the surface so that decisions regarding deep drilling,
estimation of its potential, number of years for which the resource can
be profitably tapped etc. can be taken. So far we have been able to
undertake only shallow bore hole drilling at some of our geothermal
fields.
Magneto-telluric (MT) studies were assigned to National
Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad to assess the deep
reservoir temperature of potential sites at Puga geothermal field located
in the north-west Himalayan range in Ladakh and Tatapani geothermal
field in the Sarguja district of Chhattisgarh. Further, a project on MT
investigations for assessing the geothermal potential in Satluj-Spiti, Beas
and Parbati valley in Himachal Pradesh, Badrinath-Tapovan in
Uttarakhand and Surajkund in Jharkhand was assigned to NGRI has
shown promising geothermal potential at Surajkund in Jharkhand and
Badrinath-Tapoban area in Uttarakhand

37
There is a good potential of geo-thermal energy in the Ladakh
region   However, due to high altitude, difficult terrain, harsh weather
conditions, very short working period, difficulty in taking transmission
lines to load centers and high cost the projects for tapping geo-thermal
energy could not be taken up so far. Jammu and Kashmir State Power
Development Corporation Limited (JKSPDC) in collaboration with M/
s Thermax and Reykjavik Geothermal, Iceland have initiated an action
for setting up of 5 MW Geothermal Power Plant at Puga. Recently an
International Seminar was held at Leh, Ladakh, where experts from
Australia were also present. The other stakeholders including Nodal
Agencies, NGRI, ONGC, DRDO including MNRE were present. In the
brainstorming session it was opined to take-up collaborative projects
to explore potential available in Ladakh region.  It is also proposed to
undertake activities for setting up of at least one multipurpose R&D-
cum technology demonstration energy power generation project in each
of the potential States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, West
Bengal and others.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/2/2011-P&C,
Dated 22.11.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
16 April , 2013 Chairman,
26 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

38
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2012-13) HELD ON
13TH MARCH, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’
PARLIAMENT  HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Lok Sabha
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
2. Shri P.C. Chacko
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal
5. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
6. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
7. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
10. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
11. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
13. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
14. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
15. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
16. Shri Motilal Vora

39
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3 Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** ***
5. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption
of the draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations contained
on the 29th Report on ‘Availability of Identified Non-Conventional
Resources of Energy-Their potential vis-à-vis utilization’ and adopted
the same without any changes. The Committee also authorized the
Chairman to finalise the aforementioned Report and present the same
to both the Houses of Parliament  in the current Session.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

40
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
(15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14
Total: 13
Percentage 93%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which
the replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Nil
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited:
Sl. No. 13
Total: 01
Percentage 07%

33
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Availability of Identified Non-Conventional
Resources of  Energy-Their Potential Vis-a-Vis Utilization]
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/ Chaitra, 1935 ( Saka)


THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Availability of Identified Non-Conventional
Resources of  Energy-Their Potential Vis-a-Vis Utilization]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.4.2013
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  23.4.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/ Chaitra, 1935 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 233
Price : Rs. .....00
© 2013 B Y LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupak Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..............................................................................
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ....................................
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ......................................
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration .......................................................................
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ............................................................................
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
13th March, 2013 ................................................................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
29th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .......................................................
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P.C. Chacko
3. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji *
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Smt. Mausam Noor
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
(iii)
*Expired on 1st March, 2013.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
24. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri K.C. Tyagi
#
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
#Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th March, 2013.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 33rd Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 29th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy on the subject Availability of Identified Non-
Conventional Resources of Energy-Their Potential vis-a-vis Utilization.
2. The 29th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 24th August, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22nd
November, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 13th March, 2013.
4. The Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 29th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
16 April , 2013 Chairman,
26 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.