THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25.05.2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  06.08.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 236
Price : Rs. 64.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
CHAPTER I Introductory ....................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Overview of International Cooperation in
New and Renewable Energy Sector ........................... 5
A. International Cooperation/MoUs/Agreements ... 5
B. Major Outcome from International Cooperation ... 8
C. Problems in the implementation of MoUs
signed ........................................................................... 15
D. Training and Capacity Building ............................ 15
CHAPTER III Collaboration for financing projects in New and
Renewable Energy Sector............................................... 18
A. Support from MNRE ................................................ 18
B. Collaboration with International Funding
Agencies ....................................................................... 18
C. Externally Funded Projects ..................................... 19
D. Implementation of Externally Aided Projects .... 24
E. Lines of Credits available and Utilized by
IREDA........................................................................... 26
F. Targets of power generation from various
renewable energy sources during the 12th Five
Year Plan ..................................................................... 29
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee .... 32
(i)

ANNEXURES
I. Contracts for technical collaborations with
International Institutions: Centre for Wind Energy
Technology (C-WET) ...................................................... 4 2
II. Contracts for technical collaborations with
International Institutions: Solar Energy Centre
(SEC)................................................................................... 44
III. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
23.07.2012, 26.11.2012 and 07.05.2013 ......................... 49
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2012-13)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P.C. Chacko
3. Shri Gadhvi Mukesh Bhairavdanji *
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Smt. Mausam Noor@
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
10. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
11. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
12. Shri A. Raja
13. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
14. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
(iii)
* Expired on 1st March, 2013.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee  w.e.f. 1st May, 2013.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
24. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri K.C. Tyagi
#
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary
#Nominated as member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th March, 2013.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Sixth Report on ‘International Cooperation in
New and Renewable Energy Sector’.
2. The Committee took briefing and evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on
23rd July, 2012 and 26th November, 2012 respectively. The Committee
wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry for
appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing the
information, desired by the Committee in connection with the issues
relating to the subject.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 7th May, 2013.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part II of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
07 May, 2013 Chairman,
17 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
India’s substantial and sustained economic growth is placing
enormous demand on its energy resources. The demand and supply
imbalance in energy sources requires serious efforts by the Government
of India to augment energy supplies. Economic growth, increasing
prosperity, urbanization, rise in per capita consumption, and spread
of energy access are the factors likely to substantially increase the
total demand for electricity in future. According to the 18th Electric
Power Survey (EPS) report, the energy requirement and peak demand
in the country in 2016-17 will be 13,54874 MU and 1,99,540 MW
respectively. Present peak shortage and energy shortage are at 9% and
8.6% respectively. The persistent shortages in electricity both for peak
power, off peak power and substantial increase in total demand for
electricity in future indicate the need for improving performance of
the power sector in the country, and the need to contain energy supply-
demand imbalance.
1.2 In view of electricity supply shortages, huge quantities of diesel
and furnace oil are being used by all sectors—industrial, commercial,
institutional or residential. Lack of rural lighting is leading to large-
scale use of kerosene. A very large proportion of citizens continue to
live with no access to electricity and other forms of commercial energy.
With constraints faced in resource availability and in delivery
mechanisms, traditional means of energy supply are falling short.
1.3 Renewable energy can make a substantial contribution in each
of the above-mentioned areas. In June, 2011, the Inter Governmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released the Special Report on
Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. The Report
suggest that in some of the scenarios renewable energy share in global
energy mix could reach upto 77% by 2050. It is in this context that
the role of renewable energy needs to be seen. It is no longer “alternate
energy" but will increasingly become a key part of the solution to the

2
nation’s energy needs. India’s renewable energy installed capacity has
grown at an annual rate of 23% i.e. from 3900 MW in 2002-03 to about
28,000 MW at the end of 2012-13. It is contributing about 12% of
national electricity.
1.4 Renewable energy has been an important component of India's
energy planning process for quite some time now. At the Government
level, political commitment to renewable energy manifested itself in
the establishment of the first Department of Non-conventional Energy
Sources in 1982, which was then upgraded to a full-fledged Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES). Subsequently in 1992 it
was renamed as Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE).
MNRE is the nodal Ministry of the Government of India to deal all
matters relating to new and renewable energy. Under the Allocation
of Business Rules, the MNRE has been assigned the following specific
items:
• Research and development of biogas and programmes
relating to biogas units;
• Commission for Additional Sources of Energy (CASE);
• Solar energy including solar photovoltaic (SPV) devices and
their development, production and applications;
• All matters relating to small/mini/micro hydel projects of,
and below, 25 MW capacity;
• Programmed relating to improved chulhas and research and
development thereof;
• Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited;
• Research and development of other non-conventional/
renewable sources of energy and programmes relating
thereto;
• Tidal energy;
• Integrated Rural Energy Programmed (IREP);
• Geothermal energy;
• Bio-fuels: (i) National Policy; (ii) research, development and
demonstration on transport, stationary and other
applications; (iii) setting up of a National Bio-fuels
Development Board and strengthening the existing
institutional mechanism; and (iv) overall coordination.

3
1.5 The Indian Renewable Energy Programme has received wide
recognition internationally in the recent years. Many countries have
evinced interest in cooperation with India for promotion of new and
renewable energy. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has
been interacting with several developed and developing countries for
cooperation in new and renewable energy sector. Global position of
India in harnessing renewable energy in accordance with various
parameters is given as follows:
• Harnessed about 20% of the estimated feasible potential in
various renewable energy sectors.
• 5th Position in overall renewable energy capacity
installations.
• 2nd largest number of CDM projects.
• 2nd largest number of installed Biogas plants.
• 5th largest Wind installed capacity.
•6  million decentralized RE systems.
1.6 The main objective of the international cooperation has been
to learn from and adapt technological advancements and best practices
in policy and implementation from advanced countries. Further,
according to the Ministry, the focus of the international cooperation
has been to explore opportunities for exchange of scientists to share
experience and for taking up joint research, design, development,
demonstration and manufacture of new and renewable energy systems
and devices by R&D institutions and organizations as well as industry
of partnering countries and thereby establishing institutional linkages
between institutions of India and cooperating countries. Bilateral and
multilateral cooperation frameworks have been established for
cooperation.
1.7 According to the Ministry, International Collaborations opens
door for Indian Manufacturing Companies for supply of indigenously
manufactured renewable energy products, systems and devices
especially in the area of wind, solar and hydro power in developing
as well as developed countries. International commitments are
undertaken by the Ministry in consultation and approval of the
Ministry of External Affairs. The MNRE has been interacting with
several developed and developing countries for cooperation in New
and Renewable Energy sector such as USA, Denmark, Sweden,
Scotland, Japan, UK, Germany, European Union, Italy, Switzerland and

4
West Africa. There have been cooperation with various funding agencies
such as UNDPGEF, World Bank, Global Environment Facility (GEF),
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IGPCC) in wind, solar,
bio-energy and small hydro sectors. However, there are vast avenues
for co-operation in the following areas as well:
(i) Policy Planning.
(ii) Resource assessment.
(iii) Knowledge sharing and renewable energy technologies and
projects.
(iv) Human Resource Development.
(v) Commercial co-operation in renewable energy through JVs.
(vi) T echnology transfer in solar, small hydro, wind energy,
biogas, biomass and testing and standardization.

5
CHAPTER II
OVERVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR
A. International Cooperation/MoUs/Agreements
1.8 According to the MNRE, 29 Memorandum of Understandings
(MoUs)/Programme of CooperationAgreements in renewable energy
sector have been signed with 22 countries so far. The Ministry have
stated that in general, Memorandum of Understanding is just an
intention to do something and not binding legally, whereas, under
Agreements/cooperation is enforceable legally, where both parties
agrees on implementing specific work/task.
1.9 Many countries have shown interest in co-operation with India
for promotion of new and renewable energy:
(i) Cooperation under dedicated MoUs/PoCsAgreements in RE
Sector:
• There have been 21 dedicated MoUs with Australia,
Bangladesh, Brazil, South Africa, Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Denmark, Egypt, Iceland, Iran, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
Philippines, Spain, Scotland, Sweden, Thailand, Uruguay
and 8 PoC/Agreements: Spain-1 (MNRE), USA-3
(MNRE, C-WET, SEC), USA-4 (Planning Commission-2,
GoI-2).
(ii) Project based Cooperation at Bilateral level:
• There has been project based co-operation at bilateral
level viz. Indo-Japan Energy dialogue, Indo-German
cooperation, etc.
(iii) Cooperation through Agreements of other Ministries:
• There has been co-operation through Joint Working
Committees/Working Groups/Commissions constituted
by Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Commerce
& Industry etc.
(iv) Multilateral/Trilateral Cooperation frameworks:
• There have been multilateral/trilateral co-operation
frameworks with SAARC, ASEAN, IBSA, APPCDC,
APCTT, etc.

6
(v) Considerable cooperation activities taken up in the past:
• Energy access projects have been set up in many
countries including Senegal, Namibia, Mali, Burkina
Faso, Uganda and Syria;
• Solar Lighting/Gasifier initiative in Africa.
1.10 Highlighting the initiatives of the Government in international
cooperation for promotion of new and renewable energy, the Secretary,
MNRE during the evidence deposed before the Committee:
“……there will be stress on conventional sources such as coal, oil
and gas etc., it should be so because per capita consumption of
power in the country is the lowest in the world i.e. 760 units per
capita while world average is above 2800, that is why we will
continue our priority towards conventional sources but non-
conventional sources of energy such as solar power, wind power,
hydro power etc. are also contributing and it can be very significant
because presently what we call giving access has been considered
very significant. The United Nations’s General Assembly has
declared this year as the year of sustainable energy for all.
On this issue India and our Ministry conducted an important
International Ministerial Seminar in October, 2012 which was
inaugurated by our hon’ble Prime Minister and Ministers and very
senior officials from 42 countries came to attend it and they held
deliberations for two days on how to give access to energy to a
large part of the population? This initiative was taken by India for
United Nations Declaration. Similarly, in the beginning of
November, 2012, we had conducted a meeting for three days, it
was attended by Ministers and senior officers from Asian countries.
Renewable energy was discussed in the said meeting and this
discussion would prove very fruitful in the near future.”
1.11 MNRE in association with its technical institutions namely
Centre for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai and Solar
Energy Centre (SEC), Gwalpahari, Gurgaon have established contracts
for technical collaborations with international institutions. Details are
given at Annexure I and Annexure II respectively.
1.12 Indo-German bilateral programme regarding Renewable
Energy Supply for Rural Areas (RESRA) from 2008-13 has also yielded
results in terms of developing and implementing Biogas based
electricity generation projects.
(i) In Korba, Chhattisgarh:
- 24 tribal villages grouped into 6 clusters were selected
for Biogas based electricity generation. Electricity
generation has started in 6 villages and Jatropha oil
based electricity generation has started in 8 villages.

7
(ii) In Kolwan, Maharashtra:
- Biogas based electricity generation has been set up in
one village.
1.13 Responding to the query about the projects/programmes
implemented in African and ASEAN countries under different
cooperative programmes, the MNRE in their replies stated as follows:
“Presently many projects/programmes in renewable energy sector
have been implemented/planned for implementation in African
countries under the aegis of India-Africa Forum Summit (AIFS-II)
and in ASEAN countries under Indo-ASEAN Co-operation
programmed. These include electrification of villages through solar
power plants, bio-mass gasifiers, solar charging stations for solar
lanterns and specialized training programmes.
No international commitments for implementation in African and
ASEAN countries have led to the deviation of focus of our priorities
and requirements, as funds for such activities are separately
provided by MEA/MNRE. Such cooperations helps in making
India’s presence in renewable energy sector and establishing Indian
manufacturing/market for renewable energy sector in African and
Asian countries.”
1.14 In response to a query as to whether the Ministry have
initiated any proposal for strengthening/revival of MoUs and initiating
fresh MoUs and collaborations with the African and South-East Asian
countries, the MNRE in their written replies stated as follows:
“After organizing International Seminar on Energy Access during
9-10 October 2012, ASEAN Workshop of Experts during
5-6 November 2012 and ASEAN-India Ministerial level Meeting
on Renewable Energy on 7th November 2012, interest have been
shown from many African and South East Asian Countries for
strengthening/revival of MoUs and/or initiating fresh MoUs and
cooperations in renewable energy sector.”
1.15 MoUs in renewable energy sector have been signed including
project based cooperation at bilateral level such as that under Indo-
Japan energy Dialogue, or cooperation through Joint Commissions/
Committees/Working Groups of other Ministries like External Affairs,
Environment & Forests, Commerce & Industry and Power. Some of
the countries where specific cooperation activities are being undertaken
under the latter mechanism include Norway, Finland and Canada.

8
1.16 These MoUs provide for constitution of Joint Working Group
(JWG) to formulate specific project proposals for implementation and
for monitoring of implementation of various activities. There have been
active interest under some of the MoUs, while in case of some others,
the progress has not been significant mainly for want of initiative by
the concerned countries.
1.17 In addition India has been collaborating under various multi-
lateral/trilateral cooperation frameworks like South Asian Association
for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN), Brazil-Russia-India-China and South Africa (BRICS),
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA), and Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean
Development and Climate (APPCDC), etc.
1.18 The MNRE have stated that the MoUs signed with various
countries are of a standard nature which lays the framework for
cooperation between India and the signing country. Some developing
countries have little capacity in developing renewable energy of their
own, therefore, technical expertise and knowledge developed in the
country have been shared with them. On the other hand, MoUs have
also been signed with developed countries like USA, Germany,
Denmark, Sweden, Scotland etc. for technical collaborations with
international institutions to establish contacts with technical institutions
namely Centre for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai and
Solar Energy Centre (SEC), Gwalpahari.
1.19 The MNRE have stated that potential assessment study has
been undertaken by Gujarat State Government and MoU signed in
January, 2011 by GPCL with UK and Singapore companies for setting
up 250 MW tidal power plant at Mandis Gulf of Kutch and a special
purpose vehicle has been farmed for 50 MW plan in phase 1.
1.20 Regarding the assessment and utilization of the tidal energy
and geo-thermal energy, the Ministry in a note stated:
“Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has signed Memorandum
of Understanding with Government of Iceland for scientific
co-operation, research in renewable energy sector and to explore
the potential of Geo-thermal in India on 9th October, 2007.”
B. Major Outcome from International Cooperation
1.21 When the Committee enquired about the extent of
achievements in tapping the available renewable energy potential

9
optimally due to international cooperation, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as under:
“The major highlights of renewable energy sectors partially due to
international cooperation are as stated below:
(a) India’s renewable energy installed capacity has grown at an
annual rate of 23%, rising from about 3900 MW in 2002-03
to about 28000 MW in 2012-13.
(b) Wind energy continues to dominate India’s renewable energy
industry, accounting for 69% of installed capacity (19051
MW), followed by Biomass Power (3695 MW), Small Hydro
Power (3632 MW) and Solar Power (1686 MW).
(c) The renewable energy has started making visible impact in
the Indian energy scenario viz. contributing more than 12%
of national electricity installed capacity.
(d) Off-grid applications of renewable energy have also made
significant headway.”
1.22 Regarding benefits of international cooperation to the domestic
manufacturing of equipments/implements/infrastructure in wind
energy, solar energy and biomass, the details given by MNRE are
given in succeeding paragraphs:
Wind Energy
1.23 With regard to benefit of co-operation in wind energy, the
MNRE furnished as under:
• The establishment of Centre for Wind Energy Technology
(C-WET), Chennai for wind energy development was a
major outcome in cooperation with RISO, Denmark and
DANIDA. Initially, Wind Power demonstration projects in
India setup in collaboration with Denmark. A total of 37
demo projects with a total installed capacity of 62.80 MW
were set up in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and
West Bengal.
• The Indian wind turbine manufacturers have developed
technological and commercial collaboration with advanced
countries with a total productive capacity of about
3,000 MW per annum.
• There has been co-operation in resources management using
advance techniques with National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL) USA, GIZ Germany, RISO Denmark.

10
• The Indian wind atlas has been prepared in association with
RISO National Laboratory Denmark with the use of latest
modeling techniques.
• C-WET has developed competence to test and certify wind
turbines at par with international centres after co-operation
in testing and certification of wind turbines with RISO
Denmark and NREL, USA.
• Studies for offshore wind power development have been
taken up with Scottish Development International (SDI).
They indicate offshore wind potential in Kanyakumari and
Rameshwaram areas in Tamil Nadu and Gujarat coast.
Feasibility studies are also being undertaken with European
Union.
• Indian wind turbine manufacturers developed technological
and commercial collaboration with advanced countries.
14 wind turbine manufacturers have either collaboration with
international companies or are 100% subsidiary of foreign
cooperation, wind turbine Test Centre at Kayathur
(Tamil Nadu) was established in 2000, a joint project with
Denmark to take up manufacturing wind turbines and other
research and development activities at par with international
standard and specification.
1.24 According to the MNRE, the ongoing co-operation in wind
sector with various countries are as follows:—
• USA:
* There is Cooperation with National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL) in aero-structural design of wind
turbines (at C-WET).
* Inter Laboratory Comparison for accreditation of C-WET
as testing and certifying agency has been developed.
• Denmark & Sweden:
* for offshore wind resource assessment.
* for wind power forecasting—training and application.
* for training in Wind Energy monitoring techniques.
1.25 The Ministry have stated that the outcome of these
collaborations have enhanced competence in Design, Inter Laboratory
Comparison, Testing Wind Resources Assessment in on-shore wind
power and pre-feasibility studies in off-shore wind power. In addition,

11
international collaborations helps in capacity building and improving
Resource Assessment of wind and solar energy by using advanced
techniques and establishment of reliable and quality testing of wind
and solar systems and devices.
Solar Energy
1.26 With regard to co-operation in harnessing solar energy, the
MNRE has stated as under:—
• “Solar Energy Centre (SEC) created in 1982 as part of UNDP
technical assistance project. First 50 KW Solar Thermal Power
plant at SEC was established in 1989 with technical support
from Germany.
• Initial development of various applications such as Solar
Thermal systems, Cookers & Water Heaters with UNDP
assistance. Solar PV module testing facilities created in 1990
with USAID assistance.
• 1st Solar Simulator was established at SEC with assistance
from Germany (1992).
• Amorphous silicon technology was developed in 1988 as
part of UNDP project with major inputs from experts of
USA.
1.27 Elaborating the technology absorption after collaboration, the
Ministry stated as under:—
“At present in crystalline silicon solar cells, which are now in
large scale production in India at the commercial level, the Indian
efforts are nearly at par with the international efforts. Indian
companies are able to regularly export as the efficiency and overall
performance of the Indian modules is good. However, in various
thin film solar cell module process technique, Indian research need
to collaborate with the international institutions for large scale
commercial production. The results of the ongoing current research
initiatives will be seen in next 3-5 years. It is also possible to use
solar cells by concentrating large amount of light on a cell and
conversion efficiencies of 40.7% to 42.8% have been reported by
companies in USA. However, the high concentrator device
structures are still at pilot scale. At present one company in India
is engaged in assembly of concentrator modules.
R&D activities undertaken in the country have led to significant
achievements in the improvement and commercialization of solar
water heating systems and solar cookers. The technology and the
manufacturing base for solar water heating systems have become
reasonably well established.

12
Presently, for solar thermal power, USA and Spain represent for
more than 90% of the market in terms of installed capacity and
capacities under construction. Other countries, such as China,
Morocco, Sudan and India have also announced ambitious plans
to set up Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) plants. At present four
variants of technologies include Parabolic Trough; Tower; Linear
Fresnel and Parabolic Dish technology which are at various stages
of development and commercialization.
As a part of R&D efforts, a megawatt scale National Solar Thermal
Power Test and Simulation facility is being set up at Ministry's
Solar Energy Centre (SEC) by IIT Bombay and a consortium of
Industries. An R&D-cum-demonstration project for development
of Central Receiver Technology for solar thermal power generation
was initiated with the support of Industry led Group from USA,
Spain and Switzerland. The project aims to design and develop
solar tower with an output of 1MW thermal energy.”
1.28 According to the MNRE following projects/activities in solar
energy are under implementation:—
* Solar Desalination plant for Bitra Island, Lakshadweep.
* Desalination plant of 10,000 litre per day capacity is under
implementation. Installation of system is likely to be
completed by December, 2013.
*1  MW Solar Thermal Power Plant R&D project Mount Abu
co-funded from German Ministry and Indian Industry with
16 hours thermal storage for continuous operation is under
installation. Solar plant is likely to be completed by
September, 2013.
* Detailed Study has been completed for Industrial Process
Heat Applications and implementation of pilot projects in
textile, pulp & paper, Pharmaceutical and food processing
sectors.
* Out of 10 potential sectors, 4 have been identified and
specific projects are being developed.
1.29 In regard to achievement in UNDP/GEF assisted project on
solar water heating since 2008 the Ministry have submitted as follows:—
“* Documents have been developed for use of stakeholders—
User Handbook & Solar Water Heater Calculator. Design
Handbook for installers, consultants & engineers has been
brought out besides the guidelines on installation of SWHS
in high rise buildings.

13
*W ebsite wwe.solarwaterheater.gov.in for information
dissemination has also been established.
* Monthly electronic newsletter is being sent to over 2000
stakeholders
*T oll free Helpline No. 1-00023304477 for ready reference.
*T raining Manuals in 8 regional languages have been brought
out. Over 700 mechanics/electricians have been trained in
different programmes.
* Model project reports for setting up of manufacturing units
and entrepreneurship development are being brought out.
* Fact sheets, Reference Manual, Case studies & on-line tools
for use in Hospitality Sector are also being brought out.
* Software for data management has also been developed to
check duplicity of installations made by Channel partners.
* CDM project is in process of registration with UNFCCC.
*P roject developed in ESCO mode is under implementation”.
1.30 UNDP/GEF assisted project on market development and
promotion of solar concentrator based process heat applications in India
has strated since March, 2012 with the purpose of development of
technology information packages for different end uses, test set ups
for performance evaluation, knowledge products documents and specific
websites, planning and implementation of demonstration and replication
projects are as follows:—
* 45,000 sq. m of Concentrating Solar Technologies installed
in around 90 industries and commercial establishments.
* 39,200 tonnes of CO
2 emission reduced per year from
installations besides saving around 3.15 million litres of fuel
oil per year.
* Developing & promoting of CSTs for community cooking,
process heat and cooling applications.
1.31 When the Committee enquired about the action plan of the
Ministry for tapping the huge potential of solar energy in Leh and
Ladakh region, the Secretary, MNRE during the evidence elaborated:—
“……… the area of Leh Ladakh is probably one of the best in
terms of solar radiation. It has lower temperature and it has vast
areas of land. The only problem there is that the evacuation line
is not complete. The local demand is around 50 MW. We planned

14
to put up something like 250 MW because it does not make sense
otherwise. So, if you have 250 MW, you need a line to evacuate
this power to Srinagar and then take it further into the grid. That
is one of the major stumbling blocks. We are told that the power
grid will complete it by 2014 or 2015.”
Biomass Energy
1.32 There has been co-operation with UNDP/GEF Assisted Project
for removal of barriers to biomass Power Generation in India since
2008-13. The major outcome of this project are as follows:—
* Fuel Supply Linkages:
*2  projects have been completed at Solapur (Maharashtra)
and Muktsar (Punjab).
* Nellore (AP), Muktsar (Punjab), Solapur (Maharashtra)
project is underway .
* Biomass Gasifier systems:
* 1.2 MW, Grid-connected project at Sankheda, Vadodara is
commissioned.
*P roject at Washim (Maharashtra) is under implementation.
* Four types of Model Investment Projects have been
developed for use by project developers.
* Studies have been completed on identification of barriers,
resource assessment, evaluation of performance of the
existing biomass power plants.
1.33 Elaborating the significance of international cooperation in new
and renewable energy sector, the Secretary, MNRE stated during the
evidence as follows:—
“…..International cooperation is very significant for this Ministry
and it has two diamensions. First is how to seek technical assistance
from developed countries which have made tremendous progress
in this field technologically and how much technical assistance we
can take from them and the second diamension in this country is
what our Prime Minister called as south-south cooperation during
International Ministerial Seminar which was held recently. It means
we should share the fruits of our progress with developing
countries of Asia and Africa. These are the two diamensions and
so far as our Ministry is concerned, we have made progress on
both fronts. Our solar energy centre imported solar energy training
to 200 persons from about 61 countries, so it is our tremendous
achievement and matter of pride.”

15
C. Problems in the implementation of MOUs signed
1.34 A strong technical collaborations is required for initiating
research and development, training and creating manufacturing bases
with the advanced/developed countries especially US, Europe,
Germany, Japan, Denmark, etc.
1.35 Regarding the constraints in implementation of MoUs for
promoting of renewable energy sector in the country, the Ministry in
a note stated as under:—
“Some of the constraints in expanding promotion of renewable
energy sector in the country are associated with advanced resource
assessment/mapping of wind, solar and biomass, promoting off-
shore wind power projects, testing and certifications, solar thermal
power, hydrogen and fuel cell, financing and credit lines etc. The
activities planned under MoUs are dependent on the interest shown
by both the countries.”
1.36 When the Committee desired to know about the projects that
have been affected due to non-implementation of these MoUs, the
Ministry in their written reply have stated as under:—
“No project had been adversely affected. The MoUs signed in 2007
with Italy, Thailand, Philippines and Cuba has completed their
tenure. The Ministry takes up revival/signing fresh MoUs with
these countries in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs.”
D. Training and Capacity Building
1.37 Regarding the projects and technology-wise exchange of
scientists and results achieved thereof during the same period, the
MNRE has stated that the main objectives for providing training to
the scientists working abroad, especially in developing countries, is to
share technical experiences acquired in various fields of renewable
energy to facilitate them to develop, operate and maintain various
systems and devices apart from developing collaborative R&D
programmes. About 168 participants from 60 countries were given
training in Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon and 107 participants from
42 countries were given training in Centre for Wind energy Technology
(C-WET), Chennai during last 4 years. 652 participants from
62 countries have been given training at Alternate Hydro Energy Centre
(AHEC) Roorkee during last 15 years.

16
1.38 Regarding the exchange of scientists during the last 3 years
with specific purpose of technology advancement in renewable energy
sector, the MNRE in their written replies stated as follows:—
“The exchange of technical personnel working in various technical
institutions in India such as Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon and
Centre for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai with
collaborating technical institutions in USA, Denmark, Sweden,
Scotland, Germany etc., helped in acquiring advance technical
knowledge and capacity building required for technical personnel
in the area of aero-structural design, Inter laboratory comparisons
on power performance measurements in the case of wind energy
with US collaboration. Similarly, off-shore wind resource assessment,
wind power forecasting training and application & Wind Energy
technology training from Denmark and Sweden and data quality
checking and algorithm development for Solar Radiation Resource
Assessment with German collaboration.”
1.39 In addition, C-WET, Chennai has also provided specialized
training in wind energy sector. According to MNRE following training
programmes have been organised by the C-WET:—
“a. ARAB ORGANISATION FOR INDUSTRIALISATION (AOI),
EGYPT—training for Scientists from AOI in (i) in Wind
Turbine Testing, (ii) in Wind Resource Assessment.
b. MAURITIUS—organized highly customized training
programme for Scientists in Mauritius.
c. INDO-AFRICA—organized an International training
programme exclusively for African Nationals.
d. Training Programmes under the ITEC-MEA—Twice every
year, C-WET conducts International Training Programmes
under the ITEC-MEA funding and trained several
International participants in the developing countries in
Africa as well as South America and South Asia.”
1.40 When the Committee desired to know whether any long-term
strategy have been finalized during such exchanges, the Ministry stated
that Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon is focussing on R&D, testing and
training in solar energy technology and applications and organizing
short-term training courses on various aspects of solar energy:—
(i) SEC was accr edited as one of the training institutes under
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme
of Ministry of External Affairs in the year 2008-09.

17
(ii) In add ition, SEC has been assigned responsibility to organise
training programmes for African countries under India-Africa
Forum Summit II.
(iii) 168 participants from 60 countries (Africa, ASEAN, Baltic,
Caribbean, CIS, Latin America, Middle-East, SAARC and
South Pacific regions) have been benefitted from these
programmes.
(iv) Two experts of SEC were also deputed to Mauritius to
impart training on solar energy applications to 27 engineers
from both private and public sectors of the Republic of
Mauritius.
1.41 When the Committee desired to know whether there is any
policy to formulate a long-term energy policy for renewable sector to
encourage Indian and foreign investment in the field of New and
Renewable Energy sector, the Ministry stated:
“The Ministry has formulated a long term strategy for renewable
energy sector to encourage both Indian and foreign investment in
the field of New and Renewable Energy. It is envisaged to add
renewable power capacity of 55,000 MW from various renewable
energy sources upto the end of 13th Plan (31st March, 2022). This
includes about 20,000 MW of Solar, 26000 MW from wind,
4,000 MW from small hydro and 5,000 MW from Bio-power. The
same will lead to a total renewable power generation capacity of
about 72,000 MW by 2022, corresponding to around 15% in then
likely total installed capacity, with about 6.4% contributions in the
electricity mix.”
1.42 When the Committee desired to know about the achievements
made in pursuit of the goal as result of such exchanges, the Ministry
stated:
“Scientists and senior officials working in the Ministry, SEC,
C-WET, AHEC, IIT’s, R&D Institutions, Members of Central/State
Regulatory Commissions, States/Central Government officials
associated with renewable energy programmes visited for attending
advanced training programmes, seminars, conference, workshops,
as a part of delegations, meetings organized under MoUs etc.,
visited USA, Germany, Japan, China, Spain, UK, Korea, Mauritius,
Canada, Iceland, France, Philippines, EAE, Bangladesh, Sweden,
Denmark, Italy, South Africa, Brazil etc. from India. The main
purpose of such exchanges of scientists/technical personnel is to
acquire advanced technical training and awareness besides
improving bilateral and multilateral cooperation, implementing
ongoing cooperation, etc. About 130 such visits abroad have been
undertaken for the above mentioned purposes during the last three
years.”

18
CHAPTER III
COLLABORATION FOR FINANCING PROJECTS IN NEW
AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR
A. Support from MNRE
1.43 The MNRE provides supports for installation of various
renewable energy systems/devices for electrification of villages, setting
up of Bio-mass gassifiers and solar charging stations and specialized
training programmes planned for implementation in African countries
under the aegis of India-Africa Forum Summit (AIFS-II) and in ASEAN
countries under Indo-ASEAN Cooperation Programme. Projects for
electrification of villages in Sudan and Namibia through Solar Energy,
have already been implemented with financial assistance provided by
MNRE. MNRE is also conducting International Training Programme
under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) for Asia,
the Pacific, Latin America, Caribbian, East & Central Europe.
1.44 In order to support aforementioned activities, funds are being
provided from the Budget Head of this Ministry under Grants-in-Aid.
Details of funds allocated and actual utilization made under Grants-
in-Aid during the last 3 years is stated below:
(Rupees in cr.)
2011-12 2010-11 2009-10
HEAD Funds Actual Funds Actual Funds Actual
provided utilization provided utilization provided  utilization
under RE under RE under RE
Grants-in-Aid 4.00 3.96 5.00 4.88 4.25 4.02
B. Collaboration with International Funding Agencies
1.45 Regarding funding through International/Multinational
funding agencies, the Ministry in their replies stated:
“There is a need for strong collaborations for financing and credit
lines from various international/multi-national funding agencies,
like the World Bank, United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), Asian Development Bank (ADB), and United National
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and Global

19
Environmental Facility (GEF) for project based assistance for
renewable energy in India. Though, such agencies are providing
financial support on project to projects basis which may not be
enough to increase the pace of deployment of various renewable
energy sectors in commensuration with national policy and goals
set. A long term policy and strategy is required from international/
multi-national funding agencies.”
1.46 In reply to a specific query of the Committee related with the
areas/projects, which are under implementation as a result of
international cooperation under the separete categories of MoUs/
Bilateral agreement/Trilateral and Multilateral agreements, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as follows:
“Various international/multi-national funding agencies, like the
World Bank, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Asian Development Bank (ADB), and United National Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO) and Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) provide project based assistance for renewable energy
programme in India.”
C. Externally Funded Projects
1.47 At present, following externally aided projects are being
implemented by the Ministry:—
(i) UNDP/GEF assisted project on Solar Water Heating: The
objectives of the Project are to accelerate and sustain the
Solar Water Heating market growth and to use experiences
gained in promoting a similar growth in other countries.
Details of the project budget with participating agencies are
as below.
(ii)
Participating agencies Budget
In USD In Rupees
GEF 2 million 10 crore
MNRE (Co-financing) 10.8 million 54 crore
ICPCI (In kind) 0.3 million 1.5 crore
Total 13.1 million 65.5 crore

20
(iii) UNDP-GEF assisted project on "Market development &
promotion of solar concentrator based process heat
applications in India: The project was started on 28th March
2012 and will continue till 31st March 2017. Basic objective
of the project is to reduce GHG emissions from low &
medium temperature process heat applications through
increased use of CSTs in the country with following budget
available from various sources:
Million USD Rs. in crore
• GEF Support : 4.40 22.00
• MNRE-Grant subsidy : 6.00 30.00
• MNRE-in kind : 1.35 6.75
• Beneficiaries-in cash : 6.00 30.00
• Financial institutions : 6.00 30.00
Total Outlay : 23.75 118.75
(iv) UNDP/GEF assisted pr oject on “Removal of Barriers to
Biomass Power Generation in India”: The objective of the
project is to accelerate development and deployment of
environmentally sustainable bio-energy technologies in India
using different types of captive and distributed biomass
resources. The project was started in April 2007 for a period
of 3 years which was subsequently extended by two years
i.e. upto March 2012. DEA has approved another extension
of 2 more years i.e. upto March 2014. Total approved Outlay
of the Project is USD 10.89 (equivalent Rs. 54.45 cr.) with
UNDP/GEF contribution of USD 5.65 million and GOI/
MNRE contribution of USD 5.24 million. A total expenditure
of about Rs. 9.20 crore (approx. US $ 2.08 million) out of
the UNDP/GEF funds and Rs. 2.74 crore (approx. US $
0.59 million) out of GOI/MNRE funds has been incurred
as on 30.06.2012. Under this project, 20 studies relating to
identification of barriers, resource assessment, evaluation of
performance of the existing biomass power plants and
review of policy & regulatory framework, Development of
Model Documents, Road Map for Biomass Power have been
undertaken through technical assistance, which has had a
direct impact on the revision of guidelines, policies and on
the National Programmes being implemented by the
Ministry. Out of 12 projects (MIPs) selected for the

21
4 categories mentioned above, 3 projects have been
commissioned, another 4 are under implementation and the
remaining 5 are in process of obtaining various statutory
approvals/clearances from respective State Govt's and/or
financial closure for term loans.
(v) UNDP Project on “Access to Clean Energy”: The Project
aims for direct intervention towards accelerated access to
energy services particularly for increasing livelihoods of the
poor in remote villages in the 7 UNDAF States (Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh). Key objectives of the project are—(i) to
upscale at least 10-15 successful, cost effective, replicable,
financially viable entrepreneurship based business & delivery
model for deployment of RET projects that strengthen
livelihoods and enhance economic development; and (ii) to
provide support for pilot projects in 35-50 villages for the
development of a replicable approach for assisting local
entrepreneurs to create, manage, and upscale enterprises that
harness RET applications to provide a clean energy access
and improved quality of life to the rural people. The total
project outlay is USD 4.00 million having UNDP and GOI/
MNRE contribution of USD 2.0 million each. A total
expenditure of about Rs 1.76 crore (approx. US $ 0.38
million) out of the UNDP funds has been incurred as on
30.06.2012. Release of an amount of Rs 36.73 lakh from
GOI/MNRE share towards financial assistance to the
sanctioned projects is under process. 8 projects from various
entrepreneurs, NGOs etc. for establishing RET based projects
in the UNDAF States have been sanctioned and are
currently under implementation.
(vi) World Bank Technical Assistance for Up-scaling Deployment
of RET based Innovative Business Models: The objective of
this project is to support preparation of sustainable and
replicable business models that are entrepreneur driven and
delivery based for providing energy solutions to rural areas
using renewable energy technologies across India. Total
outlay of the project is US $ 3.10 million with the World
Bank Contribution as US $ 1.1 million and GOI/MNRE
Contribution as US $ 2.00 million. The project was started
in September 2011. The Technical Assistance from the World
Bank is to be used for—(i) Developing Pipeline of RET
Projects; (ii) Project Management and Monitoring; and
(iii) Documentation/Knowledge Dissemination. The GOI/

22
MNRE contribution is mainly for investment support for
entrepreneur, NGOs and others for enabling implementation
of projects, besides infrastructure cost for establishing a
Project Management Unit (PMU) under MNRE for
implementation of the Project.
(vii) Renewable Energy Component of the Indo-German Energy
Programme (IGEN-RE): Activities to be taken up in
shortlisted States—Bihar, West Bengal and Uttarakhand are
being finalized in consultation with respective SNA’s. Other
activities supported by GIZ are—(i) Development of
Programme of Activities under Clean Development
Mechanism; (ii) Supporting M/s SELCO Solar Pvt. Ltd.,
Bangalore for setting up a Incubation Centre for providing
mentorship in social enterprise management and business
planning support mainly from the underdeveloped States
of the country—Rajasthan, MP , UP , Bihar, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Orissa, WB, and North East; and
(iii) Utilization of Pine Needle for generation of power.
1.48 When the Committee enquired about the funding by
international bodies like World Bank in renewable energy sector during
each of the last 5 years vis-à-vis its utilization, the Ministry have
furnished the following information:
“There is no year-wise allocation of funds by the external agencies.
Funds are drawn as per requirement for each project. Details of
total funds provided and expenditure incurred as on 30.09.2012
are given below:
(Figures in US $ and Rs.)
Detail of Expenditure under Externally Aided Projects
Sl.No. Name of project Total Grant Total expenditure
1. UNDP/GEF Biomass Power Project US$ 5,650,000 2,076,011
INR 260,069,500 95,558,786
2. UNDP-Access to Clean Energy (ACE) US$ 2,000,000 395,142
INR 96,160,000 18,998,427
3. World Bank assisted project on US$ 200,000 20,239
“Scaling up Deployment of Renewable
Energy Technology for Promoting INR 10,400,000 1,052,428
Innovative Business Models”

23
UNDP/GEF Project on Total Grant Total expenditure
Solar Water Heating
GEF US$ 2 Million 1.8 Million
INR 10 Cr. 9.5 Cr.
MNRE (Co-financing) US$ 10.8 Million 36 Million
INR 54 Cr. 180 Cr.
ICPCI (in Kind) US$ 0.3 Million 0.31 Million
INR 1.5 Cr. 1.6 Cr.
Total US$ 13.1 Million 38.11 Million
INR 65.5 Cr. 191.1 Cr.
UNDP-GEF project on ‘Market Total Grant Total
development & promotion expenditure
of solar concentrator based
process heat applications
in India’
GEF support US$ 4.40 Million  37,682/-
INR 22.00 Cr. 20.87 Lakh
MNRE Grant subsidy US$ 6.00 Million 2 Million
INR 30.00 Cr. 10 Cr.
MNRE : In Kind US$ 1.35 Million  16038/-
INR 6.75 Cr. 8.5 Lakh
Beneficiaries : In cash US$ 6.00 Million 1 Million
INR 30.00 Cr. 5 Cr.
Financial institutions US$ 6.00 Million Nil
INR 30.00 Cr. Nil
1.49 Regarding the steps which are being taken at national level
for obtaining the strong collaboration for financing and credit lines to
the projects based assistance of the Renewable Energy with the various
international/multinational funding agencies, the Ministry have stated
that the tangible benefits in terms of installed capacity (MW) through
multilateral/bilateral loans received by IREDA for various renewable
energy sources are aggregated to around 1200 MW. The sector-wise

24
details of the International Line of Credits Fully Utilized are as stated
below:
Loc’s Amount Sector No. of Project  Date of Last
received projects Commissioned Loan Date of
sanctioned  (capacity) Sanction Drawl
(FY) (FY)
GON NLG 18 Million Briquetting 37 243674 MTCR 1993-94 1994-95
WB (1st LoC) $ 145 Million Wind 24 73.20 MW 1994-95 2001-02
Hydro 37 121.78 MW
Solar Photovoltaic 54 2.17 MW
DANIDA $ 15 Million Wind 1 9.60 MW 1993-94 1994-95
ADB $ 100 Million Wind 18 119.43 MW 1997-98 2002-03
Co-generation 87 240 MW
Solar Thermal 13 16124 MTCR
KfW (1st ) € 61.36 Million Wind 23 78.3 MW 2000-01 2004-05
Co-generation 2 22.5 MW
Solar Photovoltaic 6 0.18 MW
WB (2nd LoC) $ 109 Million SHP 40 149.65 MW 2000-01 2008-09
Energy Efficiency 11 32.41 MW
NIB (1st LoC) $ 50 Million Wind 3 141.40 MW 2008-09 2010-11
KfW(2nd LoC) € 50 Million Cogeneration 1 23.00 MW 2008-09 2012-13
Hydro 5 127.00 MW
362 1140.62 MW
+259798
MTCR
MTCR-Metric Tons of Coal Replacement/Annum
D. Implementation of Externally Aided Projects
1.50 About the progress made in implemention regarding Externally
Aided Projects, partly funded by various multilateral/bilateral
organizations, the Ministry in a written reply stated:
“The Ministry is currently implementing following externally aided
projects, partly funded by various multilateral/bilateral
organisations:
(i) UNDP/GEF assisted Project on “Removal of Barriers to
Biomass Power Generation in India”

25
(ii) UNDP Project on “Access to Clean Energy”
(iii) World Bank Technical Assistance for up-scaling Deployment
RET based Innovative Business Models
(iv) Indo-German Bilateral Programme—Programmes under
implementation in association with GIZ are: Renewable
Energy Supply for Rural Areas (RESRA); and Renewable
Energy Component of the Indo-German Energy Programme
(IGEN-RE)
(v) UNDP/GEF assisted project on Solar Water Heating
(vi) UNDP-GEF assisted project on “Market development &
promotion of solar concentrator based process heat
applications in India”.
1.51 Elaborating on the institutional arrangements in place for
implementation of each of the above projects, the MNRE stated:
(i) “A dedicated Project Management Cell (PMC) has been
created in the Ministry for implementation and coordination
of various activities as per approved Annual Work Plan;
(ii) A Project Steering Committee (PSC) under the chairmanship
of Secretary MNRE to oversee implementation of the project
and to provide policy guidance besides approval of Annual
Work Plan and the budget; and
(iii) A Pr oject Executive Committee (PEC) under the
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary and National Project Director
to review progress periodically and to decide remedial
actions if any.”
1.52 When the Committee asked whether the Government has set
up any co-ordination agency to look into the early and timely
implementation of the externally aided renewable energy projects in
the country, the Ministry explained as under:
“Dedicated Project Management Cell (PMC) established in the
Ministry for implementation of these projects is involved in
coordination with all the concerned divisions in the Ministry,
agencies and monitoring of the progress. It also reports to the
Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Project Executive Committee
(PEC) at regular intervals.”
1.53 As regards the constraints that are impeding the progress of
externally aided projects, the Committee have been informed as under:
“Progress under these projects is satisfactory. However, there are a
few constraints such as identification of locations/villages and
developers/entrepreneurs for setting up the projects, existing policy

26
and regulatory frameworks in the States, term loan from FIs which
impede the progress and which have to be resolved in consultation
with State Governments and other concerned agencies.”
E. Lines of Credits available and Utilized by IREDA
1.54 On being asked about the aids/funds from other countries/
International Bodies like IMF/World Bank/Asian Development Bank,
etc. received and spent, the Committee were informed:
“The Government has an attractive policy in place to encourage
transfer of foreign technologies, including those in renewable energy
sector, wherein foreign technology induction is encouraged, both
through FDI and foreign technology collaborations are permitted
in general through the automatic approval route except in specified
cases requiring Government consideration. Indian Renewable
Energy Development Agency (IREDA), engages with international
financial institutions and national capital market in order to meet
financing requirements. It signed agreement with JICA, Japan for
a line of credit of JPY 30 million backed by Sovereign Guarantee
of the Government and is engaging different other lending agencies
for the line of credit. IREDA is also raising funds through Taxable
Bonds for which GoI is providing letter of comfort.”
1.55 IREDA have raised resources to the tune of Rs. 1146.63 crore
from various external sources. Kreditanstatt for Wiederaufbau (KfW),
Agence Francaise Development (AFD) & Japan International
Co-operation Agency (JICA) upto December, 2011.
1.56 Elaborating Lines of Credits availed and utilized by
International Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA), the
MNRE stated as follows:
“Total 8 international Lines of Credit from Netherlands, World Bank
(I&II), Danish International Development Agency, Asian
Development Bank, KfW-Germany (I&II) and Nordic Investment
Bank—Luxemburg have been granted and 362 nos. of Renewable
Energy & Energy Efficiency Projects were financed. This resulted
in installed capacity addition of 1140 MW. Total Four International
lines of credit presently in operation are through French Assistance,
German Assistance (Loans III & IV) and Japan International
Cooperation Agency. 45 numbers of Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Projects were sanctioned. Further loans of projects with
generation capacity 1177 MW were sanctioned, out of which
798 MW have been commissioned.”

27
1.57 IREDA availed the lines of credit from various Multilateral/Bilateral Agencies. IREDA is also availing the line of
credit from Multilateral/Bilateral Agencies which are still ongoing. The sector-wise detail of the ongoing line of credit isstated below:LoCs Loan Amount Loan Balance Loan Drawn  Period of Line Sector No. of Capacity Capacity
Sanctioned Committed Committed of Credit Project Sanct- Commissioned
First Last sanct- ioned (MW)drawl drawl ioned (MW)year date
AFD Euro 70 Million Euro 49.90 Million Euro 20.10 Million Euro 36.60 Million 2011-12 13.07.2015 SHP 1 25 Under implementation
Biomass 2 20 10Co-gen 1 26 Under implementationWind 1 39 39.2
JICA J. Yen 30,000 Million J. Yen 23230 Million J. Yen 6770 Million J. Yen 21511.45 Million 2011-12 22.09.2018 Wind 6 718 379.9
Hydro 1 5 Under SecuritisationEnergy Efficiency 2 60 Under implementatin
KfW-III Euro 19.97 Million Euro 19.79  Million Euro 0.18 Million Euro 15.30 Million 2010-11 30.12.2014 Biomass 1 10 10
Co-gen 2 33 30Waste to  Energy 3 2 Under implementation
KfW-IV Euro 200 Million Euro 96.20 Million Euro  103.80 Million Euro 10.98 Million 2011-12 13.12.2015 SPV-Grid 1 4 4
Hydro 3 39 Under implementationCo-gen 1 18 Under implementation
Total
25 999 473 MW

28
1.58 When asked about the reasons for non-utilization of grants
extended by various international/multinational funding agencies like
the World Bank, UNDP , ADB, UNIDO, etc., provided for the renewable
energy, the Committee were informed:
“There are no questions for non-utilization of grants extended by
various international/multinational funding agencies. Grants were
utilized as per approved plan and activities. The projects/activities
planned under such projects are generally taken up in close
cooperation with State Governments/State Nodal Agencies. The
projects are generally for preparation of DPRs, resource assessment,
capacity building, establishment of pilot projects, etc. The areas
selected under these projects are planned to be taken up for the
first time, therefore, a lot of preparatory work have to be carried
out before these projects are started. Sometime during
implementation, delays happen due to change of location, absence
of policy support, clearances required from local bodies, etc.”
1.59 The Committee also desired to know about the hindrances/
reasons that limit the investment in renewable energy power projects
in India, the Ministry submitted as under:
“The major hindrances/reasons for investment in power projects
of renewable energy sources are:
• Inherent intermittent nature of renewable energy sources
leading to low capacity utilization factors and need for
storage.
• Grid synchronization limitations on account of intermittent
nature of supply.
• Relatively higher capital investment compared to
conventional power projects and higher cost of capital.
• Requirement of preferential tariffs to make investment
commercially attractive.
• General difficulties in servicing and maintenance in remote
areas where the renewable energy projects/systems are
installed.
• Higher risk associated with RE power generation as
resources like wind and solar can show large variations
from one year to another.”

29
1.60 In view of importance of National Solar Mission, the
Committee desired to know about the efforts that are made to attract
the foreign countries to invest and provide financial help for solar
mission, the Ministry replied as under:
“One of the prime objectives of the JNNSM is to create policy
conditions for diffusion of solar energy across the country quickly
and achieve a scale to drive down costs to levels required to
achieve grid parity by 2022. In this regard, the mission aims at
creating 20,000 MW grid-connected solar power capacity by 2022,
which has attracted attention of technology providers and investors
globally.
The Government engages in dialogue with foreign governments
from time to time to explore avenues for cooperation in renewable
energy sector including solar, especially in the areas of research,
development, testing and resource assessment. However, it has
not sought help of any foreign government for setting up of specific
projects for production of solar power. Solar power projects are
being promoted mainly in private sector with largely private
investment on Build-Own-Operate basis and several international
agencies/financial institutions like JICA, GIZ, ADB, World Bank,
etc. have shown interest in extending technical and/or financial
assistance (concessional funding) for such projects which are based
mostly on foreign technologies.
In addition to the fiscal and financial incentive announced by the
Government of India and State Governments to attract private
investment in solar power projects, FDI up to 100% under the
automatic route is permitted in renewable energy generation and
distribution projects including solar energy, subject to provisions
of the Electricity Act, 2003. A key initiative taken recently to attract
foreign investment in solar power sector includes introduction of
a tariff based international competitive bidding for solar power
projects under JNNSM Phase-1, which has been quite successful.
An Investors Meet on renewable power, including solar power
projects envisaged under JNNSM, was held in London, UK on 13-
14 June 2012, which was attended by both the Minister, NRE and
the Secretary, MNRE.”
F. Target of power generation from various renewable energy
sources during the 12th Five Year Plan
1.61 The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in a note
furnished the following information regarding allocation of funds

30
required during the 12th Five Year Plan period for power generation
from various renewable energy sources:
“A financial requirement of over Rs. 40,000 crore was proposed by
the Ministry for various renewable energy programmes to be
implemented during the 12th Plan with following physical targets:
Programme Physical Proposed Tentative
Financial allocation
requirement (Rs. in
(Rs. in crore) crore)
Grid Power 29,800 MW 19,092 10,500
Off Grid/DRPS 3,267 MW equivalent 8,640 4,295
Renewable Energy for Biogas - 7 lakh nos. 3,195 1192
Rural Applications Cook stoves - 35 lakh nos.
Renewable Energy Solar Thermal System - 1,724 800
Urban, Industrial &  62.50 lakh sq.mt
Commercial Applications
Research Design & Developer - 2,300 915
Support Programme - 5,925 1,361
Total - 40,876 19,063
1.62 Regarding the budgetory allocation for the 12th Five Year
Plan, the Secretary, MNRE during the evidence deposed before the
Committee:
“.......through the backing and the support that we have got from
this Committee that in the 12th Plan, our Plan outlay has been
increased four times. Of course, we had asked for eight times. The
Committee had mentioned that we should always ask for more.
Thanks to this Committee, it has been increased by four times. So,
we are almost Rs. 20,000 crore for the 12th Plan.”
1.63 When the Committee desire to know the acutal contribution
of electricity as well as target from renewable energy in the total
energy mix, the Secretary, MNRE during the evidence informed:
“.....I would like to inform that we have 6.5 percentage of the
energy mix, which is reasonably a high percentage, which we
need to take further up to almost 15 per cent by 2017. That is our
goal. That is our ambition.”
1.64 On being asked about the efforts being made by the Ministry
to achieve the targets during the plan and how far the international

31
cooperation’s will be helpful in this regard, the Committee were
informed:
“Ministry proposes to achieve the Plan targets by encouraging and
involving more private sector and entrepreneurs. To encourage
both Indian and foreign investment in the field of New and
Renewable Energy, the Government is providing various fiscal and
financial incentives to achieve the targets proposed during the
12th Plan, the Government has taken several steps. These include:
• Fiscal and financial incentives, such as, capital/interest
subsidy, accelerated depreciation, concessional excise and
customs duties;
• Preferential tariff for grid interactive renewable power in
most potential States.
•A  minimum percentage for purchase of electricity from
renewable energy sources taking into account local factors.
• Guidelines by CERC to SERCs for fixation of preferential
tariffs.
• Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission to give a boost to
deployment solar photovoltaic as well as solar thermal
systems.
• Intensive resource assessment for solar and wind resources.”
1.65 When the Committee asked to what extent the cost of
production from the renewable energy sector could be reduced due to
these collaborations/technology transfer/technological upgradation, the
Ministry submitted as under:
“1. Better technologies lead to better efficiencies which result
in higher Plant Load Factor.
2. Technologies which are more efficient require less amount
of land.
3. Latest technologies, where computerize monitoring is
possible, can reduce downtime of RE power plants.”
1.66 Regarding the cost of production on solar photovoltaic, the
Secretary, MNRE stated during the evidence:
“……on solar PV , Indian has been at the forefront in pushing
down the rate. Thanks to what we did in terms of reverse auction,
the rate of tariff for solar power came down from almost Rs. 18 to
Rs. 7.46 in just a matter of two and a half years, and we expect that
this would further go down if the Ministry of Power helps us.”

32
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The National Electricity Policy was notified on 12th February,
2005 which, inter alia , provided that the National Electricity Plan for
the ongoing Tenth Plan period and Eleventh Plan and perspective
Plan for 10th, 11th and 12th Plan periods would be prepared and
notified after revising the existing Power Plan by CEA. It was also
stipulated that the Perspective Plans would take into consideration
the rural electrification, generation, energy conservation,
environmental issues, etc. The Policy also, inter alia , provided
promotion of non-conventional energy sources and purchase of
electricity from such sources by the States. The Committee are not
very sure that such an exercise has been done in respect of non-
conventional energy sources. The Committee, therefore, would like
that a Perspective Plan is prepared exclusively for energy from non-
conventional sources for the Twelfth Five Year Plan in
synchronization to similar Plan for energy from conventional sources.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
2.2 The Committee find that the energy supply imbalances is
increasing in the country. Economic growth requires the fulfilment
of the energy needs. To sustain the growth serious efforts are required
to ensure the requisite energy supply. Rise in per capita consumption
and spread of energy access has also strained the demand-supply
gap of the energy. Conventional sources of energy have their own
limitations and the country cannot be solely dependent on them
and will have to explore the alternative sources of energy. Renewable
energy can make substantial contribution in meeting our energy
requirements. In India there is huge potential for power generation
through renewable sources such as wind, solar, bio-mass, small hydro,
etc. For sustained development of this sector, vigorous and concerted
efforts will have to be made for the New and Renewable Energy
sector. Of late, renewable energy has become an important component
of our energy planning process and the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy has been facilitating the implementation of broad
spectrum programmes including harnessing of renewable power,
R&D in renewable energy sector, renewable energy to rural areas
for lighting, use of renewable energy in urban, industrial and
commercial applications, etc. Consequently, Indian Renewable Energy
Programme has been recognized globally and the country have
become second largest in terms of installed bio-gas plants, fifth
largest in wind installed capacity and have attained fifth position in
overall renewable energy capacity installations with more than

33
6 million decentralized RE systems. The Committee find it to be a
modest beginning yet a firm step in the right direction and the
country have the potential to play a leading role globally in the
renewable sector. The Committee therefore, recommend that a proper
policy framework on renewable energy sector should be brought
out keeping in view our strengths and weaknesses with regard to
various aspects of renewable energy such as proper assessment of
potential resource-wise, wind and solar mapping, taking forward the
intiatives in thermal and tidal energy, testing and certification,
investment for infrastructure, development to attain long term goal
of sustainable and inclusive energy for future. Such areas should be
prioritized for harnessing in a time bound manner and our
weaknesses should be analyzed with a view to rectify them so as to
ensure the maximum harnessing of various sources of renewable
energy during off season and not so suitable conditions.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
International Co-operation
2.3 The Committee are informed that Memoranda of
Understanding/Agreements/Cooperation in renewable energy have
been signed with various countries. The MoUs signed are of standard
nature which lays the framework of co-operation between India and
the signing country. These MoUs provide for constitution of Joint
Working Groups (JWG’s) to formulate specific project proposals for
implementation and for monitoring of implementation of various
activities. The Committee also find that cooperation is also done
with many other countries without any specific MoUs in renewable
energy sector. The Committee have also been informed that active
interest has been taken under some of the MoUs, while in case of
others, not much progress has been made for want of initiative by
the concerned countries. The constraints in this regard have been
stated to be associated with advance resource assessment, mapping
of wind, solar and bio-mass, promoting off shore wind power
projects, testing and certifications, etc. Although, these constraints
have been cited for hampering the progress of the sector, yet the
Committee find them to be of routine nature only. The Committee
have further been apprised that generally Memorandum of
Understanding is only an intention to do something and is not legally
binding whereas, under agreements/cooperation, it is enforceable
legally where both parties agree on implementing specific work/
task. The Committee find that the position stated by the Government
with regard to MoUs/Cooperation/Agreements is not conclusive as
International Cooperation inherently assumes some concrete action
with regard to the object of the cooperation. They are not impressed
by plea of the Government that these MoUs are not legally binding.
It reflects on the seriousness of the Ministry for signing such MoUs
and should not be resorted to if no concrete action is likely to emerge

34
from this kind of general MoUs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that MoUs, Cooperation or Agreements with any of the
foreign country or entity abroad with regard to promotion of
renewable energy in the country should be signed with utmost
sincerity and purpose and not as a ritual so that precious time and
money can be fruitfully utilized within the sector. They also strongly
recommend that transparency should be maintained and concrete
initiatives should be taken by the Ministry to follow up their
implementation as also to link their progress and achievements with
reference to signing fresh MoUs/renewal of MoUs, if required, with
these countries in consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
2.4 The Committee are aware that bilateral and multilateral
co-operation frameworks have been established for co-operation and
knowledge sharing in renewable energy technology and projects.
The focus of interaction for co-operation has been on exploring
opportunities for exchange of scientists, shares experiences and take
up joint research, design, development, demonstration and
manufacture of new and renewable energy systems and devices. The
Committee find that interests have been shown by many South East
Asian countries for strengthening/revival of MoUs and co-operations
in renewable energy sector. The Committee feel that while making
efforts for collaboration with the developed countries for achieving
technological excellence and cost efficiency, it is also important to
collaborate with the developing/under-developed countries, where our
expertise in technological advancement for harnessing the New and
Renewable energy resources should be shared so that the commercial
linkages could extend to the Indian domestic producers/exporters.
Such international co-operations open doors for Indian manufacturing
companies for supplies of indigenously manufactured renewable
energy products, systems and devices especially in the wind, solar
and hydro power sectors. Hence, they recommend that the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy should focus on commercial
co-operation in renewable energy through MoUs/Agreements/joint
ventures with developing/under-developed countries also. This would
allow them to take advantage of the linkages in India such as
manufacturing of renewable energy systems, devices, equipments,
spare parts etc., while sharing their technological know-how as well.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
Technological Advancement through International Cooperation
2.5 The Committee find that technological advancement has
important role in various fields of renewable energy to facilitate
them to develop, operate and maintain various systems and devices
apart from developing collaborative R&D programmes. Therefore,
rapid advancement instead of gradual improvement in the renewable

35
energy technology is the only way to optimally harness the available
potential. Renewable energy systems are still in a relatively nascent
stage of development. But they offer the country potentially huge
primary energy sources, sustainable in perpetuity and available in
one form or another. India is an active participant in the international
dialogue on energy and the environment. The Committee feel that
our country could benefit from increased cooperation with
international experts, which will help Government, policy-makers,
industry and consumers to learn from relevant experiences and best
practices from other countries who successfully use large amount of
renewable energy applications. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Government besides focussing on increasing the installed
capacity, should also focus on technological advancement through
increased cooperation with international experts and technologically
advanced countries. Steps should be taken towards the aggregation
and sharing of information on adaptation of relevant technologies
and knowledge. Needless to emphasize these steps will take the
goal of 2050 by which renewable share is expected to reach about
77% of total energy requirements globally.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
2.6 The Committee note that India's renewable energy installed
capacity has grown at an annual rate of 23% rising from about
3900 MW in 2002-03 to about 28000 MW in 2012-13 (upto March,
2013). As far as wind energy is concerned, it dominates India’s
renewable energy sector accounting for 70% of installed capacity
(19051 MW) followed by biomass power (3695 MW), small hydro
power (3632 MW) and solar power (1686 MW) that has just started
registering its presence. The Committee find that the increasing
opportunities in the emerging market of India is bound to provide
a strong impetus to the development of renewable energy sector.
India, with a large proportion of its population in rural areas that
have limited access to electricity creates a big opportunity for the
deployment of renewable energy projects through solar, wind,
biomass, biogas and small hydro power sources of energy. Though,
renewable energy technology has relatively high installation cost but
its operating cost is quite low. In many countries, some renewable
energy technologies are already competitive compared to conventional
energy sources, for instance, biomass or biogas applications in
Thailand. The Committee feel that a strong backup support is
required for undertaking Research & Development, popularization
of successful R&D activities among the masses, diligent deployment
of skilled manpower, availability of the required finances at
competitive rate rationalizing the inputs leading to lowering of cost
for development of renewable energy sources. The success story of
renewable energy largely hinges on the cost reduction and continued
sustainability of its sources for which international cooperation will
have to be resorted to with those countries who have successfully

36
made a mark in the technological excellence as well as reduction in
cost of power from various kinds of renewable energy sources. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that sincere efforts should
be made to enter into collaboration with the countries of proven in
technology advancements with cost effectiveness in renewable energy
sectors having technological excellence and competitive cost with a
view to bring down the cost of various renewable energy devices in
the country.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
2.7 The Committee note that there have been technological and
commercial collaborations with advanced countries in wind energy,
solar energy and biomass sector. In wind energy sector there are
projects with 14 wind turbine manufacturers (with international
cooperation or are 100% subsidiary of foreign cooperation) and
Co-operation projects with NREL (New & Renewable Laboratory) in
aero-structural design of wind turbines. In solar energy there are tie
ups with various countries for solar thermal systems, cookers, water
heater, SPV module testing amorphous silicon technology
photovoltaic module reliability Industrial Process heat application
and pilot projects in textile, pulp and paper, pharmaceutical and
food processing sectors. The Committee are unaware of any
evaluation done by the MNRE or other Ministries with the objective
to assess the extent to which projects under these international
collaboration/Agreement have benefitted domestic manufacturing of
equipments/implements and to provide conducive infrastructure in
New and Renewable sector source-wise. They feel that regular
assessment of the projects under various MoUs/Agreements should
be critically carried out so as to give clarity on the extent of
technology import and technology transfer. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the projects under various collaborations should be
evaluated on regular basis by the MNRE so as to assess the extent
of technology absorption/adaptation after the technology has been
imported through these International Cooperations/collaboration/
Agreements. They emphasize that the Ministry should also take
necessary steps to assess the extent to which manufacturing sector
in India is being strengthened in terms of in-house production and
commercial applications of these international collaborations.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
2.8 The Committee note that the geo-thermal energy is heat
stored in deep interior of earth that can be effectively used for
producing electricity as also for direct heat applications. Reportedly
Geological Survey of India has identified about 340 geo-thermal hot
springs with the potential of 10,000 MW of electricity in the country
which are perennial with surface temperature ranging from
37-90 degree celsius which is suitable enough for direct heat
application. The Committee also note that India has a long coast

37
line of about 7,500 KM with estuaries and gulf where tides are
strong enough to move turbines for electrical power generation.
Estimated potential of tidal energy of about 8,200 MW in the country
including 7,000 MW in the Gulf of Kambey and 1,200 MW in the
Gulf of Kachh in the State of Gujarat and about 100 MW in the
Gigantic belt in Sunderban region in the State of West Bengal. The
Committee, however, observe that the geo-thermal energy potential
as well as tidal energy potential in India has not been systematically
and scientifically assessed or utilized. They find that the Government
has practically done very little to harness this potential. The
Committee find that the MNRE has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Government of Iceland for scientific
cooperation and research in renewable energy and to explore potential
of geo-thermal in India in October, 2007. They also find that the
State Government of Gujarat has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding in January, 2011 with UK and Singapore companies
for setting up of 250 MW tidal power plants in Gulf of Kachh. The
Committee find that these MoUs are too few to harness the full
potential. The Committee feel that such vast potential for electricity
generation are being left almost unattended. Even the projects in
which Memorandum of Understanding has been signed have not
reported any significant progress. The Committee recommend that
the MNRE should focus on importing technologies from such
advanced countries or wherever it is available who would provide
scientific cooperation and research to assess and utilize the potential
of tidal and geo-thermal energy in India within a reasonable
timeframe. They also recommend that the projects taken up in the
MoUs with concerned countries should be properly evaluated and
regularly monitored to ensure that the objective for which these
MoUs have been signed are achieved. They further recommend that
the MNRE should keep themselves well abreast of the latest
innovations or upcoming technologies world over so that the same
could be imported and adapted for domestic production and harness
the vast potential of renewable energy.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
2.9 The Committee find that Solar Energy Center (SEC), Centre
for Wind Energy Technology (C-WET), Alternate Hydro Energy Centre
(AHEC), are the prominent and main technical arms of the
Government engaged in research and development of the various
kinds of renewable energies in the country. The exchange of technical
personnel working there and in various other technical institutions
abroad has helped in acquiring advance technical knowledge and
capacity building. The areas which have been dwelt upon are aero-
structural design, inter-laboratory comparisons on power performance
measurements in case of wind energy, off-shore wind source
assessment, wind power forecasting training and application, wind
energy technology training, data quality checking and algorithm,

38
development for solar radiation resource assessment. The Committee
feel that exchange of technical information and close coordination is
essential for advancement of renewable energy to ensure an organized
an orderly energy transition and to give the necessary support at
required places. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
institutional mechanism and stable structure should be put in place
for the purpose of international technological cooperation. This
becomes all the more necessary as renewable energy is still a
developing and growing sector and more than 2/3 of its identified
and available potential is yet to be harnessed. The identified available
potential of various kinds of renewable energy is variable and never
a finality and hence technical innovations will certainly open new
avenues and vistas of the sector.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
2.10 The Committee are happy to note that about 168 participants
from 60 countries were given training in Solar Energy Centre,
Gurgaon and 107 participants from 42 countries were given training
in Centre for Wind energy Technology (C-WET), Chennai during
last 4 years. 652 participants from 62 countries have been given
training at Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC) Roorkee during
last 15 years. It shows that these institutes have faculty and know
how to attract professionals from a large number of countries for
training.
Scientists and senior officers of MNRE, SEC, C-WET, AHEC,
IITs, etc. also undertake visits to various countries for advanced
training programmes in areas of renewable energy. During last
3 years as many as 130 such foreign visits were undertaken. The
Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that study Reports of
these visits are compiled/submitted and copies placed in MNRE/
SEC/C-WET for use and reference. This will ensure that visits
undertaken are meaningful and are not repetitive in nature.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
Collaboration for Financing and Credit
2.11 The Committee observe that besides problems of assessing
the renewable energy potential, steps for their promotion, testing
and certifications, financing and credit lines are also very important
issues impending fast growth of the sector. Strong technical
collaborations for research and development, training and creating
manufacturing basis is not possible without financial resources. The
Committee note that significant steps have been taken with regard
to firming up of resource assessment of solar and wind energy,
testing and certification of wind turbines by using advance
techniques developed in USA, Germany and Denmark, off shore
wind power development, hydro fuel cell—R&D Project, removal of
barriers on bio-mass power generations in collaborations with foreign

39
countries and international organizations. However, the Committee
feel that there is an urgent need for augmented and increased
financing and credit lines from various international/multinational
funding agencies. Such collaboration should be energy source based
rather than project-based as it will help in giving thrust to the entire
segment of specific energy source for its expansion and development.
Such financial collaboration may be subjected to the identified
available potential, technological support, and scope for its
development wherever deemed necessary to promote the sector.
Research and Development activities should also be undertaken
through such financial tie-ups and credit lines. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that necessary steps should be taken
up by doing necessary spade work to impress upon international/
multinational credit agencies like World Bank, United Nations
Development Programme, Asian Development Bank, Global
Environmental Facilities etc. to extend credit facilities on agreeable
terms for the holistic development of green energy in the Country.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
2.12 The Committee note that MNRE provide support for
installation of various renewable energy systems/devices etc. both
national and international. To support these activities funds are
provided from the budget head of the Ministry for projects under
implementation following international cooperation under the
separate categories of MoUs/Bilateral/Trilateral/multilateral
agreements, various international and multinational funding agencies
like World Bank, United Nations Development Programme/Global
Environment Facility etc. provide project-based assistance for
Renewable Energy Programme in India. The Committee also find
that the International Financial Institutions provide funds to the
projects for harnessing the New and Renewable energy resources
which if properly implemented would in the long term significantly
enhance power generation and reduce power demand gap. The
Committee also note that the foreign investors can bring innovations
in business models and can complement domestic developers/
investors in implementing the RE projects and programmes by
investing in this sector. This would also lead to inclusive growth,
which is one of the important focal areas of the 12th Five Year Plan.
The Committee are, however, concerned that though the foreign
investors may avail of the concessions from the Ministry in terms of
financial and fiscal incentives yet they may not be prompt in
implementing these projects. The Committee are, therefore,
apprehensive that the foreign investors may not be able to provide
long term support to the projects in New and Renewable energy
sector. The Committee are of the opinion that to optimize
implementation of renewable projects and programmes, investors
would expect long term financial support, conducive policy and
friendly regulatory framework as a pre-requisite. The Committee,

40
therefore, recommend that the MNRE should bring out conducive
policy and regulatory framework for implementing the RE projects
and programmes. They also desire that financial and fiscal incentives
should be provided to draw investors and developers for long term
support besides bringing about innovation in business models that
are entrepreneur driven and delivery based for inclusive growth in
new and renewable energy sector. They also urge the Ministry to
incorporate effective regulatory mechanism for technological
upgradation and quality assurance clauses in the policy so as to
ensure that the incentives given for the purpose are used for growth
of the Indian Renewable Energy Sector.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
2.13 The Committee are aware that UNDP/GEF assisted Projects
on solar water heating, project on market development and promotion
of solar concentrator based process heat applications, project on
removal of barriers to biomass power generation in India, UNDP
Project on access to clean energy, World Bank technical assistance
for upscaling deployment of RET based innovative business model
are some of the projects being implemented with the financial
cooperation/funding of global funding agencies. The tangible benefit
in terms of installed capacity through multilateral/bilateral loans for
various renewable energy sources have been stated to be of around
1,200 MW. The Committee find that the Capacity Addition on this
account is extremely low particularly when a number of bilateral
and multilateral financing agencies are involved. The Committee are
aware of the limitations with regard to the investment in renewable
energy power projects being the intermittent nature of renewable
energy sources, grid synchronization limitations, relatively higher
capital investment, difficulties in servicing and maintenance in remote
areas and non-availability of preferential tariff, yet the Committee
expect higher capacity addition from such collaborations. The
Committee strongly feel that the result achieved are in no way
commensurate with the efforts put in during the last three years.
They therefore, strongly recommended that international finances
despite being project-based or otherwise should be of such scale so
as to give the desired thrust to the sector for its proper development
otherwise these activities could be financed domestically as the
projects do not have higher financial stakes and are beneficial to
the common man. This can become a reality if these projects are
made commercially viable through appropriate research and
technological advancements.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
2.14 The Committee note that the main objective for providing
training to the scientists through international collaboration is to
share technical experiences acquired in various fields of renewable

41
energy to facilitate them to develop, operate and maintain various
systems and devices apart from developing joint R&D programmes.
With regard to long term strategy, it has been stated that Solar Energy
Centre is focussing in R&D, Testing and Training in solar energy
technology and applications and organizing short-term training
courses on various aspects of solar energy. Similarly, C-Wet has also
been providing specialized training in wind energy sector. These
trainings have significantly contributed in the growth of renewable
energy over the years. The Committee feel that the facilities of
existing training institutions are limited and requires expansion,
besides creation of new facilities with the cooperation of international
organizations. This will help in the development of indigenous skills
for negotiating and managing exploration and exploitation of
renewable energy sources. As of now, the scope and area of
renewable energy applications has not expanded in a manner wherein
it could cater to our domestic requirements and become an alternative
energy option. It has also its own limitations with regard to its
magnitude and access by commoner despite the fact that it is going
to be more useful for the common man given the nature of various
sources and their availability throughout the length and breadth of
the country and their potential convertibility into electricity. It will
be opportune if skill/technical knowledge is imparted to disparate
groups wherein most people can be trained for skilful harnessing of
available renewable energy sources into their respective areas as
specialists. It can be feasible more so when it does not involve
higher technical training or enormous financial stakes and can be
useful in remote and inaccessible areas as well. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the fruits of international
technological cooperation should not remain confined within the four
walls of technical institutions of the Government or be limited to
laboratory of the technical institutions but should reach all possible
corners of the country wherein localized renewable energy sources
are available. This can be made a reality by imparting working
training to the local people in developing, handling and operating
various devices based on their areas for which financial requirements
can also be sorted out through local Self Help Groups, Local
Cooperatives, Grameen Banks and other agencies providing small
credits.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
07 May, 2013 Chairman,
17 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

42
ANNEXURE I
(Vide Para 1.11 of the Report)
CONTRACTS FOR TECHNICAL COLLABORATIONS WITH
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS: CENTRE FOR WIND
ENERGY TECHNOLOGY (C-WET)
1. INDO-US Collaboration in the field of wind energy was initiated
in November, 2009 in which C-WET, Chennai and National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL), USA signed a MoU with broad objectives
for research collaborations for 5 years. Under that, NREL has conducted
a special training on Aero Structural Design to C-WET Scientists. The
work involved training on the use of NREL developed computer
programs for aero structural design. An interim report has been
prepared based on the models developed with the assistance of NREL
Scientists with an intention of comparing the results through
experimental observation in due course, by C-WET at its Wind Turbine
Research Station, Kayathar. As part of NREL collaboration, an useful
Inter Laboratory Comparison (ILC), has been completed by C-WET’s
testing unit, which is a must for retaining accreditation and a
mandatory requirement for retaining the accreditation and is mutually
beneficial round robin-method of international proficiency testing.
In future programmes with NREL, USA is involved in Wind Turbine
Testing and initiating research proposals on wind resource assessment
involving wind forecasting in complex terrain. These activities are likely
to take place by the year end and in the beginning of 2013.
2. RISO, DENMARK has been a nodal organization which facilitated
development and establishment of C-WET as well as Wind Turbine
Testing Station at Kayathar. C-WET continues to have very fruitful
collaboration with RISO, Denmark on several areas which are listed
below:
(a) Indian Wind Atlas, a MESO scale model has been developed
by RISO, Denmark for India which was a joint project of
RISO and C-WET and the Atlas has been released to the
public in April, 2010.
(b) A project on “Development of Wind forecasting model with
special reference to complex terrain” has been started in
June, 2010 with an agreement between C-WET and RISO-
DTU. The ”PREDIKTOR” model of RISO DTU has been in
use by C-WET scientists and engineers after specialized

43
training by RISO Scientists. The project is in an advanced
stage with extended data collection from a wind farm of
50.4 MW capacities located in a complex terrain and likely
to be completed by the end of the year.
(c) A time-bound project has been completed on the offshore
wind resource assessment off the Tamil Nadu Coast, using
SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar) analysis of Satellite imagery.
(d) Another project on training and assistance for accreditation
and certification services for C-WET is reinitiated with
resource person from RISO, Denmark. Efforts are being
made by C-WET to restart the project, in the near future.
3. INDO-SCOTLAND: C-WET has full-fledged collaboration with
Scottish Development International (SDI), Scotland in the area of
offshore wind power development in India. C-WET had an Indo-
Scottish Workshop in 2010 to understand the various issues involved
in development of offshore projects in India. Later Scottish
Development International has assisted C-WET to identify a possible
location in the Southern India off the Tamil Nadu Coast for deployment
of offshore wind turbines, C-WET is still in dialogue with SDI for
carrying out offshore wind resource measurement at Dhanuskoti
(Rameswaram) while the policy formulation is in progress by the Multi-
Ministerial Sub-Committee formation by MNRE in India.
4. INDO-SWEDEN: C-WET has an ongoing collaboration with MoU
for Wind Energy orientation program co-ordination, with Life Academy,
through SIDA (Swedish International development Agency) of Sweden.
In addition, C-WET, Chennai has also been providing specialized
trainings in wind energy sector. Briefly, the following training
programmes have been organised by the C-WET:
(a) ARAB ORGANISATION FOR INDUSTRIALISATION (AOI),
EGYPT—training for Scientists from AOI in (i) in Wind
Turbine Testing (ii) in Wind Resource Assessment.
(b) MAURITIUS—organized highly customized training
programme for Scientists in Mauritius.
(c) INDO-AFRICA—organized an International training
programme exclusively for African Nationals.
(d) Training Programmes under the ITEC-MEA—Twice every
year, C-WET conducts International Training Programmes
under the ITEC-MEA funding and trained several
International participants in the developing countries in
Africa as well as South America and South Asia.

44
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 1.11 of the Report)
CONTRACTS FOR TECHNICAL COLLABORATIONS WITH
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS : SOLAR
ENERGY CENTRE (SEC)
1. INDO-US Collaboration: A Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) on technical cooperation in the field of solar energy was
concluded between the Solar Energy Centre (SEC) of MNRE and the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) of USA in November
2009. Under this technical collaboration the following major tasks have
been undertaken:
(a) Solar Resource Assessment based on Satellite Imagery and
Photovoltaic Module Reliability with National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL), USA. Under this phase, NREL
and SEC are exploring potential avenues for improving the
characterization of India’s solar resource completed under
the previous year’s collaboration and for comparison testing
of different technology photovoltaic modules, a number of
solar photovoltaic modules from the outdoor test facility of
SEC have been shared with NREL for testing in their
laboratory and comparison and evaluation of test results.
(b) US Database of State Incentives for Renewables & Efficiency
with the US Department of Energy (DOE) through National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and South Carolina
State University. Through this new initiative, the technical
expertise of NREL in this area would be available to develop
a similar database in India.
(c) Solar Energy Research Institute for India and United States
of America (SERIIUS) recently announced by the Department
of Science and Technology, Government of India. This is
essentially a virtual institute of consortia of institutions and
industry from both India and USA. The Indian side is led
by Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) is the lead partner from US side.
Solar Energy Centre (SEC) is a partner of the project in
Indian side.

45
2. INDO-JAPAN Cooperation: National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) Tokyo, Japan in 2009,
undertook a project with Solar Energy Centre (SEC) to initiate
cooperative research for long term reliability of photovoltaic modules
under actual field conditions in India and Japan. The activities at SEC
were related to long term outdoor PV module exposure test,
performance and degradation analysis under precise meteorological
data acquisition space in Indian conditions. The project has been
formally closed but data acquisition and analysis are continuing for
long term reliability assessment.
3. INDO-UK Project: As part Indo-UK Collaboration under solar
energy activities, a consortia project is sanctioned by DST and EPSRC,
UK. The project on “Stability and Performance of Photovoltaics (Stapp)”
is mainly for the long term stability and performance of PV modules.
This is a joint consortia project and involves four Indian and four UK
institutions. The other institutions are IIT-Bombay, IIT-Kanpur and IIT-
Kharagpur. From UK side Loughborough University, NPAC, Imperial
College London, and Strathclyde University. The total cost of the project
from the Indian side is 11.38 crores and from UK side the cost is
£2.5 Million. SEC is one of the leading partners in the project. The
main responsibility of SEC is to establish PV module outdoor test
beds containing different matured technology PV modules in four
different climatic zones of the country. The four identified site are IIT
Rajasthan, IIT Indore, IITB and IIT Kharagpur. The project is ongoing
the four test beds will be ready for operation by November 2012.
From the collected data on the performance, it will be possible to
estimate the energy yields, performance ration, plant utilization factors,
for different technologies at different site of the country.
4. INDO-GERMAN Cooperation: The following Programmes/
Projects are currently being implemented under the “Indo-German
Bilateral Cooperation” in the area of Renewable Energy:
(a) A project between Solar Energy Centre (SEC) and
Physikalishch Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) (the National
Metrology Institute) at Brounschweigh, Germany on
“Strengthening quality infrastructure for the solar industry
in India” has been initiated in 2012 with the objective of
strengthening the reliability of photovoltaic and solar thermal
systems in particular the quality of central components, the
proper installations of the entire system, and quality
assurance schemes. The preliminary phase of the project
continues from January 2012 to December 2013. The
Standardization Expert Dialogue on Photovoltaic and Solar
Thermal Systems has already taken place in June 2012.

46
(b) Indo-German Energy Forum (IGEF): IGEF was established
in April 2006. It facilitates constructive dialogue between
decision-makers in government and industry on sustainable
energy supply and energy use and the development of
markets. IGEF is coordinated by Ministry of Power. IGEF
has one of the sub-Groups—Sub Group-2 which is on
‘Decentralised Distributed Generation based on Biomass and
other Renewables’. GIZ, in consultation with the MNRE,
organised a meeting of the Sub Group-2 on 15 Dec. 2011 at
Mumbai. The meeting focus was mainly on—large scale
solar; business environment; rural electrification and pilot
projects. Prior to this MNRE and GIZ had also organised a
Brain Storming Session for the topics to be addressed within
the Sub group-2 of IGEF on 14 Dec. 2011.
(c) Renewable Energy Component of Indo-German Energy
Programme (IGEN-RE): During the negotiation on
development cooperation between the Govt. of India and
the Govt. of the Federal Republic of Germany held in
New Delhi 28-29th October 2009, Federal Ministry for
Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) through GIZ
committed funding of up to 5 million EUR for new line
activities to promote renewable energy with particular focus
on rural areas. This contribution is mainly to be used for
advisory services, cost incurred by the German
implementing organization, while procurement of materials
and financial contributions will be a minor part up to 15%
of the overall budget. MNRE is also contributing Euro 1
million (approximately INR 6.4 crore) including its in-kind
contribution, which will complement the German funding
by focusing on technical equipment and direct financial
contributions to pilot projects. Duration of the project is
currently scheduled from 01 Nov. 2010 to 15 Dec. 2014. The
main objective of this new component of IGEN is to
demonstrate economically viable business and governance
models for decentralized renewable energy supply
integrating stakeholder facilitation, capacity development and
policy advice. It will focus on two separate ways of energy
service delivery— (i) decentralized rural electrification
projects (RE based mini grids); and RE solutions for specific
rural applications (standalone systems). The other activities
to be undertaken are— (i) capacity development for key
stakeholders; (ii) technical capacities in rural areas;
(iii) facilitating networking and coordination. Experience

47
from both modes of service delivery will be fed into a
dialogue on policy and promotion/subsidy schemes on state
and national level. As regards progress, Implementation
Agreement (IA) and detailed Activity plan has been finalised
and forwarded to DEA for concurrence. Letters have been
sent to the 8 selected State Government/State Nodal
Agencies (SNAs) for indicating prospective sites/locations
for taking up project activities which is being followed by
the visits.
(d) ComSolar (Commercialization of Solar Energy in Urban and
Industrial Areas): This project was started in October, 2009
under the Indo-German Cooperation with the objective to
develop business models for the commercialisation of solar
energy in urban and industrial areas and test them through
pilot projects. A dissemination strategy has been developed
in achieving the ambitious targets aimed under the National
Solar Mission. A sum of € 4 900 000 (approx. INR 290
million) will be contributed by the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany (BMU) via GIZ. The project's
term is till September, 2013. The main areas of intervention
to be undertaken under this project are—upto 6 pilot
projects; Promote Technology Transfer ( e.g.  by PPP);
Monitoring of the impacts of the project; Information
campaign to present results to the public; Capacity building
in academic and public sector.The following projects/
activities are under implementation as a part of ComSolar
project:
(i) Sector Study for Industrial Process heat Applications and
implementation of a pilot project.
(ii) Solar Desalination plant for Bitra Island.
(iii) 1 MW Solar Thermal Power Plant at Mount Abu.
(e) Solar Mapping and Monitoring: MNRE has taken an
initiative to augment solar radiation measurement network
in the country by supporting setting up 51 solar radiation
monitoring stations through CWET. As a part of this project,
GIZ is providing support in capacity building for data
processing and setting up required infrastructure for quality
check-up of the data which is being procured through these
stations. A financial support of Euro 1.6 Million via GIZ has
been extended by BMU to develop solar resource maps
based on high quality solar radiation data collection by the

48
MNRE to help the developers in India for better designs of
the solar power projects.
(f) Solar Guidelines Project: As a part of Indo-German Energy
Forum, a Project entitled “Guidelines to Project
Implementation under the JNN Solar Mission to Enable
Investment in the Solar Sector in India” is being
implemented. First phase of the project is being implemented
by GIZ where the website and data base are being
developed on national and one state level.
(g) Training Programme for solar thermal and solar PV: GIZ
had advanced discussions with RENAC (Renewable Energy
Academy) of Germany to design training programmes for
the solar thermal and PV areas in India through premier
national institutions.
5. European Union: A call for proposal has been issued for setting
up a Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) demonstration project under
EU. Therein, it is proposed to have a solar-biomass hybrid plant of
upto 10 MW capacity. It is envisaged that the turbine capacity would
be maximized for solar radiation conditions of the site. The solar
contribution in these hybrid projects would be over 50%. It would be
necessary for the developer to have dedicated biomass supply chain
for the project.

49
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 23RD JULY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora— (in the Chair)
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri P .C. Chacko
4. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
5. Shri Baliram Jadhav
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri C. Rajendran
9. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
13. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
15. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
16. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia
17. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
18. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
19. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
20. Shri Mohammad Shafi
21. Shri D.P . Tripathi

50
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
Representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
1. Shri Rajarshi Bhattacharya — Special Secretary & Financial
Advisor
2. Shri D. Majumdar — CMD, (IREDA),
Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Alok Srivastava — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Tarun Kapoor — Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Sunanda Sharma — Economic Adviser
(Joint Secretary)
6. Dr. N.P Singh — Scientist ‘G’ (JS Level)
7. Dr. B. Bandyopadhyay — Scientist ‘G’ (JS Level)
8. Dr. S. Gomathi Nayagam — E.D. (C-WET)
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, a member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rule of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy to the sitting of the Committee. The Ministry was represented
by Special Secretary, who, on a request made by the Secretary, MNRE
was permitted by the Chairman under Direction 59(1) to represent the
Ministry. The Chairman drew the attention of witnesses to the
provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.
4. After introducing themselves to the Committee, the
representatives of the Ministry made a power-point presentation on
the subject—International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector. The Committee then inter-alia discussed about international
cooperation and tie ups especially with the objective of utilization of
the potential and achievements of targets under the New and

51
Renewable Sources. The following important points in connection with
the examination of the subject were also discussed:—
(i) Need for tapping the renewable power potential in the
country.
(ii) Need for more Research and Development activities in
Renewable Energy.
(iii) Need for better coordination with other countries.
(iv) Targets for 12th Five Year Plan.
(v) Need for technological upgradation in New and Renewable
Energy Sector.
(vi) Need to survey of other sources of non-conventional energy.
(vii) Steps taken to make biomass and solar power more cost
effective as well as to popularize it.
(viii) Evaluation of the New and Renewable Power projects with
regard to their success.
(ix) Need to frame a policy for each source of new and
renewable energy.
(x) Results achieved by the International Training Programmes
in New and Renewable Energy.
The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to
the subject. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be responded
to by them during the sitting.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

52
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON  ENERGY  (2012-13)  HELD  ON
26TH NOVEMBER, 2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari— (in the Chair)
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
4. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
5. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
6. Shri C.L. Ruala
7. Shri Jagda Nand Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
9. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
10. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
11. Shri Birender Singh
12. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director

53
Representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
1. Shri Gireesh B. Pradhan — Secretary
2. Ms. Anita Agnihotri — AS&FA
3. Shri D. Majumdar — CMD (IREDA) Addl. Secy
4. Shri Alok Srivastava — Joint Secretary
5. Shri Tarun Kapoor — Joint Secretary
6. Dr. N.P . Singh — Scientist ‘G’ (JS Level)
7. Dr. S. Gomathi Nayagam — E.D. (C-WET)
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Bhagat
Singh Koshyari, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the
sitting in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Chairman welcomed the
Members of the Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy to the sitting of the Committee and
apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.
3. After introduction by the witnesses, the officials of the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy gave a powerpoint presentation on
the subject—“International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector” which was followed by the discussion. The following points
were covered in the discussion:—
(1) Present scenario of cooperation in relation to wind, solar
and other forms of renewable energy and the future plans
of the Ministry on the subject.
(2) Results of international cooperation/agreements in renewable
energy sector.
(3) Problems faced by the Ministry in taking forward the
implementation of MoUs signed with other countries.
(4) Reasons for non-utilization of grants extended by various
international/multinational funding agencies.
(5) Steps taken to motivate industry, investors, researchers, Govt.
agencies and other stakeholders to facilitate dissemination
of information for further technological upgrades.
(6) The extent to which the cost of production from the
Renewable Energy sector could be reduced due to these
collaborations/technology transfer/technological upgradation.

54
(7) Tardy progress of JNNSM despite the fact the programme
began in 1982 and international collaboration/cooperation
has also been there.
(8) Non-tapping of available small hydro-potential in the
country. Need for steps to ensure its harnessing.
(9) Slow progress in development of tidal energy.
(10) Need for processing of Urban/Industrial/Commercial waste
to energy.
4. The Members raised some other queries also which were
answered by the representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to
send written replies to the questions raised by the Members.
5. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit to field
areas in the first week of January, 2013 to Ahmedabad, Somnath,
Rajkot, Mumbai and Hyderabad to acquaint themselves about the
ongoing projects, and implementation of Government policies with
respect to vital aspects relating to the Ministry of Power and Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy w.r.t. subjects selected by the Committee
for examination during 2012-13.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

55
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2012-13) HELD ON
07TH MAY, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora— (in the Chair)
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Jagdambika Pal
4. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
5. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
10. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
11. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
12. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
13. Shri K.C. Tyagi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

56
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.
The Committee then took up for consideration of the following draft
Reports:
(i) Thirty-Sixth Report on 'International Cooperation in New
and Renewable Energy Sector' relating to Ministry of New
and Renewable Energy.
(ii) Thirty-Seventh Report on 'Development of National Grid'
relating to the Ministry of Power.
4. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports without any
modifications.
5. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the
officials of the Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. *** *** *** ***
7. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Reports taking into consideration the factual
verification by the concerned Ministries and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament in the current Session.
The Committee then adjourned.