STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Funding of Power Projects’]
20
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TWENTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Funding of Power Projects’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


COE No. 214
Price : Rs. 70.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
14
38
42
52
53
55
57
61
63
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2010-2011) .............................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report.....................................................................
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government....................................
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies......................................................................
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and require reiteration..........................
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......
ANNEXURES
I. Section 80CCF of the Income-tax Act, 1961 –
Deduction – In respect of subscription to long-term
infrastructure bonds – Notified long-term infrastructure
bond.........................................................................
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
19th May, 2011.......................................................
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
3rd June, 2011.......................................................
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
24th August, 2011.......................................................
IV . Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
9th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................
PAGE
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2010-2011)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Mohammad Azharuddin
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
4. Shri P.C. Chacko
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar
@
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain*
9. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire**
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
11. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
12. Shri Jagdambika Pal
13. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
14. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao
17. Dr. K.S. Rao#
18. Shri Ganesh Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
(iii)
@
Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
*Nominated w.e.f. 18th October, 2010 vice Shri Arjun Munda.
**Nominated w.e.f. 27th September, 2010 vice Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede.
#Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th January, 2011.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia***
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi***
30. Shri Motilal V ora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)
***Nominated w.e.f. 21st September, 2010.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this
20th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in 9th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy on 'Funding
of Power Projects'.
2. The 9th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 10th August, 2010. Replies of the Government  to the recommendations
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Finance
(Deptt. of Financial Services) on 8th November, 2010, from the
Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) on 9th November, 2010, from the
Ministry of Power on 4th January, 2011 and from the Ministry of Finance
(Deptt. of Economic Affairs) on 30th June, 2011.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Power and Ministry of Finance on 3rd June, 2011 to seek clarifications
on certain important aspects regarding the subject.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 24th August, 2011.
5. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 9th Report of the Committee is given at
Appendix-IV .
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report.
(v)
 N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADA V,
29 August , 2011 Chairman,
7 Bhadrapada , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Funding of Power
Projects' pertaining to the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Finance.
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
10th August, 2010 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 15 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the fifteen Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 14
      Total–09
                           Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Governments replies:
Serial Nos. 5 and 12
      Total–02
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 2, 10, 11 and 15
Total–04
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
                           Total–00
Chapter–V
4. After considering and being dissatisfied with the replies furnished
by the Ministry of Power pertaining to the issues of bridging the funding
gap and creation of National Electricity Fund (NEF) and the Ministry of
Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) on the issues of allowing tax free bonds for
power sector and tax exemption for interest income on the investments in
power sector (categorized under Chapter IV of this Report), the Committee
at their sitting held on 19th May, 2011 decided to take further evidence of
the representatives of both the Ministries for seeking clarifications on various
aspects. Accordingly,  the Committee at their sitting held on 3rd June, 2011
discussed in detail the actions taken by both the Ministries on the
recommendations contained in their Ninth Report.
5. The Committee, in the light of the Action Taken Notes furnished
by the Government and the evidence of the representatives of both the
Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Finance, have dealt with the action
taken by the Government on some of their recommendations that require
reiteration or merit comments, in succeeding paragraphs. The Committee
desire that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I of the Report be furnished to them within three
months of the presentation of this Report.
A. Strategy to meet the Plan targets
(Recommendation Sl.No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. Based on the data of the physical targets, achievements made,
fund allocated and expenditure incurred during the 9th, 10th and 11th Five-
Year Plan periods so far, the Committee in their Ninth Report had pointed
out that the planning for capacity addition vis-à-vis proposed funding
provisions had been grossly unrealistic. The Committee had also taken note
of the fact that the target of capacity addition during the 11th Plan period
had been reduced from 78,700 MW to 62,000 MW in the mid-term appraisal.

3
Besides, it had been observed that transmission and distribution were the areas
which required immediate and positive attention of all the stakeholders. The
Committee had recommended that necessary spadework, taking into account
the past experiences, should be ensured before embarking on a new initiative
for capacity addition and other projects in transmission/distribution and social
sector schemes like Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).
It was emphasized that inter-se-priority among the various heads/stages of
the capacity addition resulting in the benefit to the end-users be decided
keeping in view the stakes from all the concerned vis-à-vis their obligation
in the achievement of the target and thereafter a well thought out, realistic,
implementable strategy be drawn ensuring the management of the finances
and other base work essential for setting up of power projects and its essential
arms like transmission and distribution network.
7. The Ministry of Power, in their written reply, stated:—
"As per the mid term appraisal of the XI Plan the capacity addition target
of 62,374 MW for 11th Plan has been fixed by Planning Commission
considering the preparedness of the projects for likely commissioning
during 11th Plan.  While fixing up the target for 11th Plan, main reason
for slippages of projects during previous plans were analyzed in details
and taken care while selecting the projects for 11th Plan. Besides a
careful selection of projects feasible during 11th Plan, a well
thought out Strategy has been evolved towards implementation of these
projects as per their schedule. The coming up of a project in time is
dependent on a number of factors. Major Issues identified for timely
Implementation of project during 11th Plan and beyond were as follows:
• Manufacturing Capability of Main Plant and Balance of Plant
Equipment to be commensurate with capacity addition.
• Adequate Construction and Erection Agencies.
• Adequate Construction Machinery.
• Availability of Adequate Fuel and  Key materials.
• Adequate Transportation facilities for Equipment and Fuel.
• Manpower development including training facilities.

4
• Slow process of decision making and cumbersome payment
procedure adopted by Utilities.
It may be mentioned that as against the above target, a capacity of
29361 MW has been commissioned till November 20, 2010 in the
XIth Plan. As far as funding gap of about Rs.4 lakh crore is concerned,
the Sub-Committee has submitted the Report and likely to be adopted
by GoM on 29.10.2010."
8. The Committee desired to know the updated status of the report
of the Sub-Committee regarding funding gap, which was to be adopted by
GoM on 29th October, 2010. The Ministry of Power in a written reply have
stated that the Sub-Committee had made various recommendations, which
were later considered and adopted by the Group of Ministers on Power Sector
issues in its meeting held on 29th October, 2010.
9. The Committee in their Ninth report had highlighted a very
important issue of logical and realistic planning taking into account the
past experiences on both physical and financial fronts. In view of non-
achievements of targets and unavailability of adequate funds to reach
them, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to draw well
thought out, realistic and implementable strategy and decide inter-se-
priority among the various heads/stages of the capacity addition
ensuring the management of finances and other base work essential
for generation, transmission and distribution projects. The Committee
do not concur with the Ministry on the statement that while fixing up
the target for 11th Plan, main reason for slippages of projects during
previous plans were analysed in details and taken care while selecting
the projects for 11th Plan. Had the Government analysed in detail the
main reasons for slippages of projects during previous Plans and taken
adequate care, a downward revision of the capacity addition target upto
the level of 62,374 MW in the mid-term appraisal of the 11th Plan would
not have arisen. Further, the Committee are not convinced with the
claim of the Ministry that a careful selection of project feasible during
11th Plan was done and a well thought out strategy was evolved
towards implementation of these projects as per their schedule. The
achievement of merely 34,462 MW of capacity addition during the first

5
four years of the 11th Plan itself speaks volumes about poor
implementation of the 11th Plan projects. Moreover, the major issues
identified by the Ministry affecting the timely implementation of
projects appear to be well within the reach of the Ministry provided
these are attended in a planned way with full alertness. Even the
exigencies like tightening of visa norms for foreign personnel working
in the power sector, geological surprises for hydro projects, loading of
Balance of Plants vendors beyond their capacity to deliver, local
agitation, contractual issues and suspension/revocation of environmen-
tal clearance on account of environmental concerns etc., as enumerated
by the Ministry are not the ones which cannot be foreseen and taken
care of at the time of formulation of the plan, its implementation
schedule, financial aspects and the overall target of the Plan.
10. With regard to funding gap of about Rs. 4 lakh crore, the
Committee have been informed that the Sub-Committee has submitted
the Report which was adopted by the GoM on 29th October, 2010.
Regarding action taken on most of the recommendations of GoM, the
Committee have been informed that the issues are being submitted
to Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) for its guidance. On
setting up National Electricity Fund (NEF), the Ministry of Power have
informed that they are submitting a Memorandum for consideration
of the Cabinet. With regard to tax related measures, the Committee
have been given to understand that the Ministry of Power has
submitted the proposals to the Ministry of Finance as a part of Annual
budgetary exercise. The Committee feel that the matter has been dealt
with in a routine manner and the seriousness of the matter has been
undermined as conclusive action is yet to be taken by the Government
on recommendations of the Group of Ministers. Now that the proposed
measures are meant to bridge the huge funding gap in Power sector
to the tune of Rs. 4 lakh crore, have been adopted by the Group of
Ministers, the Committee desire that the issues may be pursued  with
utmost urgency to save the precious time so as to be able to achieve
the targets. The outcome may be intimated to the Committee at the
earliest. The Committee also desire that the details of the planning
and strategy of the Ministry to achieve about 28,000 MW of capacity

6
addition during the terminal year of the XIth plan and their financial
management plans for not only generation projects, but also for
accomplishment of  transmission and distribution projects during the
current plan period be worked out and acted upon.
B. Allowing Tax free Bonds for Power Sector
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
11. The Committee, without making any comment on the policy
decision of the Ministry of Finance to discourage tax free bonds in general,
had emphasized in their Ninth Report that in any developing country, the
Government has to set priorities to nurture the key infrastructure sectors
including the power sector as the development of power sector would lead
to increase in overall economic activities. In view of the huge investment
required in the power sector and in view of a huge potential of investment
available in small savings sector, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry of Finance should allow PFC and REC to issue tax free bonds to
raise funds, as a special case.
12. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their written
reply stated:—
"The recommendation of the Committee is not acceptable. In this regard
a considered policy decision has been taken involving Department of
Revenue, Department of Economic Affairs and Economic Advisor to
Finance Minister. The considered opinion of the Ministry of finance has
been that the fiscal instruments should not be used as an instrument
to increase project viability. The reasons for discouraging tax free bonds
are as under:
(a) The resources of the country are limited so the available liquidity
in the market. The issuance of tax free bonds by different
governmental agencies tend to crowd out the private sector's
requirement for long term funds. It also affects the development
of a vibrant corporate bond market where interest rates are
determined by demand and supply. Tax free bonds thus tend to
distort the actual market determined rates of interest and lead to
competing demands for issue of such bonds by other entities as

7
well. It violates the principle of horizontal equity among various
entities seeking funds for financing their projects.
(b) There is also a revenue loss of roughly Rs. 24 crores annually
for every Rs.1000 crores of bond issue (This is based on the
assumption of an average tax rate of 30% on a bond with a pre-
tax interest rate of 8%).
In the light of the above, the given recommendation is not
acceptable, hence no action required to be taken at the level of
Department  of Revenue."
13. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry of Finance
(Deptt. of Revenue) the reasons/circumstances under which some other
infrastructure sectors like railways, ports, housing and highway development
were permitted to raise funds through tax free bonds.
14. The Ministry of Finance in their written reply stated inter alia
that the recommendation of the Committee pertaining to issue of tax free
bonds is under reconsideration of the Ministry and further course of action
would be decided at appropriate level. They assured that the decision in this
regard would be communicated to the Committee.
15. The Committee find that the Department of Revenue have
reiterated their earlier stated position instead of being logical and
progressive and without re-examining the issue. The Department has
stuck to their previous stand that the fiscal investments should not
be used as an instrument to increase project viability and is repetitive
in giving reasons for discouraging tax free bonds as a matter of policy.
The Committee would like to seek special attention of the Government
for Power sector, a significant infrastructure area. The Committee are
of the view that setting priorities to nurture the key infrastructure
sector like power is the prime responsibility of the Government and
still feel that by boosting power generation, transmission and
distribution to ensure uninterrupted power supply in the country, there
will be a significant spurt in the overall industrial and economic output
leading to increased revenue collection. Government Schemes like
'power for all', schemes with social contents like RGGVY can be taken

8
to their logical objectives only when power sector is given a
comprehensive backing. But the Committee find it unfortunate that
the Department of Revenue, in fact, is not giving attention and
weightage due to the power sector and is generalizing the issue by
taking a stand that the issuance of tax free bonds by different
governmental agencies tend to crowd out the private sector's
requirement for long-term funds. The Committee are also not
convinced by the argument that issuance of tax free bonds by PFC and
REC for power sector will affect the development of a vibrant corporate
bond market where interest rates are determined by demand and
supply. On the contrary, the Committee feel that boosting power sector
will benefit all other sectors in the country including public and private
sectors ultimately resulting into a stronger and more vibrant corporate
bond market. The Committee also take note of the fact that the
Ministry of Finance have allowed other infrastructure sectors like
railways, ports, housing and highway development to raise funds
through tax free bonds, during 2011-12. The Committee are, therefore,
not able to comprehend as to why the power sector was deprived of
availing the opportunity of collecting funds through tax free bonds. In
view of the foregoing and in view of the assurance to reconsider the
recommendation, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) should liberalise their decision in favour of
power sector as well and allow PFC and REC to issue tax free bonds
to raise funds. This would be in consonance with the decision of the
Group of Ministers also.
C. Exemption for interest income to the investments in power sector
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
16. In view of very large fund requirement in infrastructure sector
like power sector, the Committee had observed that it would be prudent on
the part of the Government to channelize the huge unutilized money available
in the market to enrich and strengthen our infrastructure sector, especially
the power sector. To serve the purpose, the Committee had suggested that
ample money available with both non-resident and resident Indians could be
utilized by exempting the interest on their deposits from being taxed.

9
Following the suggested pattern, the Committee viewed that there would be
considerable amount available with the Government to bridge the funding gap
in power sector in coming years. The Committee were of the opinion that
the loss of revenue to the Government by way of exempting the interest from
being taxed would be compensated in later years by utilizing the deposited
money for improving the power sector which would act as a catalyst for
rapid economic development spinning off huge revenues to the Government.
Moreover, there would be surplus funds available that way with the Banks
and other Financial Institutions which would not allow the interest rate to
increase, because demand and requirement of funds by the other sectors both
in Public and Private domain is not as large as in infrastructure sector. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that a suitable methodology be
worked out for providing proper opportunity to both Resident and
Non-Resident Indians for investment in power sector through tax free fixed
deposits and other modes of investments.
17. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their written
reply have stated:
"The Recommendation of the Committee is not acceptable due the
following reasons:
(i) The interest payable on moneys borrowed by an Industrial
Undertaking in India, in foreign currency from sources outside
India under a loan agreement approved by the Central Government
before 1st June, 2001, is exempt from taxation as per section 10
(15) (iv)(f) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
(ii) Further section 10(15)(iv)(fa) of the Income-tax Act, 1961
already provides exemption for interest income earned by a
non-resident or a person who is not an ordinarily resident on
foreign currency deposits in Schedule Banks under specified
conditions.
(iii) There is no specific data available regarding loss of revenue to
the exchequer due to this exemption. The rationale for withdrawal
of this exemption was that there was no need to continue with
a withholding tax exemption when India entered in to DTAAs with
all major economies of the world. The DTAAs generally provide

10
for taxation of interest income at a fixed rate. The income earned
by a foreign lender is taxable in the hands of the lender in the
foreign country and lender gets credit for any tax withheld on
such income by the borrower in India. Thus in effect the
exemption of withholding tax in India shifts the amount of tax
payment on interest income from India to a foreign country and
leads to loss of revenue to India. It was also considered
economically unjustifiable to subsidies the borrowings of private
companies as this encourages borrowing from abroad leading
to India's indebtedness. Further the current policy of the
Government is to discourage incentives in a moderate tax regime.
2. In the light of the above, the given recommendation is not
acceptable, hence no action required to be taken at the level of
Department of Revenue."
18. The Committee find that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) have extended reasons to defend their
viewpoint of not exempting the tax on interest income of the NRIs on
their deposits/investments in India. The Committee had in fact
recommended for proper opportunity in favour of both Resident and
Non-Resident Indians for investment in power sector through tax free
fixed deposits and other modes of investments. The Committee feel
that while banking on the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements
(DTAAs) with major economies of the world and discouraging
borrowings from abroad, the Department of Revenue is silent on the
investment opportunities for Resident Indians. The Committee believe
that there is a huge potential of investment by the Resident Indians,
which is otherwise lying unutilized and uninvested. Given an
opportunity with added attraction of tax exemption on interest income,
ample money can be diverted to nurture the power sector which will
ultimately benefit the economy as a whole. The Committee are not
convinced with the logic extended by the Department of Revenue to
consider it economically unjustifiable to subsidise the borrowings of
private companies. Rather it is primarily the investors who will be
prompted and benefited by the suggested move to mobilize uninvested
money towards power sector by giving tax exemptions leading  to the

11
development of power sector as a whole. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee reiterate in giving moderate tax concessions to attract
much needed funds for infrastructure sector, especially the power
sector instead of sticking to collect a few bucks and discourage the
possible investments. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the
fund requirement of infrastructure sector like power sector being very
large and investments by private sector being profit driven, it is the
Government which is expected to create favourable opportunities of
investments in this sector. The Committee hope that the Department
of Revenue would reconsider their stand for the sake of the
development of power sector resulting into the growth of Indian
economy. The Committee would await the revised response of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
D. Status of Power Sector as Infrastructure Sector
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
19. The Committee in their Ninth Report had observed that instead
of becoming a facilitator for resource mobilization, the Ministry of Finance
had rather shown rigid approach and adamant attitude with regard to the issue
of resource mobilization for power sector. Also no reasons had been adduced
by the Ministry to the repeated queries of the Committee to treat power sector
as infrastructure sector. The Committee had, therefore, recommended the
Ministry to amend its tax proposals and fiscal measures to go hand in hand
with the need of the nation, expectations of the people as far as the availability
of power is concerned to ensure the all-round development of the country.
20. The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs), in their
action taken reply stated as under:
"Currently, there is no definitional clarity on what constitutes
infrastructure. Various organization dealing with the subject, such as
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Insurance Regulatory Development
Authority (IRDA) etc. have different 'notions' of what constitutes
infrastructure. Department of Economic Affairs has been entrusted with
the responsibility of defining what constitutes infrastructure. DEA has
accordingly initiated a draft note on a harmonized definition of
infrastructure for the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on infrastructure

12
which includes within its definition, Electricity Transmission,
Distribution and Generation as infrastructure sub-sectors. This is likely
to be considered by CoS shortly."
21. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of
Economic Affairs) has initiated a draft note on a harmonized
definition of infrastructure for the Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
on infrastructure which includes within its definition, Electricity
Transmission, Distribution and Generation as infrastructure sub-sectors
and the draft note is likely to be considered by CoS shortly. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.
E. Creation of National Electricity Fund
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
22. Regarding creation of the National Electricity Fund (NEF), the
Committee had expressed disappointment on reduction of the original target
of Rs. 2,02,500 crore for disbursement with separate component of interest
subsidy of Rs. 82,266 crore on it to the level of loan disbursement target
Rs. 50,000 crore with interest subsidy of Rs.18,438 crore spread over a
period of 14 years. The Committee were also surprised to note that no
specific plan outlay had been made during the 11th Plan for the purpose and
plan allocation of required interest subsidy to mobilize funds for NEF was
yet to be made. Moreover, the revised proposal of the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) included inter alia the provision that the interest subsidy
scheme would initially be made applicable to distribution works only and
eligibility would be restricted  only to non R-APDRP projects and schemes.
Against this backdrop, the Committee had observed that the very objective
and the scope of the scheme were being diluted even before the creation
of the NEF and had recommended that the modalities of the scheme and
detailed plan of its implementation be worked out and got finalized at the
earliest so that the funding of transmission and Distribution sector which
constitute about 60 per cent of the funding gap might not suffer.
23. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Power have stated
that the recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
implementation. They have informed that the EFC meeting was held on

13
18th October, 2010 and based on its recommendations, Cabinet Note would
be submitted for approval, at the earliest.
24. In an updated reply the Ministry of Power have informed that they
are submitting a Memorandum for setting up of the NEF. To a further query
towards the latest position, the Ministry inter alia  informed as under:—
"After following the procedure and detailed discussions, it was felt that
interest subsidy aggregating Rs. 8466 crore, would be adequate for a
total loan disbursement amounting to Rs. 25,000 crore for distribution
schemes during the years 2011-12 and 2012-13, spread over 14 years.
A draft CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs) note is under
finalization for circulation based on the above decision. FM's approval
has since been obtained on the same.
25. The Committee are dissatisfied with the casual and
incomplete and rather routine reply given by the Ministry to such an
important proposal regarding creation of the National Electricity Fund
to provide funds to the States and power utilities for improving
transmission and distribution network. The Committee had raised
specific issues relating to non-allocation of plan outlays and dilution
of objective and scope of the scheme and had expected the Ministry
to come out with the modalities of the scheme and detailed plan of its
implementation. That this was not done is nothing but regrettable.
According to the Ministry, the EFC meeting was held in October, 2010
only and the Cabinet note was supposed to be submitted soon after that
for approval. In the updated status of the recommendations of the final
report of the Sub-Committee on financial issues of power sector, the
Ministry of Power have further informed that they are submitting a
Memorandum for consideration of CCEA for setting up of the NEF.
Since the matter has been delayed inordinately, the Committee would
like the Government to expedite the process of setting up of the NEF.
They would await conclusive action in the matter expeditiously.

14
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
Energy plays a critical and catalytic role in the sustainable socio-
economic development of the country.  There has been a sizeable growth
in the generation capacity from 1750 MW in 1950 to 1,47,965 MW by the
end of 2008-09.  However, with the growth in demand of Power, the country
still faced an energy shortage and peaking shortage of 11% and 12%
respectively during 2008-09. To meet the existing shortage and growing
requirements of Power, capacity addition of 90,000-1,00,000 MW would be
required every five years.  For this magnitude of capacity addition massive
funds are required alongwith requisite funds for efficient transmission and
distribution.  Keeping the importance of the sector, the Committee examined
various facets of the 'Funding of Power Projects' and took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Power, various wings of the Ministry of
Finance and Reserve Bank of India. The main issues emerged out of
Committee's examination are listed as under:—
(i) The National Electricity Policy (2005) inter alia  provides:—
To meet the objective of rapid economic growth and "power for
all" including household electrification, it is estimated that an
investment of the order of Rs. 9,00,000 crorers at 2002-03 price
level would be required to finance generation, transmission, sub-
transmission, distribution and rural electrification projects.  Power
being most crucial infrastructure, public sector investments, both
at the Central Government and State Governments, will have to
be stepped up. Considering the magnitude of the expansion of the
sector required, a sizeable part of the investments will also need
to be brought in from the private sector.

15
Further, the capital is scarce.  Private sector will have multiple
options for investments. Return on investment will, therefore,
need to be provided in a manner that the sector is able to attract
adequate investments at par with, if not in preference to,
investment opportunities in other sectors.  This would obviously
be based on a clear understanding and evaluation of opportunities
and risks.  An appropriate balance will have to be maintained
between the interests of consumers and the need for investments.
(ii) As against the targets of 41,110 MW, capacity generation during
10th Five Year Plan (2002-07) was only 21,180 MW (52%).
(iii) As against the targets for capacity addition of 78,700 MW for
the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-12), the achievements are likely to
be 62,000 MW.
(iv) For the power projects relating to capacity addition/generation/
transmission/distribution  and other schemes, the budget require-
ments for 11th Plan are Rs. 10,59,515 crores.  The State, Central
and Private sector having share of Rs. 5,31,245 crores,
Rs.2,91,984 crores and Rs. 2,36,286 crores respectively.  For
12th Plan funds requirements are estimated about Rs. 11,00,000
crores for estimated capacity generation of 1,00,000 MW.
(v) For 11th Plan, as against the required funds, the funds availability
is of Rs. 6,37,873 crores leaving funding gap of Rs. 4,21,642
crores.
(vi) Out of Rs. 4,21,642 crore, the gap for generation projects is
Rs. 1,60,557 crores and for distribution, the gap is of
Rs. 2,02,083 crores.  Apart from spreading the network to all
areas, T&D sector aims at cutting down T&D losses from 40%
(in 2001) to 10% by 2017.
(vii) Since gestation period of power projects is 4-5 years, some of
the investments made in 11th Plan would give benefit in
12th Plan.

16
(viii) Apart from adequate return on investment, power sector needs
fiscal incentives to attract huge investments.
(ix) PFC and REC, PSUs under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Power play a substantial role in funding of power
projects.
The above issues have been examined by the Committee in detail.  The
findings/recommendations of the Committee are detailed in succeeding
paragraphs.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee take note of the fact that target of capacity addition
within the 11th Plan period is 78,700 MW. The estimated budget required
for capacity addition, transmission, distribution and other schemes/projects
is Rs. 10,59,515 crore. As against this, the availability of fund is of
Rs. 6,37,873 crore leaving a funded gap of Rs. 4,21,642 crore. The breakup
of the requirement of the fund in Central, State and Private sectors are
Rs. 2,91,984 Crore, Rs. 5,31,245 crore and Rs. 2,36,286 crore respectively.
Out of this, the requirement of fund for Generation in all the three sectors
are Rs. 5,91,734 crore in which the share of private sector is Rs. 2,36,286
crore, Rs. 2,14,655 crore in the Central sector and Rs.1,40,793 crore in the
State sector.  Bulk  of the funds required are under transmission, sub-
transmission and distribution, RGGVY , APDRP, etc. No doubt the fund
requirements are mammoth but the methodology adopted to arrive at the
estimation regarding fund requirement requires reconsideration. The
Committee are not very sure whether the Government is in any away directly
responsible for mobilizing the resources expected from Private sector but
it is expected of the Government to introduce conductive fiscal policies to
attract adequate investments in power sector not only from public sector but
from private sector as well.  Schemes like RGGVY , APDRP which are
Centrally sponsored schemes need priority in making budgetary provisions.
The only grey area regarding paucity of fund is sub-transmission and
distribution which comes within the domain of the State Government but
requires attention from all quarters for fund management being directly
connected with capacity addition programmes making power available to all

17
and its resultant benefit to end users i.e. common man. Therefore, the
Committee are of the opinion that a realistic approach should be taken while
coming to a conclusion regarding requirements of fund.
Reply of the Government
To estimate the fund requirement for 11th Plan, a Sub-Group on
Financial Issue under the Chairmanship of the then Chairman PFC was
constituted while preparing the report of Working Group on Power for
11th Plan. The sub-group on Financial issue also had experts  from  Planning
Commission, IDFC, IDBI Limited, National Institute of Public Finance &
Policy, IIT, Kanpur, ICICI Bank, CRISIL, LIC of India, GIC of India,
Reliance Energy Centre, Tata Power Company Limited, CESC, Torrent
Power Generation Limited, NTPC Ltd., NHPC, NJPC, Power Grid Corp. of
India Ltd. and BHEL. The estimate for requirement of fund for 11th Plan
power projects is based on report of above sub-group on financial issue
which is part of report of working group on power for 11th Plan. Further
the sub-committee on Financial Issue, headed by Deputy Chairman Planning
Commission has revised the figure of funding requirement for 11th Plan
power projects, based on input from Working Group Report and revised
capacity addition target for 11th Plan. A realistic approach is being taken.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
The committee find that the progress of Capacity Addition Programme
has been far from satisfactory.  The Ministry of Power are hopeful of
achieving 62,000 MW capacity against the target of 78,000 MW during the
11th Plan.  The reasons responsible for slow pace in the target achievement
are the delay in supply of equipment by major supplier of power equipment
viz. BHEL and the more time taken by them in the commissioning of projects.
Reportedly the workers working in private sector are more efficient and
quick.  Private sectors are utilizing the services of Chinese professionals and
due to the immigration policy of the Government, the stay and working of
Chinese engineers in India has become a bit difficult. This has impacted the
pace of capacity addition resulting in less achievement of the target. While

18
not commenting on the immigration policy of the country, the Committee
are not convicted about the  reason as in the opinion of the Committee, there
is no dearth of the skilled manpower in the country.  As far as BHEL is
concerned, it should be made obligatory upon them to fulfil the commitment
within the stipulated time failing which the penal provisions should be
enforced on the defaulting organization. On the issue of taking services of
other joint collaborations, the Ministry of Power inform that apart from
BHEL, other few joint ventures comprising of Siemens, L&T, Mitsubishi,
JSW, Alstom and Bharat Forge are coming up in India.  The Committee are
of the opinion that with a number of new power projects on the avail in
coming years together with renovation and modernization of old setups, there
would be growing need to meet the escalating demands for manufacturing
power equipments like generators and turbines, etc. and also to provide
specialized services.  In view of this, the Committee recommend the
Government to explore the possibility and feasibility of establishing another
organization of the size and facilities of BHEL having participation of power
sector with Indian Industry Associations like FICCI, CII and ASSOCHAM
etc. and if necessary even participation of MNCs in the field.  The growing
power sector has ample opportunities for our upcoming engineers,
technicians and skilled manpower from it is and similar technical Institutions
in the country.  The Committee further recommend that keeping in view the
huge reservoir of our skilled talent, a perspective plan in the form of vision
document incorporating all aspects of power sector particularly with
reference to training of manpower be prepared at the right earnest.  The vision
document should be flexible, practicable and useful to all the stakeholders
in the power sector.
Reply of the Government
With enhancement of the manufacturing capacity of BHEL and other
Joint ventures mentioned above, it is expected that there should not be
shortage for main plants and equipments during 12th Plan onwards. Also
many companies are importing BTG from foreign countries.
In view of large thermal capacity addition programme envisaged mostly
through supercritical units, efforts have been made to increase the

19
manufacturing capacity for supercritical units. BHEL is augmenting its
manufacturing capacity for large power equipments and is stated to have at
present achieved a capacity of 10,000 MW/year which is planned to be raised
to 13,500 MW/year by March-2012. Apart from BHEL, several Joint Ventures
for manufacture of supercritical boilers and turbine generators for thermal
power plants have been set up/being set up in India and the manufacturing
capacity envisaged by the JVs is given below:
Planned Manufacturing capacity per annum
Venture Boilers Turbine- Re marks
generators
L&T-MHI 4000 MW 4000 MW Manufacturing  facilities
constructed and production
commenced
Alstom -Bharat Forge - 5000 MW Probable date of completion
of factory construction: Mid
2012
Toshiba- JSW - 3000 MW Construction of factory
started. Probable date of
completion - August 2011.
Gammon-Ansaldo 4000 MW - Probable date of completion
of facilities December, 2012
(2000 MW) and December
2014 (additional 2000 MW)
Thermax-Babcock 3000 MW Probable date of completion
& Wilcox of manufacturing facilities by
end 2011.
Thus apart from BHEL's augmented manufacturing capacity of
13500 MW/year, total manufacturing capacity of about 11000 MW/year for
steam generator and 12000 MW/year for turbine generator is envisaged
through these Joint Ventures. In addition to the above Joint Ventures, it is

20
understood that BGR-Hitachi is also setting up Joint Ventures in the country
for manufacturing of supercritical boiler and turbine generators. With such
augmentation of manufacturing facilities in the offing, the requirements of
future thermal projects could be met from indigenous sources.
Manpower requirement for the 11th Five Year Plan.
The 11th Plan envisages addition of nearly 78,000 MW generation
capacity, 1,00,000 circuit kilometers of transmission lines and extension and
augmentation of the requisite Sub Transmission and distribution network
(including that under RGGVY and APDRP). This massive programme for
building additional capacity and infrastructure is likely to lead to the
requirement of around 10 lakh additional personnel for power sector during
11th Plan.
The category-wise break-up is as under:
Category Construction Operation To accelerate Total
& construction
Maintenance
Engineers 20,000 40,000 6,500 66,500
Supervisors 33,000 75,000 12,000 1,20,000
Skilled Workers 67,000 60,000 23,000 1,50,000
Semi-skilled 73,000 65,000 22,000 1,60,000
Unskilled 1,48,000 75,000 49,000 2,72,000
Non-technical 84,000 1,20,000 27,500 2,31,500
Total 4,25,000 4,35,000 1,40,000 10,00,000
Manpower Requirement during the 12th Five Year Plan
The proposed capacity addition during the 12th Plan is about
1,00,000 MW. This capacity addition and associated T&D network is likely
to lead to the additional requirement of around 6.6 lakh manpower. The

21
category-wise break-up of the Additional Requirement of Manpower
during the 12th Plan  is as follows:
Category Construction Operation & T otal
maintenance
Engineers 3,000 56,000 59,000
Supervisors 4,000 1,05,000 1,09,000
Skilled Workers 8,000 85,000 93,000
Semi-skilled workers 9,000 91,000 1,00,000
Unskilled workers 15,000 1,05,000 1,20,000
Non-tech 10,000 1,70,000 1,80,000
Total 49,000 6,12,000 6,61,000
Steps taken to ensure availability of skilled manpower
Given the number of graduates passing out of the existing schools,
colleges and other institutions each year, it is expected that there will be no
shortage of manpower of required qualification in any category, technical or
non-technical in the country.
The quality of engineers and supervisors graduating from the technical
institutions is also adequate.  However, they will require induction and in-
service training to be able to meet the challenges of working in today's
technologically highly sophisticated power industry.
The requirement of induction and in-service training is met by training
institutes in the Central, State and Private Sectors including CEA recognized
institutes, which are providing induction training, refresher and advanced
training, simulator based training, training in T&D and grid management,
training for capacity building of franchisees, and training in energy efficiency
and energy conservation.
The training efforts are complemented by the academic and research
institutes like IIMs, IITs, ASCI, ESCI, IIPA, MDI and the likes.

22
In respect of ITI trained skilled workers, the following issues have been
identified:
(i) There are shortages in certain power related trades and in some
geographical locations.
(ii) Shortcomings in the skill set of ITI trained skilled workers for
utilization of their services in the power sector
(iii) Upgradation of skills of the in-service skilled workforce by
training.
To address these issues, the following actions have been taken:
I. "Adopt an ITI" scheme—  The Ministry of Power and the CEA
have taken started "Adopt an ITI"  initiative since July 2007.
Under this initiative, the State Government ITIs are being adopted
by the Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) and Private
Project developers under Public Private Partnership (PPP) scheme
of the Directorate General of Employment and Training, Ministry
of Labour and Employment to invest in augmentation and
up-gradation of the training assets of ITIs around their project
areas, especially in respect of trades that are relevant to the power
industry.  CPSUs  have adopted 61 ITIs & 8 new ITIs by NTPC
being established. The private developers have also adopted
12 ITIs.
The Master Skill development i.e. Training of trainers is being
undertaken to improve the quality of trainers in ITIs by following
methodology:
z Experienced highly skilled employees / supervisors of Power
Sector Companies/ PSUs will train the instructors.
z Instructors are being sponsored for training in various
Institutes run by State Governments/other training institutes.
The cost of the training is being borne by the adopting
PSUs.

23
z Visits of the instructors are being organized to nearby power
stations of the adopting CPSUs so that the instructors
observe the actual process of jobs being done.
II. The issue of manpower requirement and their skill development
was emphasized in the Chief Ministers' conference (2007) and
Power Ministers' conference held in June 2009 and November
2009.
In the Power Ministers' conference, Minister of Power called
upon the states to ask project developers in their states to adopt
ITIs in their project areas. State Governments were requested to
facilitate adoption of ITIs by their State Power Utilities. It was
also resolved in the conference that States would take measures
to improve the skills of Franchisees in their states.
III. Distance Learning Programme
Distance learning programme on power distribution has been
started through IGNOU, one programme for engineers and one
programme for technicians. Both the programmes are of
6 months duration delivered through multi-media, print material,
virtual classes and contact classes delivered at local study centres
across the country.
IV. Implementation of National Training Policy for Power Sector
The National Training Policy (NTP) for power sector has been
formulated which  highlights the need for planning for training
as an integrated Human Resource Development (HRD) activity
with a commitment to imparting training for all in the power sector
at entry level as well as in-service.
The Ministry of Power and the CEA have been impressing upon
the Power Companies in the central, state and private sectors for
implementation of National Training Policy for power sector. The
MoP and the CEA have also been monitoring the status of
implementation of NTP.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]

24
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee also note that the Interim Report of the Sub-Committee
of the Group of Ministers (GoM) inter alia recommended that PFC and REC
may be allowed to raise External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) of USD one
billion each per year under the 'Automatic Route'.  The Committee have been
appraised by the Departmental of Financial Services that they are not in favour
of PFC and REC adopting automatic route for ECB as allowing ECB on an
automatic route has a number of implications in term of the foreign fund
flowing coming into the country, in terms of the reserve management and
in terms of the exchange rate management.  The Committee are not convinced
with this view as the nature of implications adduced to deny PFC and REC
automatic ECB routes does not appear to be plausible.  The Committee are
inclined to the infer that the Group of Ministers might have carefully
considered all implications before recommending automatic  ECB route.  As
the purpose of ECB is specific and focused, hence the objections like
exchange rate management and reserve management do not hold much
ground.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that either the Department
of Financial Services should be categorical in their objections as to how this
system will be inimical to our interest in what concrete manner they are
willing to help the power sector to mobilize the resources or they should
agree to the recommendation of Group of Ministers on the automatic ECB
route to PFC and REC with necessary safeguards wherever required.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation was examined by the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Financial Services in consultation with Reserve Bank of India.
Comments of RBI are as follows:
(i) The recent liberalization in the ECB policy allows Infrastructure
Finance Companies (IFCs) like Power Finance Corporation (PFC)
and Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) to access the
automatic route up to 50% of their owned funds for the ECB
requirements.
(ii) ECB requirements of PFC and REC beyond 50% of their owned
funds will be considered under the approval route.

25
(iii) Under the approval route, Reserve Bank has permitted corporate
to avail of ECB up to USD 2 billion for Ultra Mega Power
Project (UMPP's).
(iv) Any requirement by PFC and REC as per extant guidelines on ECB
will be considered on its merits.
(v) The extant policy on ECB permits a take-out financing
arrangement through ECB under the approval route for refinan-
cing of Rupee loans availed of from the domestic banks by eligible
borrowers in the sea port and airport, roads including bridges and
power sectors for the development of new projects subject to
certain conditions.
(vi) The policy permits credit enhancement by eligible non-resident
entitles, namely, multilateral/regional financial institutions and
Government owned development financial institutions, in respect
of domestic debt raised through issue of capital market
instruments, such as debentures and bonds, by Indian companies
engaged exclusively in the development of infrastructure and by
the Infrastructure Finance Companies (IFCs), classified as such
by the Reserve Bank.
In view of the above liberalization in ECB Policy, PFC & REC would
be able to access ECB under automatic route upto Rs. 6630 crore and 5540
crore respectively. The recommendation of the Committee has been
implemented by Ministry of Finance/Department of Financial Services.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee find that the interim recommendation of the Sub-
Committee of GoM also contain proposals regarding enhancing exposure
limits of banks for lending to power sector companies as also to PFC and
REC.  The Committee have been given to understand that the existing bank's
exposure limits for individual infrastructure company is  20 per cent, plus
5 per cent of bank capital funds. On the basis of information compiled by

26
the Reserve Bank of India in respect of 10 major banks, the Department of
Financial Services has informed that the public sector banks exposure to
single borrower is in the range of 10.6 to 10.8 per cent only.  Similarly, the
maximum group borrower is in the range of 10.6 to 10.8 per cent only.
Similarly, the maximum group borrower limit is 55 per cent by the RBI's
analysis of funding by 10 major banks indicated that the bank's exposure
to group  borrowers ranges from 21.2 to 41.3 per cent which is again
exposure to group borrowers ranges from 21.2 to 41.3 per cent which is
again below the maximum limit.  Thus, according to Department of Financial
Services there is still available for further expansion of banks' credit to the
power sector.  The Department of Financial Services has also indicated that
the existing individual and group exposure norms of RBI are liberal as per
international standards and any further increase in these limits may lead to
asset liability mismanagement.  However, the Committee have been informed
that the RBI has issued a notification on 12th February, 2010 wherein the
bank's exposure for infrastructure finance companies has been enhanced by
5 per cent, as such banks can lend upto 20 per cent of their capital funds
to Infrastructure Finance Companies which are applicable to the PFC and
REC also.  Moreover, the Committee find from the replies of the Department
of Financial Services that the RBI will consider the request of any willing
bank for exposure to PFC upto 25 per cent of their capital funds and similar
will be the case for REC too.  In view of the forgoing and in view of the
fact that the banking sector is also growing rapidly in the country, the
Committee feel that the PFC and REC should take advantage of the
opportunities being extended by the Reserve Bank of India for meeting their
demands for funds for power sector and approach RBI with extensive
roadmap covering their specific requirement.  The Committee recommend
that both the Ministry of Power and the Department of Financial Services
should work in tandem and in mutual coordination by forming joint group
to ensure that bank credits to power sector have a smooth flow within the
existing norms.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Financial Services had constituted a Group under
the Chairmanship of Secretary.  Financial Services, to examine the issue of

27
Sectoral/group cap for financing of Power project. Secretary, Power;
Chairman, PFC and Chairman, REC are also its members. The recommen-
dations of the Committee have been noted for compliance by Ministry of
Finance/Department of Financial Services.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee are aware of the fact that both PFC and REC have to
play pivotal role in meeting the mammoth fund requirement for power
projects in coming years. During the evidence, the Secretary (Power) had
stated that for generation projects for the 11th Plan, financial closure has
been done.  It has been reported that for generation projects where financial
closure has been done. It has been reported that for generation projects where
financial closure has been reported, REC will provide funds to the extent of
Rs. 40,000 crore during the 11th/12th Plan periods and PFC will provide
funds to the extent of Rs. 1,00,000 crore during the 11th/12th Plan. For
National Electricity Fund (NEF) also, funds to tune of Rs. 2,02,500 crore
is sought to be mobilized by PFC and REC.  However, while examining the
details supplied by the Ministry of Power, the Committee find that PFC has
disbursed Rs. 1,13,119 crore cumulative financial assistance till 31st March,
2009 as against sanction of Rs. 2,32,551 crore, which forms 48.64 per cent
of the sanctioned amount. The disbursement was as poor as 23.32 per cent
in 2007-08 while it was 36.91 per cent in 2008-09 in respect to the sanctioned
financial assistance in the respective years.  The Committee further notice
that in 2008-09 disbursement in respect to private sector was only 7.85 per
cent and that to Central Sector, it was 17.26 per cent of sanctioned  financial
assistance by PFC. In grants also, the cumulative disbursement is Rs.
22,277,86 crore making out 54.67 per cent of sanctions. In case of REC
also as against total loan sanctioned of Rs. 2,21,098 crore upto March, 2009,
the loan released was Rs. 92,400.65 crore only.  The Committee are not
satisfied with the reply given by REC and PFC towards reasons for decline
in sanction and widening of sanction-disbursement gap and feel that the
position of disbursement as well as sanction can improve substantially by
proper planning and management, otherwise the whole exercise of managing

28
funds to realize a massive physical target of 78,700 MW during the 11th Plan
period get strayed and the purpose of funding gets defeated.  The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommended that keeping in view the past performances
both in cumulative as well as yearly sanction and disbursement position, the
PFC and REC should take all preemptive measures to ensure that loans are
granted so such units in which there are less likelihood of any bottlenecks
in between after the work on the project is started.  This will not only help
in minimizing the gap between the sanction and disbursement but will also
save the precious fund from getting locked in and thus becoming a bad debt
of the company.
Reply of the Government
In order to reduce the time between sanction and disbursement the
following measures are adopted:
• Minimum level of preparedness for sanction of project to include
availability of major clearances viz. environment clearance, fuel
linkage and commencement of land acquisition for the project.
• Wherever PFC is the lead, facilitating sanction by other FIs/Banks
through promptness in issue of Information Memorandum and
providing syndication services.
• Standardized procedure for appointment of legal counsel and
Lenders' engineer in order to facilitate loan documentation and
commencement of disbursement.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee do understand that the expenditure in power projects
is required to be incurred in a phased manner depending upon the progress
of the activities involved and the scheduled milestones. Nevertheless, the
factors like delay in award of contracts by the projects authorities, delay in
supply of the equipment, stoppage of the work in between due to some
contractual issues, etc. reported to affect the expenditure pattern indicate that

29
there is an urgent need to develop and strengthen monitoring mechanism to
mitigate these root administrative problems.  The Committee would await
specific response of the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The Monitoring Mechanism for projects under construction is already
in place in this Ministry. These inter alia include the following:
(i) Monitoring by Central Electricity Authority (CEA):
The Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is performing the duties
of monitoring of the power projects in pursuance of 73 (f) of
Electricity Act, 2003.  Central Electricity Authority has a nodal
officer nominated for each ongoing project who continuously
monitors the progress at site through frequent site visits and
interaction with the developers. The respective nodal officer is
responsible for submitting a report on the progress of each
of the ongoing power project on a  monthly basis highlighting
the critical areas where corrective actions are required. CEA
holds quarterly review meeting with the developers and
other stakeholders and highlights the critical issues to Ministry
of Power & Project Authorities and suggests the remedial
actions.
Chairperson, CEA reviews monthly progress of the ongoing
projects.
(ii) Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP):
A Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up to
independently follow up and monitor the progress of the critical
projects.
(iii) Review meetings  by Ministry:
Meetings with the concerned officers of CEA, equipment
manufacturers, State Utilities/CPSUs/Project developers, are

30
being held by Ministry regularly.  Also, periodical review meetings
are held with other Ministries like Coal, MOE&F, Railways,
Planning Commission etc.
In addition, the following Committee have also been constituted by
Ministry of Power to review the progress of works & suggest remedial
measures for bottlenecks or constraints.
(a) Task Force on Hydro Project Development:
A Task Force on Hydro Project Development, has been
constituted to look into all issues relating to development of
hydropower including issues of rehabilitation and resettlement of
project affected persons.  The Task Force is headed by the
Minister of Power.
(b) Inter-Ministerial Group on Development of Hydro Power in
North-East:
An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has been constituted
(vide Ministry of Water Resources O.M. dated 7th August, 2009)
to evolve a suitable framework to guide and accelerate the
development of Hydropower in the North-East.
(c) Advisory Group:
An Advisory Group has been set up under the chairmanship of
the Minister of Power to advise for expeditious completion of
ongoing power generation projects.  So far, the Advisory Group
has held seven meetings.
(d) Special Monitoring Group:
A Special Monitoring Group (SMG) under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Power) has been constituted to discuss & sort out
various issues through video conferencing for J&K and North
Eastern Region.
(e) Committee of Power Sector :
In order to implement various decisions taken at the highest level
of the Government, a committee under the chairmanship of

31
Secretary (Power) has been constituted to ensure implementation
of various programmes including capacity addition.
(f) Contractual related issues:
A task force has been constituted by MoP under the Chairperson,
CEA and members from various CPSUs, IPPs, State Govts. etc.
to develop a Model Contract document for hydro projects to help
in minimizing disputes between employers and contractors.
This document has been prepared and finalized in consultation
with various stakeholders and after getting vetted from
legal expert. The Model Contract document inter alia
include selection of Joint venture, Risk allocation and sharing
mechanism, Compensation Events & Grant of compensation,
Variation in quantities/extra items, price adjustment, Dispute
resolution etc.
(g) Augmenting the capacity of power plant equipments:
In order to overcome any supply constraints, BHEL is augmenting
its manufacturing capacity for large power equipments. Further
BHEL was asked to take following actions:
• Advance placement of orders for long delivery and critical
items in international market.
• Development of skilled manpower in the area of high
pressure welding, skilled fitters etc.
• Augmentation of their erection and commissioning infra-
structure.
BHEL have also entered into collaboration with M/s. Alstom and
Siemens for manufacturing of supercritical boiler and turbine-
generators.
Apart from BHEL, several Joint Ventures for manufacture of
supercritical boilers and turbine-generators for thermal power plants have

32
been set up/being set up in India and the manufacturing capacity envisaged
by the JVs is given below:
Planned Manufacturing Capacity Per Annum
Venture Boilers Turbine- Re marks
generators
L&T-MHI 4000 MW 4000 MW Manufacturing  facilities
constructed and production
commenced.
Alstom-Bharat Forge – 5000 MW Probable date of completion
of factory construction: Mid
2012.
Toshiba-JSW – 3000 MW Construction of factory
started. Probable date of
completion: August 2011.
Gammon-Ansaldo 4000 MW – Probable date of completion
of facilities December, 2012
(2000 MW) and December
2014 (additional 2000 MW).
Thermax-Babcock 3000 MW – Probable date of completion
& Wilcox of manufacturing facilities by
end 2011.
In addition to the above Joint Ventures, it is understood that BGR-Hitachi
is also setting up Joint Ventures in the country for manufacturing of
supercritical boiler and turbine-generators. With such augmentation of
manufacturing facilities in the offing, the requirements of future thermal
projects could be met from indigenous sources.
PFC is also monitoring the progress of the both private sector projects
as well as State/Central projects. Regarding the State/Central sector projects
constituting about 80% of PFC loan portfolio, the monitoring is being

33
undertaken  by the Project Monitoring Unit established by PFC last year
through quarterly progress monitoring formats, tele-conferencing etc.
involving review of the progress in respect of the major milestones.  The
outcome of the progress monitoring including the progress status, delays if
any, impact on implementation  etc. is posted on the intranet site   for
reference/necessary action  by  the concerned.  The exception reports are
also prepared from time to time for the information of the top management.
For the Private sector projects the monitoring is done through the
Lenders' Engineer (LE), Lenders Financial Advisors (LFA) etc. appointed for
such projects. These LEs and LFAs are the independent agencies with the
required professional skills and act on behalf of various lenders/consortium
members as the case may be and provide them with the periodic reports/
information about the physical and financial progress status of the projects
based on the periodic site visits, interaction at borrowers Hqrs., inspection/
review of the relevant documents as per the requirements.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee are anguished to note the response of the Ministry of
Finance towards the power sector of the country.  Instead of becoming a
facilitator for resource mobilization, it has been consciously attempting to
take the garb of various provisions financial rules, imaginary situation,
diversionary tactics and even misinterpretation of the possible and logical
outcome of various fiscal measures to deflect the issue and divert the
attention.  This attitude is amply reflected in their response regarding interest
rate in the debt market and size of the debt market in the country.  Any half
hearted approach to mop up part of the required resources will only add to
the gravity of the problem.  In order to protect the development of a vibrant
corporate bond market, where interest rates are determined by demand and
supply, the denial of the opportunity to raise money from market as well as
from general public on concessional terms will not only affect the proper
development of the core infrastructure like power but will certainly have
adverse impact on market driven rate of interest also. The statement of the

34
Ministry about the limited availability of funds is based on what conclusion
remain unclear.  Based on this fact or assumption of the Ministry, market
rate of interest should have sky rocketed  and IPOs of various companies,
public as well as private, might have not received any response from the
public.  Therefore, to state that ‘if more entities are allowed, the supply to
the existing entities is bond to be impacted’ is highly imaginary and not all
convincing.  Similarly, no reasons have been adduced by the Ministry of
Finance to the repeated queries of the Committee to treat power sector as
infrastructure sector.  The Committee express their unhappiness about this
attitude and are unable to comprehend as to who will benefit by this approach
to the Ministry of Finance.  The infrastructure deficit of such a vital nature
will certainly have far reaching consequences affecting the pace of
development of all the spheres of our economy and employment
opportunities.  If the contention of the Ministry are taken to bonafide, even
then the financial requirement of the power sector cannot be lost sight of.
Therefore, it is imperative that instead of having conventional approach, rigid
response and foreclosed mind, new, innovative, sector specific, growth
oriented and realistic measures will have to be explored to meet the aspirations
of the people and also to empower the nation to be amongst the developed
comity of the nations.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
it is high time the Ministry of Finance should come out of its slumber, shed
its inhibitions and fixed notions and amend its tax proposal  and fiscal
measures to go hand in hand with the need of the nation, expectations of
the people as far as the availability of power is concerned to ensure the all-
round development of the country.
Reply of the Government
Currently, there is no definitional clarity on what constitutes
infrastructure. Various organization dealing with the subject, such as the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Insurance Regulatory Development Authority
(IRDA) etc. have different 'notions' of what constitutes infrastructure.
Department Economic Affairs has been entrusted with the responsibility of
defining what constitutes infrastructure. DEA has accordingly initiated a draft
note on a harmonized definition of infrastructure for the Committee of
Secretaries (CoS) on infrastructure which includes within its definition,

35
Electricity Transmission, Distribution and Generation as infrastructure sub-
sectors. This is likely to be considered by CoS shortly.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
OM No. 9/12/2010-INF, Dated 30.06.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee are aware that the power sector is a regulated sector.
The Electricity Regulatory Commissions look at various issues relating to
power companies like generation, transmission and distribution as also the
company's annual revenue requirements.  Moreover, the regulatory bodies
are empowered with regulating the tariff and protect the interest of the
consumers in many other ways.  The Committee find no practical evidence
to show that the companies in the power sector which have availed tax
concessions and other benefits have passed on the benefits to the consumers
in terms of tariff, etc. The Committee are of the firm view that whatever
concessions and support are being envisaged in funding and empowering the
power companies, should reasonably percolate to the end users i.e.
consumers. The Committee, therefore, while supporting the prospective
concessions to power companies, recommend the Ministry to work out
together with the concerned entities a suitable way to benefit the consumers
correspondingly.
Reply of the Government
Electricity Act, 2003
• The Appropriate Commission have been empowered under
Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003 specify  the terms and
conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall
be guided inter alia by the following, namely:—
(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the Central
Commission for  determination of the tariff applicable to
generating companies and transmission licensees;

36
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of
electricity are conducted on commercial principles;
(c) the factors which would encourage competition, efficiency,
economical use of the resources, good performance and
optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same time,
recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner;
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
electricity and also reduces cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission.
Tariff Policy
• The objectives of this tariff policy inter alia  are to ensure
availability of electricity to consumers at reasonable and
competitive rates.
• The tax benefits are passed on to the consumers at the time of
determination of tariff by the Appropriate Commission.
National Electricity Policy — Clause 5.8.4
• Capital is scarce. Private sector will have multiple options for
investments. Return on investment will, therefore, need to be
provided in a manner that the sector is able to attract adequate
investments at par with, if not in preference to, investment
opportunities in other sectors.  This would obviously be based
on a clear understanding and evaluation of opportunities and risks.
An appropriate balance will have to be maintained between
the interests of consumers and the need for investments.
• The tariffs of the utilities regulated by CERC are governed in terms
of the Regulations on Terms and Conditions of Tariff issued by
the Commission for 2009-14. As per these Regulations the Return
on Equity (which forms part of tariff) in respect of utility paying
the Minimum Alternate Tax (as a result of benefits of tax holiday

37
under Section 80IA of the Income Tax Act, 1961) is less than
that of a utility paying normal corporate tax.  Through these
Regulations, the Commission has moved from the earlier post-
tax regime to pre-tax regime. The tax burden for the beneficiaries
is now restricted to return on equity component only.  The
Regulations, therefore, enable the utilities to retain the benefits of
tax holiday under Section 80IA of Income Tax Act as this benefit
is available to the investors for development of infrastructure
facilities.  This is to promote investment in this capital intensive
industry, which in the long run would benefit consumer through
adequacy of supply.
As regards the adoption of tariff through competitive bidding, the
competitive framework/guideline itself is meant to ensure that the
bidders account for all benefits accrued to them in their quotes,
in the absence of which such bidders are likely to be competed
out by lower quotes of other bidders.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]

38
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the Sub-Committee of Group of Ministers
(GoM) headed by the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission had submitted
the interim recommendations pertaining to bank credits to power sector to
the Finance Minister in February, 2009.  The Committee also find that the
response of the Ministry of Finance on some of the interim recommendations
was pending for long and it was only when the Committee took up the subject
of 'Funding of Power Projects' for detailed examination and pursued the issue
with the departmental of Financial Services, the response of the Ministry of
Finance was expedited and their comments on the interim recommendations
of the Sub-Committee were forwarded to the Ministry of Power and to the
committee as  well in March, 2010.  The Committee take serious note about
the delayed response of the Departmental of Financial Services.  There may
be reasons for through examination of the recommendations and that may
take a little time.  But the delay of more than a year and that too on the
recommendations of the Group of Ministers on such a vital issue cannot be
justified by any yardsticks.  It was an avoidable delay and should not have
taken place leading to the non-finalisation of sources of funds for power
sector.
Reply of the Government
The interim recommendations of the Sub-Committee of Group of
Ministers was received in Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial
Services  on 26.2.2009. Since it involved regulatory issues the copy of the
interim recommendations of the Sub-Committee was sent by the Department
of Financial Services to RBI on 16.3.2009 for seeking their comments.

39
A meeting was held at level of Finance Secretary and RBI on 30.5.2009 and
comments of RBI were received on 3 interim recommendations of the
Sub-Committee in August, 2009.  Immediately, the comments of the Ministry
if Finance  on 3 interim recommendations were sent to Ministry of Power
on September 1, 2009. Remaining two interim recommendations relating to
exposure issues remained under examination in RBI and it took time in
submission of reply. It is mentioned that delay in submission of reply by the
Department of Financial Services on the interim recommendations of the
Sub-Committee was unintentional as it involved regulatory issues and required
through examination by RBI.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note with appreciation that a new section 80CCF has
been inserted in the Income Tax Act through the Finance Bill, 2010 to provide
for a deduction of Rs. 20,000/- for investment in infrastructure bonds to
be notified by the Central Government during the financial year 2010-11,
which would be over and above the existing tax exemption limit of
Rs. 1 lakh under the existing provisions of the Act.  The Committee endorse
the views expressed by the Department of Revenue that there is a need to
create further opportunities for attracting more investments in the
infrastructure sector and welcome the decision of the Ministry of Finance
to incentivize infrastructure specific investments by the general public in
long-term infrastructure bond to be notified.  The Committee have been given
to understand that such individual bonds will be notified by the Central
Government on an application made to Central Board of Direct Taxes
(ITA-Division) and on the recommendation of the Infrastructure Division of
the Department of Economic Affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that for the sake of utilizing the invested money for the sole benefit to
power sector, a certain sub limit, preferably in the range of Rs. 15,000/- to
Rs. 20,000/- be provided under Section 80CCF of the Income Tax Act
exclusively for the power sector alone, even by increasing the overall limit
of Rs. 20,000/- if required.

40
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes has notified vide Notification No. 48/
2010 [F.No.149/84/2010-SO(TPL)], dated 9.7.2010 for issuance of
infrastructure bonds under section 80CCF of Income Tax Act 1961.
Details are enclosed in Annexure-I.
The above bonds are not specific to power sector but applicable to
infrastructure in general.
Since PFC Ltd. is classified as Infrastructure Finance Company by RBI,
PFC can issue Infrastructure bonds.
Further action on the above recommendation is required to be taken
by Ministry of Finance.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
Reply of the Government
The issue of increasing the limit of savings under tax exemption
category was considered while framing the budget proposals. In order to
give relief to individual taxpayers, the Finance Act, 2010 has considerably
widened the tax slabs and the maximum marginal rate will now be applicable
to income beyond Rs. 8 lakhs instead of the earlier Rs. 5 lakhs. In addition,
to encourage savings and for funding infrastructure development the Finance
Act, 2010 has also introduced a tax deduction of Rs. 20,000/- under section
80CCF, over and above the existing limit of Rs. 1 lakh (under section 80C
of Income Tax Act) in respect of tax deduction on savings will be available
on investment in long-term infrastructure bonds during the current financial
year 2010-11.
Moreover, given the average rate of savings by households, any increase
in the saving limit of rupees one lakh allowed under section 80CCF will
essentially benefit taxpayers in the higher income slabs only. The existing
provisions of section 80C and 80CCF are essentially designed on the basis
of the 'Exempt Exempt-Exempt' (EEE) method of taxation of savings. This
method promotes gross savings by not penalising dis-savings. As a result,

these provisions do not encourage  savings in any manner. They merely
encourage diversion of savings into specified financial instruments. This
problem will be further aggravated if the limits are increased. Further, any
enhancement of the present savings limits will lead to substantial loss of
revenue. Therefore, in view of these reasons and the hike in tax slabs and
investment limit, there is no case for enhancing the limit for savings under
tax exemption categories.
Regarding the proposal for granting 'sole benefit' to power sector, it
may be reiterated that the proceeds from the infrastructure bonds issued
u/s 80CCF are to be utilized towards 'infrastructure lending' as defined by
the RBI Guidelines, which includes lending for generation or generation and
distribution of power, and transmission or distribution of power by laying
a network of new transmission or distribution lines. Moreover, granting such
special incentives to a particular sector may lead to similar demands from
other sector too, which may not be desirable. Therefore, a direct budgeting
approach is preferable to tax incentive mode of subsidy.
In the light of the above, the given recommendation is not acceptable,
hence no action required to be taken at the level of Department of Revenue.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) OM
No.149/55/2010-SO (TPL),  Dated 9.11.2010]
41

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para  No. 2.2)
The Committee are dismayed to note that there has been mismatch
between the target set and achieved regarding the capacity addition during
the 9th and 10th Plan period.  Similarly, the budgetary estimates and the actual
expenditure during the corresponding period are also poles apart as only
19015 MW with an expenditure of Rs. 1,10,338 crore against the target of
40,245 MW with an estimate of Rs. 1,24,526 crore was achieved during
the 9th Plan. Similarly, Rs. 1,81,518 was spent on 21,180 MW generation
against the estimate of Rs. 2,70,276 crore for the target of 41,110 MW in
the 10th Plan. First, there is no logical co-relation between the targets of
the two plan periods and the estimated expenditure appropriated to achieve
the targets as the difference in target of 9th and 10th Plan is less than 1000 MW
whereas, the difference in expenditure is of more than Rs. 1.45 lakh crore.
For the 11th Plan an ambitious targets of Rs. 78,700 MW was set with an
approximate of more than Rs.10 lakh crores. The Committee have not gone
into the micro level of the expenditure, yet they find that the planning
regarding capacity addition vis-à-vis proposed finding provisions have been
grossly unrealistic. Past performances should be the benchmark for setting
any target of any future planning as the factors responsible for less
achievement of the target can be taken care of while formulating the next
plan. This cardinal principle has been overlooked while setting the target for
11th Plan. The elementary work of managing finances has not been diligently
dealt with while setting the target. Less than two years remain in the
completion of the 11th Plan and there is a yawning deficit of more than
Rs. 4 lakh crore to achieve the target. The management of finances appears
42

to be an insurmountable obstacle in taking forward power projects, as the
Government is yet to expedite creation of National Electricity Fund which
would bridge the gap between requirement of funds and its availability.  As
the now the situation is so intricate that even if the resources are arranged,
it would be impossible to achieve the physical targets of Plan as there is
considerable gestation period in completing the power projects.  In the mid-
term appraisal, the target has been revised (reduced) to 62,000 MW from
78,700 MW and here also the Government has only high level; of expectations
and not sure with regard to it accomplishment. The major head starving for
fund is the Distribution and the need is to the tune of Rs. 2,02,083 crore,
Rs. 1,60,557 crore is required for the generation. Transmission also requires
and amount of Rs. 49,245 crore. Thus, it amply demonstrates that
transmission and distribution are the areas which require immediate and
positive of all the stakeholders.  The objective of bringing reduction in T&D
losses from the present level of 9% to international levels by 2012 can be
achieved only when required funds are available top this vital area. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that necessary spade work,
taking into account the past experiences, should be ensured before embarking
on a new initiatives for capacity addition and other projects in transmission/
distribution and social sector schemes like Rajeev Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).  Inter-se-priority among the various heads/
stages of the capacity addition resulting in the benefit to the end-users should
also be decided keeping in view the stakes from all the concerned vis-à-vis
their obligation in the achievement of the target.  Thereafter, a well thought
out realistic implementable strategy be drawn ensuring the management of
the finances and other base work essential for setting up of power projects
and its essential arms like transmission and distributing network.
Reply of the Government
As per the mid term appraisal of the XI Plan the capacity addition target
of 62,374 MW for 11th Plan has been fixed by Planning Commission
considering the preparedness of the projects for likely commissioning during
11th Plan.  While fixing up the target for 11th Plan, main reason for slippages
43

of projects during previous plans were analyzed in details and taken care while
selecting the projects for 11th Plan. Besides a careful selection of projects
feasible during 11th Plan, a well thought out Strategy has been evolved
towards implementation of these projects as per their schedule. The coming
up of a project in time is dependant on a number of factors. Major Issues
identified for timely Implementation of project during 11th Plan and beyond
were as follows:
• Manufacturing Capability of Main Plant and Balance of Plant
Equipment to be commensurate with capacity addition.
• Adequate Construction and Erection Agencies
• Adequate Construction Machinery
• Availability of Adequate Fuel and  Key materials
• Adequate Transportation facilities for Equipment and Fuel
• Manpower development including training facilities
• Slow process of decision making and cumbersome payment
procedure adopted by Utilities.
It may be mentioned that as against the above target, a capacity of
29361 MW has been commissioned till November 20, 2010 in the XIth Plan.
As far as funding gap of about Rs. 4 lakh crore is concerned, the
Sub-Committee has submitted the Report and likely to be adopted by GoM
on 29.10.2010.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraphs  9&10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power had submitted 24 Direct
Tax proposals and 17 Indirect Tax proposal to the Ministry of Finance
44

(Departmental of Revenue) for amendment in the Income Tax Act to
encourage mobilizing requisite funds for power sector.  With the initiative
taken by the Committee, a quick response from the Department of Revenue
could be obtained and the Committee welcome the decision taken by the
Department of Revenue to exempt transmission of electricity from service
tax.  At the same time, the committee are not convinced with the comments
of the Department of Revenue on the issue of tax free bonds that employing
fiscal instruments, 'especially tax concessions for mobilizing resources for
project financing  can be distortive and might instigate extending the argument
to project financing in general'.  Notwithstanding the reported adverse impact
of the tax concessions as assessed by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee
are of the considered opinion that in any developing economy,  the
Government has to set priorities to nurture the key infrastructure sectors
including the power sector as the development of power sector would lead
to increase in overall economic activities. The Committee feel that by boosting
power generation, transmission and distribution to ensure uninterrupted
power supply in the country, the overall individual and economic output will
grow emphatically leading to increased revenue collection.  The Committee
also feel that interest free bonds would attract investment from small saving
sector, which has huge potential and is otherwise lying un-invested, eg. from
senior citizens and salaried employees of both public and private sector.
Through such incentives, huge resources can be mobilized as the people have
confidence in Government owned public sector institutions.  Besides, raising
of funds from issue of tax free bonds will ultimately be in favour of the project
by reducing the cost of capital.  In the light of the forgoing and in view
of the huge investment required in the power sector, the committee
recommend that the Ministry of Finance should reconsider their decision
and allow PFC and REC to issue tax free bonds to raise funds, as a special
case.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is not acceptable. In this regard
a considered policy decision has been taken involving Department of
45

Revenue, Department of Economic Affairs and Economic Advisor to
Finance Minister. The considered opinion of the Ministry of finance has
been that the fiscal instruments should not be used as an instrument to
increase project viability. The reasons for discouraging tax free bonds are
as under:
(a) The resources of the country are limited so the available liquidity
in the market. The issuance of tax free bonds by different
governmental agencies tend to crowd out the private sector's
requirement for long term funds. It also affects the development
of a vibrant corporate bond market where interest rates are
determined by demand and supply. Tax free bonds thus tend to
distort the actual market determined rates of interest and lead to
competing demands for issue of such bonds by other entities as
well. It violates the principle of horizontal equity among various
entities seeking funds for financing their projects.
(b) There is also a revenue loss of roughly Rs. 24 crores annually
for every Rs. 1000 crores of bond issue (This is based on the
assumption of an average tax rate of 30% on a bond with a pre-
tax interest rate of *%).
2. In the light of the above, the given recommendation is not
acceptable, hence no action required to be taken at the level of Department
of Revenue.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) OM
No. 149/55/2010-SO (TPL), Dated 9.11.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee are of the view that the requirement of infrastructure
sector being very large, it is the Government which is expected to invest
46

in this sector, whereas comparative investment by private sector is minimal
and is profit driven.  It would, therefore, be prudent on the part of the
Government to channelize the huge unutilized money available in the market
to enrich and strengthen our infrastructure sector, especially the power
sector.  The Committee understand that there is ample money available with
the Non-Resident Indians and feel that given an opportunity to deposit their
money in power sector either as fixed deposits or as shareholders by
exempting the interest from being taxed, there would be a considerable
amount available with the Government to bridge the funding gap in power
sector in coming years. The loss of revenue to the Government by way of
exempting the interest from being taxed would be compensated in later years
by utilizing the deposited money for improving the power sector which will
act as a catalyst for rapid economic development spinning of huge revenues
to the Government.  Moreover to the Committee view that if the infrastructure
financing is allowed by the Government on the suggested pattern, there would
be surplus funds available with the Banks and other Financial Institutions
which would not allowed the interest rate to increase, because demand and
requirement of funds by the other sectors both in Public and Private domain
is not as large as in infrastructure sector. The Committee also feel
that giving a tax subsidy to individuals towards investment in infrastructure
sector viz. the power sector would be balance by  availability of abundant
fund for power sector and other infrastructure projects leading to increase
economic activities and increase in demand and increasing the capacity of
low net worth individuals to pay taxes.  Also, the existing window of
viability of gap funding through Grants and Budgetary Support may result
into delays  in financial closure of such projects and even Budgetary Support
may also result in an inflationary trend. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a suitable methodology be worked out for providing
proper opportunity to both Resident and Non-Resident Indians for investment
in power sector through tax free fixed deposits and other mode of
investments.
47

48
Reply of the Government
The Recommendation of the committee is not acceptable due the
following reasons:—
(i) The interest payable on moneys borrowed by an Industrial
Undertaking in India, in foreign currency from sources outside
India under a loan agreement approved by the Central Government
before 1st June, 2001, is exempt from taxation as per section 10
(15) (iv)(f) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
(ii) Further section 10(15)(iv)(fa) of the Income-tax Act, 1961
already provides exemption for interest income earned by a
non-resident or a person who is not an ordinarily resident on
foreign currency deposits in Schedule Banks under specified
conditions.
(iii) There is no specific data available regarding loss of revenue to
the exchequer due to this exemption. The rationale for withdrawal
of this exemption was that there was no need to continue with
a withholding tax exemption when India entered in to DTAAs with
all major economies of the world. The DTAAs generally provide
for taxation of interest income at a fixed rate. The income earned
by a foreign lender is taxable in the hands of the lender in the
foreign country and lender gets credit for any tax withheld on
such income by the borrower in India. Thus in effect the
exemption of withholding tax in India shifts the amount of tax
payment on interest income from India to a foreign country and
leads to loss of revenue to India. It was also considered
economically unjustifiable to subsidies the borrowings of
private companies as this encourages borrowing from abroad
leading to India's indebtedness. Further the current policy of
the Government is to discourage incentives in a moderate tax
regime.

49
2. In the light of the above, the given recommendation is not
acceptable, hence no action required to be taken at the level of Department
of Revenue.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) OM
No. 149/55/2010-SO (TPL), Dated 9.11.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that creation of the National Electricity Fund (NEF)
was announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget speech of 2008-09
to provide funds to the States and power utilities for improving transmission
and distribution network so as to minimize the transmission losses.
According to the Ministry of Power, the objective of the scheme is to offer
an interest subsidy linked to substantive transmission and distribution reforms
at the State level. The Committee have been informed that for the
disbursement target of Rs. 50,000 crore during the 11th Plan period, an
interest subsidy of Rs. 18,438 crore has been envisaged spreading over a
period of 14 years.  The Committee are dismayed to note the reduction in
the original target of Rs. 2,02,500 crore for disbursement with a separate
component of interest subsidiary of Rs. 82,266 crore on it.  This will certainly
have an adverse impact on the achievement of the target. The Committee
also note that no specific plan outlay has been made during the 11th Plan
for this purpose and plan allocation of required interest subsidy to mobilize
funds for National Electricity Funds is yet to be made.  It has been brought
to the notice of the Committee that the proposals of the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) has since been revised before submitting the same to the
Government for approval to include the change that the interest subsidy
scheme would be extended to loans from banking sector and other financial
institutions also apart from those taken from PFC and REC and the interest
subsidy scheme initially to be made applicable to distribution work only.  It
has also been added that only non R-APDRP projects and schemes would

50
be eligible under the interest subsidy scheme.  The scrutiny reveals that the
size of the subsidy element consequently got reduced to Rs. 227.64 crore
for the Annual Plan of 2010-11.  Against this backdrop, the Committee are
concerned that the very objective and the scope of the scheme is being diluted
even before the creation of the NEF.  Since the scheme is target oriented,
the Committee recommend that the modalities of the scheme and detailed
plan of its implementation may be worked out and got finalized at the earliest
so that the funding of Transmission and Distribution sector which constitute
about 60 per cent of the funding gap may not suffer.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee noted for implementation. The
EFC meeting has been held on 18-10-2010.  Based on its recommendations,
Cabinet Note will be submitted for approval, at the earliest.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 4.1.2011]
Updated Reply of the Government
A Committee was set up on 29.04.2008 under Member (Power),
Planning Commission to consider various aspects of establishing the NEF.
The Committee estimated funding gap under State T&D about Rs. 3 lakh
crore and debt requirement for last 3 years of the XIth Plan at about
Rs. 2.02 lakh crore.
The Concept Note as prepared by the Committee, recommended
mobilization of resources to meet the funding gap by issue of tax free bonds,
increasing LIC exposure limit, and lending from Asian Development Bank
(ADB)/World Bank. The Note envisaged to provide loans from Power Finance
Corporation Ltd. (PFC) and Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd. (REC) to
the States for improving T&D infrastructure. The Note assesses the interest
subsidy requirement of 82266 crore over 15 years with 3 years moratorium
in repayment of principal.
An EFC memo was circulated on 9.9.2009 based on the concept note.
A meeting was taken by Secretary (Planning Commission) on 25th January,

2010 to resolve certain issues flagged by the appraising agencies. It was
decided in the meeting that interest subsidy should be available only for
distribution schemes and that interest subsidy should be extended to loans
from other FIs in addition to PFC/REC and the scheme should be extended
to non-APDRP projects and all rural areas (Non-RGGVY) to avoid any
duplication.
After following the procedure and detailed discussions, it was felt that
interest subsidy aggregating Rs. 8466 crore, would be adequate for a total
loan disbursement amounting to Rs. 25,000 crore for distribution schemes
during the years 2011-12 and 2012-13, spread over 14 years.
A draft CCEA note is under finalization for circulation based on the
above decision. FM's approval has since been obtained on the same.
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No.7/22/2009 – PF Desk, Dated 31.5.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
51

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AW AITED
-NIL-
52
  N EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
29 August , 2011 Chairman,
7 Bhadrapada , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

ANNEXURE I
(Chapter III, Reply to the Recommendation Sl. No. 12)
Section 80CCF of the Income-tax Act, 1961 — Deduction — In respect
of subscription to long-term infrastructure bonds — Notified long-term
infrastructure bond
Definition
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 80CCF of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the Central Government hereby specifies bonds,
subject to the following conditions, as long-term infrastructure bonds for the
purposes of the said section namely:—
Name of the bond
The name of the bond shall be "Long-Term Infrastructure Bond".
Issuer of the bond
The bond shall be issued by:—
(i) Industrial Finance Corporation of India;
(ii) Life Insurance Corporation of India;
(iii) Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited;
(iv) a Non-Banking Finance Company classified as an Infrastructure
Finance Company by the Reserve Bank of India;
Who can Invest
An Individual or HUF can invest in these new infrastructure Bonds upto
Rs. 20000/- in a Financial year.
Limit on issuance
(i) The bond will be issued during financial year 2010-11;
(ii) the volume of issuance during the financial year shall be restricted to
twenty-five per cent of the incremental infrastructure investments made
by the issuer during the financial year 2009-10;
53

54
(iii) 'Investment' for the purposes of this limit include loans, bonds, other
forms of debt, quasi-equity, preference equity and equity.
Tenure of the bond.
(i) a minimum period of ten years;
(ii) the minimum lock-in period for an investor shall be five years;
(iii) after the lock in, the investor may exit either through the secondary
market or through a buyback facility, specified by the issuer in the issue
document at the time of issue;
(iv) the bond shall also be allowed as pledge or lien or hypothecation for
obtaining loans from Scheduled Commercial Banks, after the said lock-
in period;
(v) permanent Account Number (PAN) to be furnished — It shall be
mandatory for the subscribers to furnish there PAN to the issuer;
(vi) yield of the bond — The yield of the bond shall not exceed the yield
on Government securities of corresponding residual maturity, as
reported by the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives
Association (FIMMDA) of India, as on the last working day of the
month immediately preceding the month of the issue of the bond;
(vii) end-use of proceeds and reporting or monitoring mechanism;
(viii) the proceeds shall be utilizes towards 'infrastructure lending' as defined
by the Reserve Bank of India in the Guidelines : issued by it;
(ix)  the end-use shall be duly reported in the Annual Reports and other
reports submitted by the issuer to the Regulatory Authority concerned,
and specifically certified by the Statutory Auditor of the issuer;
(x) the issuer shall also file these alongwith term sheets to the Infrastructure
Division, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance within
three months from the end of financial year.

55
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2010-11) HELD ON 19TH MAY , 2011 IN ROOM
NO. ‘G-074’ PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING , NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal V ora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Sundar Das
3. Shri Chandrakant Bhaurao Khaire
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
6. Shri M.B. Rajesh
7. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
9. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
11. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
13. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary

56
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
V ora, a Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on:
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 9th Report
on “Funding of Power Projects”.
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
11th Report on “Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”.
4. The Committee discussed the draft Reports on both the subjects
and the Action Taken Replies of the concerned Ministries in detail. On the
subject “Funding of Power Projects”, the Committee were not satisfied with
the replies furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
particularly on the issues of allowing tax free bonds for power sector and
tax exemption for Interest income on the investments in power sector. The
Committee decided to call the representatives of the Department of Revenue
and the Ministry of Power for seeking clarifications on actions taken by the
Government on the recommendations of the Committee.
5 . *** **
*** **
*** **
The Committee then adjourned.

57
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2010-11) HELD ON 3RD JUNE, 2011 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P.C. Chacko
3. Shri Ram Sundar Das
4. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
9. Shri M.B. Rajesh
10. Shri Ganesh Singh
11. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Govindrao Adik
13. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
14. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
15. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
16. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
17. Shri Mohammad Shafi
18. Shri Motilal V ora (Presided the meeting in absence of the Chairman)
19. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav

58
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
List of Witnesses
MINISTRY OF POWER
Sl.No.  Name  Designation
1 2  3
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar Secretary (Power)
2. Shri G.B. Pradhan Spl. Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Lavasa Addl. Secretary
4. Shri Sudhir Kumar Joint Secretary
5. Dr. M. Ravi Kanth Joint Secretary
6. Shri Devender Singh Joint Secretary
7. Shri I.C.P. Keshari Joint Secretary
8. Shri Rakesh Jain Joint Secretary & FA
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY
1. Shri Gurdial Singh Chairperson, CEA
2. Dr. Jaipal Singh Member, CEA
3. Shri A.S. Bakshi Member, CEA
PSUs, AUTONOMOUS BODIES, STATUTORY BODIES, ETC.
1. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury CMD, NTPC
2. Shri A.B.L. Srivastava CMD, NHPC
3. Shri S.K. Chaturvedi CMD, Powergrid

59
1 2  3
4. Shri H.D. Khunteta CMD, REC
5. Shri R. Nagarajan Director(Fin.), PFC
6. Shri R.P. Singh CMD, SJVNL
7. Shri R.S.T. Sai CMD, THDC
8. Shri I.P. Barooah CMD, NEEPCO
9. Shri Devender Singh Chairman, DVC
10. Shri A.B. Agrawal Chairman, BBMB
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Shri Sunil Mitra Secretary (Finance/Revenue)
2. Shri M.C. Josh Member & Spl. Secretary, CBDT
3. Shri Ashutosh Dikshit JS, CBDT
4. Shri Sunil Gupta JS, CBDT
5. Shri Vivek Johri JS, CBEC
6. Ms. Ravneet Kaur JS, DFS
7. Shri Rajesh Khullar JS, DEA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance to the sitting of the Committee
and apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker. The Chairman briefly explained that the 9th Report
of the Committee on “Funding of Power Projects” pertaining to both the
Ministries was presented to the Parliament on 10th August, 2010. The
Committee, after receiving the Action Taken Replies from the Government,
scrutinized them and found the same unsatisfactory, particularly on the issues
relating to allowing tax free bonds for power sector and on exemption for
interest income to the investments in power sector.

60
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the
Ministry of Finance apprised the Committee of the updates of the action taken
by them on the recommendations of the Committee in their aforementioned
Report. The Revenue Secretary, in particular, regretted for their previous
replies and assured the Committee to reconsider the concerned recommen-
dations of the Committee and intimate fresh action taken in due course.
4. The Committee sought clarifications on various other issues
including final action on the proposals of the Group of Ministers on financial
issues of power sector and also on creation of the National Electricity fund
by the Ministry of Power. The Committee suggested both the Ministries to
underline the importance of the issue and draw concrete action plan to ensure
availability of resources for the power sector.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2010-11) HELD ON 24TH AUGUST, 2011 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri V .P. Singh Badnore — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3. Shri Syed Shahanawaz Hussain
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
6. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
7. Shri Ganesh Singh
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Govindrao Adik
10. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
11. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
12. Shri Motilal V ora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
61

62
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri V.P.
Singh Badnore, MP and a Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman
for the sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report
on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
Ninth Report on “Funding of Power Projects”.
5. The Committee, adopted the draft Action Taken Report on the
recommendations contained in the 9th Report without any amendment. The
Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
6 . *** **
*** **
*** **
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX IV
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
NINTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 14
Total: 09
Percentage 60%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Sl. Nos. 5 and 12
Total: 02
Percentage 13.33%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2, 10, 11 and 15
Total: 04
Percentage 26.67%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Total: Nil
Percentage 0%
63

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”