STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”]
17
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Sravana, 1933 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2010-11)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17th August, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th August, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Sravana, 1933 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


COE No. 207
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
12
29
30
37
38
40
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2010-2011) .............................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report.....................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government....................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies......................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and require reiteration..........................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
19th May, 2011.......................................................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
11th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................
PAGE
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2010-2011)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Mohammad Azharuddin
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
4. Shri P.C. Chacko
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar
@
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain*
9. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire**
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
11. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
12. Shri Jagdambika Pal
13. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
14. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
15. Shri M.B. Rajesh
16. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao
17. Dr. K.S. Rao#
18. Shri Ganesh Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
(iii)
@
Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
*Nominated w.e.f. 18th October, 2010 vice Shri Arjun Munda.
**Nominated w.e.f. 27th September, 2010 vice Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede.
#Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th January, 2011.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia***
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi***
30. Shri Motilal V ora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Committee Officer
(iv)
***Nominated w.e.f. 21st September, 2010.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been authorized
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this
17th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in 11th Report of the Standing Committee on Energy
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”.
2. The 11th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 21st August
2010 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on
6th December, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 19th May, 2011.
4. An Analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 11th Report of the Committee is given at
Appendix-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
body of the Report.
(v)
 N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADA V,
25 July , 2011 Chairman,
3 Sravana , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Renewable Energy for
Rural Applications’.
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st August,
2010 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report
contained 09 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been examined and categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8 and 9
      Total–06
                           Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Nil
      Total–00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 3, 4 and 6
Total–03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
                           Total–00
Chapter–V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of the Report may be
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation
of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that require
reiteration or merit comments.
A. REMOTE VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME (RVEP)
(Recommendation Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
6. The Committee in their 11th Report had pointed out the low
achievement during the first three years of the 11th plan under RVE
Programme, where  only 1280, 325 and 700 villages and hamlets were
electrified in 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto 31st October, 2009)
against the targets of 2000, 1500 and 1500 villages respectively during these
three years.The Committee were not satisfied with the pace of implementation
and had raised doubts over the accomplishment of the piled up unattained
targets in the remaining period of the 11th Five Year Plan. Also the Committee
were not convinced with the constraints put forward by the Ministry in
implementation of the RVE Programme and had observed that RVEP being
an exclusive MNRE Programme funded by their budget, the administrative
Ministry is duty bound to ensure that the issues are addressed from all
angles in coordination will all concerned in order to meet the set targets in
a time bound manner. While the Committee acknowledged the existence of
a high level Coordination Committee at Central level under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, MNRE had recommended establishment of local Committees
at State levels or regional levels well versed with the local problems and their
solutions to ensure hassle-free implementation of schemes at ground level.

3
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy have stated:—
“In so far as the observation of the Committee with regard to
achievement of target in RVE is concerned, it is clarified that in the
11th Plan, 4400 Villages & Hamlets have been sanctioned. In addition
2824 Villages & Hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier, excluding
252 Villages & Hamlets which were dropped, are ongoing. Thus all
together in 11th Plan 7224 Villages & Hamlets are sanctioned/ongoing
as on 31st October, 2010.  Out of these 7224 Villages & Hamlets,
220 Villages & Hamlets have been dropped due to various reasons,
2918 Villages & Hamlets have been completed, and the remaining are
on-going and would be completed with in the plan period.
The Ministry had earlier stated that the number of villages to be covered
is entirely dependent upon decisions of the State Government for the
villages to be covered under RGGVY or under RVE. Therefore, these
are not routine matters where the Ministry could take a decision.  Some
examples would make this clearer.  In December 2009, in principle
approval was given to Jharkhand for 257 villages. The State
Government was to give a certificate from REC that they are not
covered under RGGVY as well as submit the project proposals as
required based on field survey.  However, REC has finally cleared only
81 villages and the final DPR’s have only recently come.   In case of
Orissa initial list identified for coverage under the Programme was 1352,
however after numerous meetings and discussions with the State
Government in principal approval was given for 1091 villages.  Now
REC certification is coming for only 965 villages. Therefore, the
number of villages, which can actually be sanctioned, is dependent
entirely upon the State Government.  Once sanctioned, the implemen-
tation is also dependent entirely upon the State Government. The
Ministry is making all possible efforts to persuade the State Government
that all the villages which are not coming under RGGVY should be
proposed under this scheme and also that implementation be done
quickly.  Many meetings have been held including those chaired by the
Secretary in the concerned States as well as repeated reviews in the
Ministry where the State Governments and REC have been invited.  The

4
Coordination Committee meetings itself have been held 6 times during
the last year.
As regards the observation of the committee for State and local level
coordination, it is clarified that all the States have a mechanism in place
which enables them to coordinate with the multiple stake holders but
in keeping with the recommendations of the Committee the Ministry
is also advising the State to strengthen the coordination mechanism so
as to make the implementation of the RVE more effective.  There are
already village level committees which are trained to take care of the
day-to-day challenges that may arise after the implementation of the
programme.  The villages where the villagers are taking active interest
are the ones where RVE is successful.  The success of community
based programme like RVE depend on the active interest of the
beneficiary and participation and support of all stake holders.”
8. The MNRE in their action taken reply have clarified that in
the 11th plan, 4400 villages and hamlets have been sanctioned including
2824 villages and hamlets sanctioned earlier, a total of 7224 villages
and hamlets have been sanctioned/ongoing in 11th plan as on
31st October, 2010. The MNRE have further stated that out of these
7224 villages and hamlets, 220 have been dropped due to various
reasons, 2918 have been completed and the remaining are ongoing and
would be completed within the Plan period. With the information made
available by the Ministry, the Committee find that more than
4000 villages and hamlets are yet to be completed in the remaining
time period of about one year of the current Plan period which forms
about 56 percent  of the total 7224 villages and hamlets being
undertaken for electrification in the 11th Plan under RVEP. The
Committee do understand that the projects in the remaining villages
and hamlets may be in various stages of implementation and some of
them might be on the verge of completion too. Nevertheless, in the
absence of any concrete plan of action on the part of the Ministry, it
is difficult for the Committee to believe the claim of the Ministry to
accomplish the gigantic task in such a limited time available with them.
Further, the Committee hope that the problems enumerated by the
MNRE relating to finalization of villages and hamlets to be covered

5
under the RVEP are already over for the current Plan period and the
Ministry must be focusing on completing the already sanctioned as well
as ongoing projects as early as possible. The Committee also take note
of the efforts made by the Ministry in terms of holding meetings in
the concerned States and organizing meetings of the Central
Coordination Committee time and again. After analyzing the whole
related facts, the Committee recommend that the administrative and
functional bottlenecks in smooth implementation of the programme
may be tackled State-wise and a practical and pragmatic solution be
worked out in coordination with all concerned in order to meet the set
targets in a time bound manner.
The Committee had also recommended that apart from the high
level Coordination Committee at Central level, local Committees at
State levels or regional levels well versed with the local problems and
their solutions be established to ensure hassle-free implementation of
schemes at ground level. The Ministry in their action taken reply have
stated that all the States have a mechanism in place which enables them
to coordinate with the multiple stake holders and also there are already
village level committees which are trained to take care of the day-to-
day challenges that may arise after the implementation of the
programme. In view of the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry have informed that they are advising the  States to strengthen
the coordination mechanism so as to make the implementation of the
RVE more effective.  The Committee feel that the Ministry have not
taken their recommendation in its right perspective. In fact the idea
behind the Committee’s suggestion to set up State level and regional
level Committees was to establish effective link between the Centre
and the States and for that matter between the Centre and the regional
machinery for better coordination so that the pending issues, if any,
could be addressed with much promptness and in more practical
manner. The Ministry have rightly pointed out that the success of
community based programmes like RVE depends on the active interest
of the beneficiary and participation and support of all stakeholders. At
the same time it is the responsibility of MNRE (being the nodal
Ministry) to create requisite awareness and suitable environment in

6
favour of RVE Programme so that the active interest and participation
of the beneficiaries in general and all the stakeholders in particular
may be encouraged. Apart from the executive and monitoring wings
of the MNRE, the media wing can also play a big role in making the
programme popular at local level. The Committee emphasize that the
Ministry should aggressively advertise/create awareness among the
target beneficiary groups/stakeholders with immediate effect as also
expedite completion of the projects in remaining villages and hamlets
so that the targets are achieved for the 11th Plan Period.  The
Committee would like to be kept abreast of the steps being taken by
the Ministry and the progress made thereafter.
B. VILLAGE ENERGY SECURITY TEST PROJECTS (VESP)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
9. The Committee were informed that the Village Energy Security
Test Projects (VESP) was started during 10th Five Year Plan to meet the
total energy requirements of cooking, lighting and motive power of remote
villages, through locally available renewable energy resources, particularly
biomass, with active community participation. The Committee were surprised
to find that out of the initial proposal to cover 1000 villages with a total outlay
of Rs. 225 crores during 11th Plan as on 30th June, 2009,  only 17 villages
could be covered with financial expenditure of Rs. 6.99 crore under the
projects. The Committee were not convinced with the reasons advanced by
the Ministry with their poor performance on both physical and financial
fronts. While recognizing the fact that the conditions and resource availability
vary from area to area particularly in remote villages, the Committee had
suggested the Ministry to work out concrete and comprehensive plan of
action in advance in coordination with the local Government, implementing
agencies and local panchayats area-wise in a proactive manner and strive to
convert the objective and spirit behind the well thought out scheme of the
Government into reality. The Committee were also not happy with the
Ministry’s decision to concentrate only on the projects already taken up for
implementation and to take up new villages only under the RVE Programme.
The Committee had therefore, recommended the Ministry to critically review
their own performance, identify the shortcomings project-wise, work out

7
action plan for rest of the projects accordingly with well coordinated and
practical approach, keep strict vigil on the progress so as to accomplish the
remaining targets in a time bound manner.
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have informed as
under:—
“The observation of the Committee has been noted.
The VESP project was designed as a community based project for
electrification based on biomass. These were pilot project which were
initially taken up and it was felt that if the pilot projects and the mode
of implementation thereof succeed only then would the upscaling be
taken up.  The Ministry was aware that these projects required immense
amount of mobilization at the local level and only those remote villages
where mobilization and interest of the community for running this
project was of the nature that was needed for running these projects
successfully, were able to succeed. Since the nature of the VESP
scheme was proposed as a test case, only 109 test projects were
sanctioned.
The performance of the test projects under implementation is reviewed
by the Ministry through inspection visits to the test projects and review
meeting with concerned implementing agencies from time to time.
Keeping in view, the cancellation of 30 test projects of our 109 test
projects sanctioned so far, due to electrification of villages through grid
and non-availability of sustainable biomass resources, it has been
considered necessary to complete the ongoing 58 test projects in eight
States, namely, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal during the remaining
Plan period.  In view of the fact that the implementation of the projects
has been a challenge, the Ministry held a two day workshop to review
the projects and learn lessons from their implementation,  and further
sanction and implementation of these projects is not being considered.
However, based on the learning from VESP, the scheme for
implementing decentralized Biomass based rural electrification projects
has been revised and has been made more practical to enable
entrepreneurs to take up rural electrification using gasifier/combustion
based technology option.”

8
11. The Committee observe that the Village Energy Security
Test Projects (VESP) aim at meeting the total energy requirement such
as cooking, lighting and motive power of the remote villages and
hamlets, through locally available renewable energy resources,
particularly bio-mass in an efficient, reliable and cost-effective manner.
It is evident that the VES Test Projects go beyond electrification and
with full participation of the local communities, including women; these
projects create avenues for local employment, thus improving the
quality of life and leading to overall sustainable development.  In view
of the importance of these Test Projects, the Committee in their
11th Report had asked the Ministry to work in tandem with the State
Governments, implementing agencies and local bodies in a proactive
manner and to strive to convert the objective and spirit behind the well
thought out scheme of the Government into reality in order to lit the
life of the most needy people.  But the Committee were disappointed
to note that the initial proposal to cover 1000 villages under VESP with
total outlay of Rs. 225 crore during 11th Plan was reduced to 200 Test
Projects.  The Committee were further dismayed to note that the
Ministry had made a very dismal achievement of 17 villages with a total
expenditure of Rs. 6.99 crore upto 30th June, 2009.  In their action
taken reply the Ministry have informed that only 109 test projects were
sanctioned as the nature of the VESP scheme was proposed as a test
case.  The Ministry have further informed that out of 109 test projects
sanctioned so far, 30 test projects have been cancelled due to
electrification of village through grid and non-availability of sustainable
bio-mass resources and it has therefore been considered necessary to
complete the ongoing 58 Test Projects in eight States, namely, Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal during the remaining Plan Period.  The
Committee consider the decision of the Government to curtail the VES
Test Projects to nominal figures of 58 during the current plan as
unfortunate and apprehend that the targeted beneficiaries who were
the most needy people residing in the remotest areas and difficult
terrain would suffer the most with this decision of the Government.
The Government itself had conceived these Test Projects for very
remote villages and hamlets where electrification through conventional

9
methods were very unlikely. There are many villages and hamlets in
the country where grid connectivity and conventional electrification is
like a dream.   Through proper assessment and ground work at the
initial stage itself besides firm implementation, the Government would
not have gone for cancellation of Test Projects due to conventional
electrification and for that matter due to non-availability of sustainable
bio-mass resources. The Ministry itself in their reply have admitted
that based on the learning from VESP, the scheme for implementing
decentralized bio-mass based rural electrification projects has been
revised and has been made more practical to enable entrepreneurs to
take up rural electrification using gasifier/combution based technology
option.  The Committee would appreciate if the upgraded technology
is used to serve the objective of the VESP and to fulfill the unfinished
work of the Test Projects so that the energy requirements of the needy
people may be fulfilled in an environment friendly manner.  Further,
the Government should coordinate with local implementation authori-
ties and create awareness among the locals for the benefits that would
accrue such as electrification of their villages, employment generation
and general development etc.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry may identify their shortcomings based
on their experience in implementation of VESP, work out action plan
for future course of action and proceed to well coordinated implemen-
tation with strict vigil on the progress so as to accomplish the remaining
targets in a time bound manner.
C. SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
12. The Committee were concerned about the operation and
maintenance of the installed SPV systems mainly on the replacement of
batterins after 4-5 years of its installation which incidentally happens to be
the closing period of the maintenance contract.  The Committee found that
the beneficiaries who are common rural people are not even aware of the
general technical know-how of the SPV installation and even if they are
willing to do so, find it difficult to get the genuine batteries and other parts
and proper service at reasonable rates. The Committee were of the opinion

10
that if the installations are not made use for want of proper and timely
maintenance, the investment made in this regard would go in vain.  In order
to ensure that the efforts and money invested by the Ministry may serve the
purpose and optimum utilization of the SPV installations is made by the
beneficiaries, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to ensure the
availability of services of the same company for maintenance who can
provide best available quality of batteries and proper service at subsidized
rates.  The Committee had suggested to seek the help and cooperation of
Panchayats, Self Help Groups and NGO’s in running the systems.
13. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply informed as under:
“The Ministry recognizes the importance of timely maintenance support
for the projects. Therefore, in the guidelines for off-grid solar
applications, apart from the State nodal agencies, additional channels
of supply and after sales service have been allowed. The regional rural
banks have been involved in supporting solar lights in rural areas
through a combination of subsidy and/or loan. The suppliers of the solar
lights are required to initially open a supply and service center at least
at the district level to provide after sales service and spares. Without
a supply and after sales service network regional rural banks do not
sanction loans for projects prepared by that supplier.  The systems
integrators are also allowed to directly supply and maintain solar
systems. The Ministry has also issued performance specifications/
standards to facilitate availability of quality products and components.
Ministry is also organizing training programme. These measures are
expected to facilitate better upkeep of the systems in the field.
As suggested by the Committee, the Ministry has already involved
reputed NGOs such as the Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi and
Social Works and Research Centre, Tilonia in the implementation of off-
grid and decentralized SPV systems programme.  The Ministry has also
sanctioned a project to a public sector undertaking in Rajasthan for
installation of stand-alone SPV power plants on Panchayat Buildings.”
14. While acknowledging and appreciating the initiatives taken
by the Ministry and arrangements made available with regard to
upkeep and maintenance of the SPV installations across the country,

11
the Committee are still concerned about the reliability and availability
of the service providers in times of need. The Committee are well aware
of the difficulties being faced by the local people especially in remote
areas. They stress upon the Ministry to ensure assured the quality of
the SPV installations (especially of the batteries being used, that is,
it should be functional and durable)  supported by the efficiency and
effectiveness of the suppliers and service providers for prompt and
adequate maintenance and support service.  Further, the Committee
would like to emphasize that with the launching of Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission, more SPV systems are likely to be installed
in the country with consequent rise in demand of the services of
operation and maintenance in a larger scale.  In the absence of proper
and timely maintenance of the systems, all the efforts and investment
made under the ambitious solar mission would go in vain after few
years of its installation.  The Committee, therefore, urge that though
significant steps have been taken by the Ministry to ensure timely and
genuine maintenance support/after sales service network/availability
of quality products and component, yet a constant monitoring of these
provisions is equally important.  They would appreciate if effective
monitoring system is put in place at the earliest and the Committee
apprised of the same.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Serial No. 1)
The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
had proposed a plan outlay of Rs. 2,500 crore for its different rural energy
systems/programmes for the 11th Five Year Plan. 9,000 villages with an
outlay of Rs. 650 crore were to be electrified under Remote Village
Electrification (RVE) Programme, 1,000 Villages with an outlay of Rs.225 crore
under Village Energy Security (VES) Projects, 10,000 villages (both RVE and
VESP) for cooking/motive power  (non-electrical RE systems) with an
estimate of Rs. 900 crore, 2 mln cum. under bio-gas plants for cooking
applications with an outlay of Rs. 250 crore, 1 million square metre collector
area  with an estimate of Rs. 150 crore under the scheme Flat Plate Collectors
for Hot Water, Rs. 250 crore were earmarked under the scheme Decentralized
SPV systems/devices without any physical targets. Rs. 50 crore were
proposed for solar cookers/driers and 25 crore for concentrating solar
cookers. However, an amount of Rs. 1000 crore was approved as budget
outlay for the 11th Plan period without allocating the amount head-wise to
different programmes. As many as 4 programmes out of 8 were neither
allocated any fund nor any targets were fixed with regard to their
implementation. As far as the achievement of target (both physical and
financial) during the first three years of the 11th Plan is concerned, a lot
need to be done as only 2378 villages from out of the target of 5000 could
be electrified under RVE till 31st January, 2010 with an expenditure of
Rs. 272.50 crore. Similarly, the target under bio-gas was fixed to 3.78 lakh
plants for the first three years of the 11th Plan out of which only 2.54 lakh
plants could be completed with an expenditure of Rs. 171.51 crore against
BE of Rs. 162 crore. No target has been fixed under Decentralized SPV system

13
and 1.46 MWp could be achieved by spending Rs. 147.80 crore. The
Committee’s examination has revealed glaring disparity between the target
set and achieved under different programmes being run by the Ministry. The
sidelining of four important programmes by not initiating any action regarding
their implementation itself speaks about the poor and improper planning and
mixing up of the priority areas. Rural electrification and its associated benefits
should be the priority consideration of the Government. With a view to
facilitate rural electrification expeditiously without being dependent on regular
known sources of energy, non-conventional and renewable sources have
been identified to meet the situation. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that a careful, practicable and implementable strategy ensuring maximum
utilization of these sources should be devised to achieve the target within
the stipulated budgetary outlays.
Reply of the Government
The comments of the Committee have been noted.  The Committee
in its observation has mentioned that there were 4 programmes out of 8 that
were neither allocated any fund nor targets fixed with regard to their
implementation.  In this matter it is clarified that after the zero based budgeting
exercise was conducted by the Planning Commission it was decided that
MNRE would be allocated plan funds under 5 large umbrella programmes
viz. Grid interactive and distributed Renewable Power; Renewable Energy
for rural applications; Renewable Energy for Urban, Industrial and
Commercial Applications (UICA); Research, Design and Development in
Renewable Energy and Supporting programme since 2007-08.  In line with
the above, the Ministry worked with the Ministry of Finance to re-align the
budget lines accordingly.  Hence, though in the budget it seems that there
is no budgetary allocation for 4 programmes, this is so because those have
been merged with the following budget heads:
“In the umbrella programme of Renewable Energy for rural applications,
the Schemes of Bio-gas, RVE, VESP and common component for
cooking/motive power have been allocated a overall budget. The
schemes of flat plate collector for hot water, solar cooker/driers and

14
concentrating solar cookers have been allocated budget under the
umbrella programme of UICA and the decentralized SPV system/
devices schemes has been provided budget under Grid interactive and
distributed renewable power. Thus all the existing schemes of the
11th Plan have been now allocated budget as per the re-aligned
programmes approved by the Planning Commission. No Programme
has been sidelined.
In so far as the observation of the Committee that in the first three
years of the Plan only 2378 villages from out of the target of 5000
could be electrified under RVE till 31st January, 2010, the present status
has been explained in reply to paras 2.3 & 2.4.  As clarified there in,
2981 villages/hamlets have been completed as on 31.10.2010 and work
is ongoing in remaining villages/hamlets and would be completed within
the plan period.
It is further clarified that this is an ongoing process and the progress
of the scheme is dependent on the States for sending their proposal.
The Ministry has been actively pursuing with States to send
their proposals and regular review of the scheme is done at the highest
level.
In so far as the observation of the Committee in decentralized SPV
system is concerned, it is clarified that by March, 2010, the physical
achievement under this scheme was 24.33MW and against a total BE
of Rs. 218.25 crore for the years 2007-10, an expenditure of
Rs. 207.43 crore was incurred. However, now with the launching of
the Jawahar Lal Nehru National Solar Mission, an ambitious target for
solar off-grid applications (PV and thermal) has been set at 200 MW
till March, 2013. The guidelines for project preparation and approval
have already been notified and the Ministry is obtaining proposals in
project mode. It is expected that the Ministry would be in a position
to meet the target of sanctioning 32 MW in the current year under the
Mission, as several projects of 30.6 MW have already been sanctioned.

15
The observation of the Committee that rural electrification projects
should be given priority has been noted with full seriousness and sincere
efforts are being made to sanction projects for rural electrification and
lighting under the National Solar Mission.”
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that the achievement of targets is far from
satisfactory in all programmes being run by the Ministry under RVE. Even
50% of the villages earmarked under the target for first three years have not
been electrified and budget allocation of about 90% have been eaten up. Under
biogas, only 2.54 lakh have been established against the target of 3.78 lakh
plants while the expenditure on the same has overshot of the budgetary
estimate. This is nothing but ill conceived planning, poor implementation, lack
of coordination and will to implement the programme and achieve the target.
Despite this, there has been an increase of 45% in the budgetary allocation
of the Ministry for the rural renewable energy programmes during the Mid-
Term Appraisal. This itself speaks about the importance being attached to
the Rural Electricity Programmes by the Government. However, extreme
incoherence prevails in overall expenditure under various programmes being
implemented, targets set and achieved under each of the programmes and
direction with regard to efforts for attainment of the targets. With this attitude,
it will be practically impossible to do something meaningful within the
stipulated timeframe. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
while acknowledging the importance of the programme, a meticulous
planning fixing inter-se priority of the various programmes should be done
to make the programmes economically viable and practically implementable.
Budgetary estimates should also be assessed in such a fashion to avoid the
unnecessary locking of precious finances. Thereafter, focused efforts
should be made to achieve the targets fixed under each of the programme/
schemes of this arena to make the life better for the citizens living in
countryside.

16
Reply of the Government
2.3 In so far as the observation of the Committee with regard to
achievement of target in RVE is concerned, it is clarified that in the 11th Plan,
4400 Villages & Hamlets have been sanctioned. In addition 2824 Villages &
Hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier, excluding 252 Villages & Hamlets
which were dropped, are ongoing. Thus all together in 11th Plan 7224 Villages
& Hamlets are sanctioned/ongoing as on 31st October, 2010.  Out of these
7224 Villages & Hamlets, 220 Villages & Hamlets have been dropped due
to various reasons, 2918 Villages & Hamlets have been completed, and the
remaining are on-going and would be completed with in the plan period.  The
Ministry has been urging the States to complete the ongoing projects as early
as possible.  Further the projects sanctioned in a financial year may not be
completed in the same year as the process involves containing state matching
share, tendering, procurement and installation. Since the Ministry releases
70% of the CFA along with the sanction, it may happen that more funds
are spent in a particular year although the completion figures do not
correspond. Similarly, in another year, more projects, which were taken up
in the previous year, may be completed although they would require only
30% funds. It is further clarified that this is an ongoing process and the
progress of the scheme is dependent on the States for sending their proposal.
The Ministry has been actively pursuing with States to send their proposals
and regular review of the schemes is done at the highest level
During the first 3 years of the 11th Plan 3.17 lakh No. of family
type biogas plants were installed against a target of 3.78 lakh. Thus, the
achievement of target in bio-gas programme has been little lower. One
of the reasons was that CFA had not been revised for the last 5 years.
The Ministry then took requisite steps to get a new scheme for Biogas
approved by the competent authority which has made the CFA more
attractive and the scheme more practical.  It is hoped that the impact
of the revision will be seen in the current and next financial year. It will
be the effort of the Ministry to try reach the revised MTA target of 6.47
lakh plants by the end of the XIth plan. Both these programmes are also

17
fully dependent upon the action taken by the States. The Ministry is taking
all action on its part and there is no lack of will or efforts as far as
Ministry is concerned.  The expenditure of biogas programme during first
three years of the 11th Plan is about 12% higher than the BE outlay.
This much variation is normal and is due to settlement of accounts for
earlier years also. There is no incoherence in overall expenditure.  The
funds for biogas programme are released on the basis of receipt of
Utilization Certificate (UCs) of previous years.  The UCs for 2008-09 and
2009-10 have been received from most of the States and first installment
for the current year has been released.  The Ministry is closely pursuing
with a few States who have not submitted UCs and settled their accounts.
There is thus no locking of precious finances.
The observation of the Committee that due importance should be given
to the programme of Renewable Energy applications for rural areas is noted
with seriousness and sincere efforts are being made to provide the necessary
focus to this area during the remaining period of the Plan.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 5)
Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) Technology is used to convert sunlight into
electricity. As abundant solar radiation is available in the entire country, the
Committee take it as the most useful and futuristic technology and thus
reducing our dependence on fossil fuel and encouraging the use of
renewable energy. Launching the new solar mission by the Government
shows that the Government is not only aware of the importance and
usefulness of the SPV technology in India but also has taken the bold and
much needed initiative to convert an ambitious target of 20,000 MW grid
solar power, 2000 MW off-grid capacity including 20 million solar lighting
systems by 2022 into reality. The Committee trust that the Government
must have analysed the daunting task ahead in implementation of solar
energy projects and accomplishing the ambitious targets and are geered up
to work with requisite force, zeal, meticulous planning and tight monitoring.

18
The Committee find that the performance of the Government so far with
regard to SPV programmes has not been encouraging both in setting the
targets and making efforts in achieving the same. During the 11th Five Year
Plan itself, BE/RE was Rs. 52.50/60.75 crore and actual expenditure was
Rs. 55.35 crore in 2007-08. While in the year 2008-09, it was Rs. 87.25/
67.35 crore and actual expenditure was Rs. 62.45 crore. The target during
the year 2007-08 was 4.21 MWp and 2008-09 4.4 MWp while the
achievement was 3.56 MWp and 2.59 MWp respectively for these two
years under various SPV Systems. This itself speaks volumes about the
performance and planning of the Ministry. Above all, the Committee are
surprised to note that the Ministry have not fixed any system-wise physical
targets during 2009-10 showing project mode of implementation and have
spent a poor sum of Rs. 7 crore during the first quarter of 2009-10 against
the BE of Rs. 98 crore for the year. Also the Committee do not find any
notable performance in sanctions as well as actual implementation of
different solar energy programmes like solar home lighting systems, street
lighting systems, solar lantens and stand alone solar power plants in various
States and observe that a lot of work has to be done in many States like
in Uttar Pradesh where only 450 street lighting systems have been installed
whereas the sanctioned number was as many as 2,361 in 2009-10. Another
disquieting feature about this project is that the aggregate SPV capacity
under  off-grid systems and power plants installed during 2009-10 is
reported to be about 3.06 MW while those sanctioned during the year is
about 6.50 MWp. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry fix targets even in project mode and start a special drive to
complete the backlogs and also to take up new projects for speedy
implementation in time-bound manner with special attention to rural SPV
programmes where the people are more needy as compared to their urban
counterparts.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India has launched Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar
Mission (JNNSM) in January, 2010, with a target by 2022 AD of 20,000
MW grid solar power based on solar thermal power generating systems and

19
solar photovoltaic (SPV) technologies, 2000 MW of off-grid capacity
including 20 million solar lighting systems and 20 million sq.m. solar thermal
collector area. Government has also approved the implementation of the first
phase of the Mission (up to 2013) and the target to set up 1,100 MW grid
connected solar plants including 100 MW of roof top and small solar plants
and 200 MW capacity equivalent off-grid solar applications and 7 million
sq.m. solar thermal collector area in the first phase of the Mission, till
2012-13.
In view of the rapid scale up envisaged in the Mission, in the first phase
of the Mission, consolidation of the on-going efforts on harnessing the solar
energy applications like water heaters and solar lights and promoting other
off-grid systems to reach the energy deficient areas, reduce diesel and
kerosene consumption etc. are thrust areas.
The guidelines for supporting off-grid projects were released on
16th June, 2010. The guidelines provide for 30% capital subsidy and/or loan
at 5% annual interest rate. In addition to the Government agencies, Banks,
system integrators and renewable energy companies have also been allowed
to implement the projects. Regional Rural Banks will be supported through
refinancing. The private sector projects will be funded on reimbursement
basis. Consequent to approval of the Mission, the requirement of funds for
the off-grid solar projects was also reviewed. Based on the likely releases
to the implementing agencies, the requirement of funds during 2010-11 was
estimated as Rs. 250 crores. An amount of Rs. 172 crores has been spent
so far. However, this requirement is likely to increase in 2011-12.  For the
current financial year the target was accordingly set as 32 MW. Projects of
about 31 MW have been sanctioned by mid November, 2010. About
12 months time period is given for completion of projects, therefore, the
capacity of projects sanctioned in an year will be in excess of projects
completed during the year. In the previous year also for this reason the actual
installed capacity reported is lower than the capacity of projects sanctioned
by the Ministry. Ministry is regularly organizing meetings with the State
agencies, banks and the manufacturers to ensure timely completion of the
projects.

20
It may be seen that during 2009-10 the performance under the solar
PV programme improved over the previous years. A total of 1,03,058 Solar
Lanterns,  92,478 Solar Home Lighting Systems; 40,017 Street Lights;
113 Solar Water Pumping Systems; and- 617.11 kWp  capacity of stand alone
SPV power plants and 8.15 MWp capacity of Grid connected SPV Plants,
with  aggregate capacity of 16.39 MWp were installed during the year. In
U.P. against the sanctioned number of 2361 street lighting in 2009-10,
1978 nos. have been installed upto 31.10.2010. During the year the actual
expenditure was Rs. 89.63 crores.
Grid connected solar power generation is a new application in the
country and so far a limited capacity has been set up, therefore, the annual
targets and the requirement of funds have been set to gradually achieve 1,100
MW capacity by March, 2013. The first batch of grid solar power projects
of about 200 MW capacity is to be allocated during 2010-11. The guidelines
for the selection of projects have been announced during June/July, 2010.
The photovoltaic grid power projects take about 12 months time for
completion and the solar thermal projects are allowed time up to 28 months.
Therefore, the requirement of funds has also been reviewed and accordingly
kept as Rs. 30 crores for 2010-11. The following is the status of allocation
of the grid connected projects
(i) 84 MW capacity (connected to 33 KV and above grid) grid
connected solar power projects have been allocated by the NTPC
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN).
(ii) Projects to set up another 100 MW capacity (connected to grid
below 33 KV and of 100 kW to 2 MW size) have been short listed
by IREDA.
(iii) Projects to set up another 36 MW capacity are also under
implementation.
A total of 220 MW capacity grid connected solar power projects are
allocated so far. In addition, the NVVN has issued request for selection of
projects of another 620 MW capacity in August, 2010. The NVVN has reeived

21
bids offering discount on the tariff announced by CERC.  The final selection
of projects will take place in December 2010, after verification of documents
of the bidders.
An amount of Rs. 6.5 crores has been spent by October, 2010 and
the balance is expected to be released in coming months.   Eight projects
of about 15 MW capacity have been installed during the last one year, which
is a satisfactory beginning, considering that small capacity projects of about
2.1 MW were installed in the country before that.
Therefore, the Ministry will be in a position to fully achieve the targets
for grid power projects as well as the off-grid solar projects of the first phase
of the Mission.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]
(Recommendation Serial No.7)
The Committee note that solar cooker and solar dryers are one of the
important appliances of solar thermal energy in rural areas. The Committee
find that small capacity solar dryers are used for drying of food products
in rural areas and are being promoted through NGOs, Women Self Help
Groups etc. The Committee feel that applications of solar cooker in the rural
areas will improve the health condition of the villagers and that of solar dryers
will generate employment opportunities ultimately improving the economic
activities at village level. The solar cooking should also be promoted in group
activities in rural areas like schools for mid-day meals and at anganwaries,
etc. The Committee while appreciating the initiatives of the Ministry for
providing financial assistance to the manufacturers and users, recommend
that the systems should be made available to the rural users at affordable
price. Further, the Committee desire that demonstration and promotional
programmes of the systems should be increased in the rural areas.
Reply of the Government
As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee, the use of solar
cooking in group activities in rural areas like schools for mid-day meals and

22
at anganwadies, wherever possible is being promoted by the Ministry by
providing financial assistance. Solar cooking is also being promoted in
residential schools including those in tribal areas by providing solar steam
cooking systems as well as direct focusing community solar systems.  Over
50 such schools have been reported to have using such systems for cooking
food for around 20,000 students in rural/tribal areas.
Under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, a provision of
financial assistance to the individual users has also been made on the
purchase of solar cookers so as to make it available to the users in the
country including the rural users at affordable price. Provision of financial
assistance for solar air heaters including dryers has also been made.  Solar
air heating systems/dryers have been found to be useful in food processing
units for drying of various food products. These units generally require
hot air at low temperature (50-80ºC) as process heat for drying of
products such as tea leaves/coffee beans, and also for processing of
fruits, spices, cereals, mushroom, papad, vegetables, fish, seafood etc.
which is being generated using fire wood, electricity or fuel oil. Solar
air heating systems installed in these units have been saving a significant
amount of fossil fuel, apart from improving the quality of food product
and reducing GHG emissions. Over 60 such systems of different capacities
comprising of 12,000 sq.m. of collector area are functioning in the
country.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that under the biogas programme, the Ministry
aim at the deployment of family type biogas plants of average 2 cum
per day capacity for biogas generation from cattle manure as major
feedstock, mainly for cooking application in rural areas. The Committee
find that against the vast estimated potential of 1,23,39,300 family type
biogas plants, the cumulative achievement as on March, 2009 is 41,33,710
which is merely 33.5 per cent. This implies that a lot of work is yet

23
to be done in this important area of renewable energy for rural application.
Further analysis of data reveals that the plants so far installed in some
of the States viz. Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir,
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura and
Uttar Pradesh are comparatively low vis-à-vis their available potential for
such installations. The Committee are surprised to note that the targets
set for many of these States for the year 2009-10 are highly low. For
example, targets for Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh are 300, 100, 50, 50 and 4000 respectively during the year
2009-10. Even the performance during the said year upto first three
quarters has been 51,732 plants against the total target of 1,50,000 plants,
showing that almost two-third of the target was left for fulfilment in the
last quarter, which is just impossible to be achieved by the Ministry. The
Committee would like to stress that besides generating electricity, biogas
plants also provide high quality organic fertilizer which are essential for
sustaining soil fertility. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should re-energize themselves and take initiative to ensure
utmost utilization of available opportunities particularly in high potential
States so as the usage of family type biogas is encouraged in the rural
areas where raw materials are abundantly available. As the cost of
construction of biogas plants has been the limiting factor for its adoption,
the Committee recommend that efforts should be made to rationalize the
cost and promote the larger participation of NGOs, private entrepreneurs
and local communities in this area.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that only about 34.66% of the potential has been realized.
It is also a fact that the performance of many large States has been much
lower particularly Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, etc.
However, during the 11th Plan the installation of biogas plants has been
increasing year after year.  In the year 2009-10, 1.20 lakh numbers of
biogas plants have been installed which is about 11% higher than the
previous year.

24
Under the National Biogas and Manure Management Programme
targets are allocated on the basis of past performance and recommendation
or requests made by the States themselves since the implementation of
the programme depends entirely on the initiative of the State Nodal
Departments/State Nodal Agencies (SNDs/SNAs. Priorities in different
States vary.
In order to ensure that proper initiative is taken by the SNDs/SNAs,
review meetings are held at regular intervals. States are being urged to
pay more attention in this area, particularly where biogas has been poor.
Secretary has made field visits in the States of U.P., Bihar, Uttaranchal,
Punjab and Haryana. Officers from the Ministry have made many field
visits to most of the bigger States.
The target for the current year has been kept at 1.5 lakh and
the implementing agencies are continuously being encouraged to exceed
the target. The subsidy structure of the programme has been changed
to help in achieving higher number of installation of biogas plants.
The targets for the current year have been raised for 16 States including
Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim and
Uttar Pradesh.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]
(Recommendation Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that as against the estimated potential of about
15000 MW for Small Hydro Projects, the capacity of the installed project
is only about 2500 MW in various States. Besides projects of more than
900 MW are at various stages of implementation. As such a huge Small
Hydro potential is still lying untapped in the country. Since most of the
potential is in Himalayan States being river-based projects extending upto
North-Eastern region, the Committee feel that the Small Hydro Power
Programme is the most suited option after Solar Photovoltaic in illuminating

25
remote villages. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry are
encouraging both public and private participation for commercial projects
and decentralized micro hydel projects for remote village electrification.
The Ministry have taken a step further in granting due importance to this
programme by stating that the aim of the SHP programme  is to double
the current growth rate and take it from 250 MW per year to 500 MW
per year. At the same time, the Committee are not satisfied with the actual
performance of the Ministry at the ground level achieving only 534 MW
during first three years of 11th Five Year Plan against the overall target
of 1400 MW. The Ministry have no other option but to accelerate the
pace of implementation by evolving proper coordination mechanism with
the State Governments to overcome the bottlenecks. The Committee also
find that the target for the 11th Plan under SHP has been reduced to
1000 MW during Mid-Term Appraisal without reducing the financial
allocation of Rs. 700 crore. Moreover, the Prime Minister has approved
a special package of Rs. 550 crore to provide electricity/illumination to
all the villages along the State border of Arunachal Pradesh through solar
as well as small hydro power projects. Considering the available funds
for installation of Small Hydro Projects, the Committee expect the Ministry
to show the required will power and zeal to intensify the momentum of
implementation of the pending projects by taking necessary initiative and
steps to undertake new projects as well. At the same time, the Committee
recommend that small hydel power projects should be given top priority
by the Government to ensure that the identified potential of 15,000 MW
for small hydro projects in the country could be tapped by the
12th Plan period. The Committee also recommend that identification and
evaluation of new potential sites should also be undertaken in order to
take the most needed benefit to the deprived masses in the remotest rural
areas of the country.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is thankful to the Committee for recognizing and
acknowledging the efforts being made by the Ministry towards stepping up

26
growth of small hydro power by encouraging public and private sector
participation and decentralized micro hydel projects for remote village
electrification.
The 11th Plan target for small hydro is 1400 MW. It has not been
reduced in the mid-term appraisal to 1000 MW and remains 1400 MW. The
target for first three years of the 11th Plan was 750 MW against which
758.95 MW and not 534 MW, have been achieved, which is higher than the
target. Year-wise target and achievements for the 11th Plan are as follows:
 Period Physical
Target (MW) Achievement (MW)
11th Plan 1400
2007-08 200 204.75
2008-09 250 248.93
2009-10 300 305.27
Total in first 3 years 750 758.95
of 11th Plan
2010-11 300 114.85
Up to 31.10.2010
2011-12 350
11th Plan 1400 826.285
During last year and this year, the Ministry stepped up substantially its
efforts towards close monitoring of the projects, interaction with potential
States and private developers.  A series of meetings and visits were held at
the level of the Minister and Secretary, MNRE with the potential States to
monitor the ongoing projects and take up new potential sites. These are
ongoing. (Schedule of major meetings held are given at Annexure-I).  The
Ministry has been requesting the States to take steps for faster allocation of

27
sites, giving clearances and creating evacuation facilities. However, water
being State subject, the projects are allotted by the States and all clearances
are given by them. In some cases, allotment/purchase of land, forest
clearance etc. takes 2 to 3 years. The Ministry has a very limited catalytic
role in the exploitation of this potential by way of guiding the States, providing
some subsidy to the projects to improve their economic viability and create
technical support services.
It will not be possible to exploit the full available potential of 15000 MW
by the end of 12th Plan, considering the long gestation period of small hydro
projects and time taken by the States in allotment of sites, mandatory
clearances and creating evacuation facilities etc. However, the Ministry is
targeting a capacity addition of 3000 MW during the 12th Plan against the
current 11th Plan target of 1400 MW.  The Ministry has been taking up with
the respective Power Departments to identify new potential sites and draw
up an evacuation plan linked to progress of small hydro projects.
Regarding progress in the Prime Minister’s special package to electricity/
illumination border villages in Arunachal Pradesh, out of Rs. 550 crore.
Rs. 274.42 Crore has been provided by the Planning Commission directly
to the State to completing 46 small hydro power projects being implemented
by Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh. A project for electrification/illumination
of 1058 villages from small/micro hydel projects and solar photovoltaic
systems with an estimated cost of  Rs. 275.58 crore  is under implementation.
Already 610 villages have been illuminated by SPV systems and small/micro
hydel projects. The remaining villages are targeted to be electrified by
31st December, 2011. The project is monitored by a Steering Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MNRE. Four meetings of the Steering
Committee have been held.
The Ministry has been implementing a scheme to support upgradation
of water mills and micro hydel projects up to 100 KW capacity, which are
mainly located in remote and rural areas including international border areas.
Such projects are benefiting to the local people in such areas by providing
illumination/electrification, micro-entrepreneur development and socio–

28
economic development.  The Ministry has sanctioned support for 3547 water
mills in 9 States. So far 1414 water mills have been set-up. The Ministry
has also sanctioned 28 micro hydel projects (up to 100 KW) under the new
scheme announced in February, 2009.  Further,  in-principle approval has
been given for setting up of 53 micro hydel projects and 2000 watermill in
Jammu & Kashmir.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]

29
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

30
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
(Recommendation Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that the Remote Village Electrification Programme
(REVP) is being implemented by the Government to provide lighting/
electricity in those remote unelectrified villages and hamlets which are not
going to be covered under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY) by using renewable energy options like small hydro plants,
biomass, solar energy, etc. The Committee have been given to understand
that the decision to use a particular technology is taken by the State
implementing agencies after examining the technical feasibility and resource
availability. Under the scheme, the Ministry provide Central Financial
Assistance (CFA) upto 90 per cent of the costs of installation of various
renewable energy devices/systems. The Committee find that only 1280, 325
and 700 villages and hamlets were electrified in 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-
10 (upto 31st October, 2009) against the targets of 2000, 1500 and 1500
villages respectively during three years. Also, the amount spent upto 30th
September, 2009 was only Rs.27 crore against BE of Rs.80 crore for the
year 2009-10. While acknowledging all the positive intentions and the fruitful
contents of the programme, the Committee are not satisfied with the pace
of implementation. The poor achievements so far during the current 11th Plan
period not only form the basis of the Committee’s observation but also raise
doubt over the accomplishment of the piled up unattained targets in the
remaining period. The main constraints put forward by the Ministry are
change in plans by the State Governments for coverage of villages through
grid extension, lack of provision of State financial contribution, logistic
problems due to extremely remote location of the villages and hamlets, lack
of adequate organizational and financial resources with the State implementing
agencies and lack of coordination between the implementing agencies of

31
RGGVY and those of RVE. The Committee feel that the obstacles highlighted
by the Ministry are neither unforeseen nor insurmountable and the
implementation of the programme cannot be left to suffer on account of these
routine administrative and functional bottlenecks. Since RVEP is exclusively
an MNRE Programme being funded by their budget, the administrative
Ministry is duty bound to ensure that the issues are addressed from all angles
and a practical and pragmatic solution is worked out in coordination with
all concerned in order to meet the set targets in a time bound manner. The
Committee take note of the fact that the Ministry has set up a Coordination
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MNRE with representation
from the Ministry of Power, REC, Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. This Committee will help in formulating plans, provision
of budgets, and synchronization of MNRE programmes with that of Ministry
of Power, but some mechanism is required to put up at local level. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that apart from the high level Coordination
Committee at Central level, local Committees at State levels or regional levels
well versed with the local problems and their solutions should be established
to ensure hassle-free implementation of schemes at ground level so that the
plans/programmes of the Ministry are converted into the reality and the
population living in remote and far off areas improve their living and economic
conditions.
Reply of the Government
In so far as the observation of the Committee with regard to
achievement of target in RVE is concerned, it is clarified that in the 11th Plan,
4400 Villages & Hamlets have been sanctioned. In addition 2824 Villages &
Hamlets, which were sanctioned earlier, excluding 252 Villages & Hamlets
which were dropped, are ongoing. Thus all together in 11th Plan 7224 Villages
& Hamlets are sanctioned/ongoing as on 31st October, 2010. Out of
these 7224 Villages & Hamlets, 220 Villages & Hamlets have been dropped
due to various reasons, 2918 Villages & Hamlets have been completed,
and the remaining are on-going and would be completed within the plan
period.
The Ministry had earlier stated that the number of villages to be covered
is entirely dependent upon decisions of the State Government for the villages

32
to be covered under RGGVY or under RVE. Therefore, these are not routine
matters where the Ministry could take a decision.  Some examples would
make this clearer.  In December 2009, in principle approval was given to
Jharkhand for 257 villages.  The State Government was to give a certificate
from REC that they are not covered under RGGVY as well as submit the
project proposals as required based on field survey.  However, REC has finally
cleared only 81 villages and the final DPR’s have only recently come.   In
case of Orissa initial list identified for coverage under the Programme was
1352, however after numerous meetings and discussions with the State
Government in principal approval was given for 1091 villages.  Now REC
certification is coming for only 965 villages. Therefore, the number of
villages, which can actually be sanctioned, is dependent entirely upon the
State Government. Once sanctioned, the implementation is also dependent
entirely upon the State Government. The Ministry is making all possible
efforts to persuade the State Government that all the villages which are not
coming under RGGVY should be proposed under this scheme and also that
implementation be done quickly.  Many meetings have been held including
those chaired by the Secretary in the concerned States as well as repeated
reviews in the Ministry where the State Governments and REC have been
invited.  The Coordination Committee meetings itself have been held 6 times
during the last year.
As regards the observation of the Committee for State and local level
coordination, it is clarified that all the States have a mechanism in place which
enables them to coordinate with the multiple stake-holders but in keeping with
the recommendations of the Committee the Ministry is also advising the State
to strengthen the coordination mechanism so as to make the implementation
of the RVE more effective. There are already village level committees which
are trained to take care of the day-to-day challenges that may arise after the
implementation of the programme. The villages where the villagers are taking
active interest are the ones where RVE is successful. The success of
community based programme like RVE depend on the active interest of the
beneficiary and participation and support of all stake-holders.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]

33
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that the Village Energy Security Test Projects
(VESP) was started during 10th Five Year Plan to meet the total energy
requirements of cooking, lighting and motive power of remote villages,
through locally available renewable energy resources, particularly biomass,
with active community participation. The initial proposal under VES Projects
was to cover 1000 villages with a total outlay of Rs.225 crores during
11th Plan. Subsequently, the target was reduced to 200 Test projects. The
Committee are surprised to find that only test projects have been
commissioned so far and as on 30th June, 2009 only 17 villages could be
covered with financial expenditure of Rs.6.99 crore under the projects. With
such a poor performance so far during the current plan on both physical
and financial fronts, the Committee are constrained to point out that the
implementation of these projects has been extremely tardy and much below
the plan targets. Moreover, the reasons advanced by the Ministry for this
state of affairs like the challenges being faced in identification of villages,
community mobilization, managing trained personnel and local share of capital
cost and in performance monitoring are superficial and not convincing. It
appears that the problems enumerated by the Ministry are meant to cover
up their own failure in foreseeing the difficulty in remote areas and coming
up with pragmatic remedial measures. The Committee understand the
conditions and resource availability vary from area to area particularly in
remote villages and feel that the Ministry should have worked out concrete
and comprehensive plan of action in advance in coordination with the local
Government, implementing agencies and local panchayats area-wise in a
proactive manner and should have strived to convert the objective and spirit
behind the well thought out scheme of the Government into reality in order
to lit the life of the most needy people. That this was not done is nothing
but regrettable. The decision to concentrate on consolidating the projects
already taken up for implementation and to take up new villages only under
the RVE Programme is also a disappointing manifestation of the non
performance of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should critically review their own performance, identify the

34
shortcomings project-wise, work out action plan for rest of the projects
accordingly with well coordinated and practical approach, keep strict vigil
on the progress so as to accomplish the remaining targets in a time bound
manner.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted.
The VESP project was designed as a community based project for
electrification based on biomass. These were pilot project which were initially
taken up and it was felt that if the pilot projects and the mode of
implementation thereof succeed only then would the upscaling be taken up.
The Ministry was aware that these projects required immense amount of
mobilization at the local level and only those remote villages where
mobilization and interest of the community for running this project was of
the nature that was needed for running these projects successfully, were able
to succeed. Since the nature of the VESP scheme was proposed as a test
case, only 109 test projects were sanctioned.
The performance of the test projects under implementation is reviewed
by the Ministry through inspection visits to the test projects and review
meeting with concerned implementing agencies from time to time.  Keeping
in view, the cancellation of 30 test projects of our 109 test projects sanctioned
so far, due to electrification of villages through grid and non-availability of
sustainable biomass resources, it has been considered necessary to complete
the ongoing 58 test projects in eight States, namely, Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal during the remaining Plan period. In view of the fact that the
implementation of the projects has been a challenge, the Ministry held a two
day workshop to review the projects and learn lessons from their
implementation, and further sanction and implementation of these projects
is not being considered. However, based on the learning from VESP, the
scheme for implementing decentralized Biomass based rural electrification
projects has been revised and has been made more practical to enable
entrepreneurs to take up rural electrification using gasifier/combustion based
technology option.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06-12-2010]

35
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Serial No. 6)
The Committee have been informed that the installed SPV systems need
expenditure on operation and maintenance mainly on the replacement of
batteries after 4-5 years. It has also been stated that the manufacturers/
suppliers provide two years warranty and comprehensive maintenance
contracts for next three years for the systems under programme. It is
understood that the need for actual maintenance of the SPV installations and
replacement of batteries arises after 4 to 5 years of installation of the system,
which incidentally happens to be the closing period of the maintenance
contract. The Committee feel that the beneficiaries, even if they are willing
to maintain the system, may find it difficult to get the genuine batteries and
other parts and proper service at reasonable rates. Moreover, the statement
that ‘it is the responsibility of the people of those areas to maintain the facility’
appears to be too harsh and rigid especially to the common rural people who
are not even aware of the general technical know-how of the SPV
installations. The investment made by the Government goes in vain if the
installations are not made use of for want of proper and timely maintenance.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, instead of simply
bothering about their target achievement statistics, should come forward with
some prudent and pragmatic solution so that the efforts and money invested
by them serve the purpose and there is optimum utilization of the SPV
installations by the beneficiaries. One such solution is to ensure the availability
of services of the same company for maintenance who can provide best
available quality of batteries and proper service at subsidized rates. Also
Cooperation of Panchayats, Self Help Groups and NGO’s can be sought for
helping in running the systems. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry recognizes the importance of timely maintenance support
for the projects. Therefore, in the guidelines for off-grid solar applications,
apart from the State nodal agencies, additional channels of supply and after

36
sales service have been allowed. The regional rural banks have been involved
in supporting solar lights in rural areas through a combination of subsidy and/
or loan. The suppliers of the solar lights are required to initially open a supply
and service center at least at the district level to provide after sales service
and spares. Without a supply and after sales service network regional rural
banks do not sanction loans for projects prepared by that supplier. The
systems integrators are also allowed to directly supply and maintain solar
systems. The Ministry has also issued performance specifications/standards
to facilitate availability of quality products and components.  Ministry is also
organising training programme. These measures are expected to facilitate
better upkeep of the systems in the field.
As suggested by the Committee, the Ministry has already involved
reputed NGOs such as the Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi and Social
Works and Research Centre, Tilonia in the implementation of off-grid and
decentralised SPV systems programme. The Ministry has also sanctioned
a project to a public sector undertaking in Rajasthan for installation of
stand-alone SPV power plants on Panchayat Buildings.
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, File No. 8/7/2010 P&C
Dated 06.12.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

37
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AW AITED
-NIL-
 N EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
25 July , 2011 Chairman,
3 Sravana , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

38
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2010-11) HELD ON 19TH MAY , 2011 IN ROOM NO.
‘G-074’ PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING , NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal V ora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Sundar Das
3. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
6. Shri M.B.Rajesh
7. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
9. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri V .P. Singh Badnore
11. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
13. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary

39
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
V ora, a Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on:
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 9th Report
on “Funding of Power Projects”.
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
11th Report on “Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”.
4. The Committee discussed the draft Reports on both the subjects
and the Action Taken Replies of the concerned Ministries in detail.
*** **
*** **
*** **
5. Thereafter, the Committee, adopted the draft Action Taken Report
on the recommendations contained in the 11th Report with some
amendments. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

40
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
ELEVENTH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 09
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8 and 9
Total: 06
Percentage 67%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Total: Nil
Percentage 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect
of which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 3, 4 and 6
Total: 03
Percentage 33%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Total: Nil
Percentage 00%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”