STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on Availability of Gas and Coal for Power Sector]
TWENTY SIXTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)
26

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Availability of Gas and Coal for Power Sector]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.5.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.5.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)

COE No. 220
Price : Rs. 59.00
© 2012 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012) ....................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 19
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 33
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration ............................. 39
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 46
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
25 April, 2012. ................................................................. 50
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
10th Report  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .................................................... 52

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P .C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
#22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
@24. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal Vora
#31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant
@ Ceased to be member of the Committee consequent upon her retirement from Rajya
Sabha w.e.f. 15th February, 2012.
# Ceased to be members of the Committee consequent upon their retirement from Rajya
Sabha w.e.f. 2nd April, 2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 26th Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 10th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘ Availability of Gas and Coal for Power
Sector’.
2. The 10th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 21st August, 2010. Replies from the Ministry of Power, the Ministry
of Coal, the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas were received on 9th December, 2010; 6th December, 2010;
6th December, 2010 and 30th January, 2012. However, the replies from
the Ministry of Environment and Forests are still awaited.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 25th April, 2012.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 10th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
1 May, 2012 Chairman,
11 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘ Availability of Gas and Coal for Power Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Power.
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st August,
2010 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The
Report contained 11 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government except for recommendation at Sl. No. 5 related to the
Ministry of Environment and Forests. These have been categorized as
follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total - 06
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial No. 1
Total - 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the reply
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 2, 4 and 11
Total - 03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial No. 5
Total - 01
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report. The Committee also desire that the
Government should furnish replies to the recommendation in respect
of which Government replies are still awaited.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
on merit comments.
A. REQUIREMENT AND SUPPLY OF COAL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
6. The Committee had noted that there are coal stocking norms for
power stations of different categories based on their distance from the
coal mines. It is 15 days for pit head power stations, 20 days for stations
located up to 500 km, 25 days up to 500-1000 km and 30 days for beyond
1000 km. The stocking norms are aimed to achieve optimal power
generation, if properly adhered to. However, the Committee’s examination
had revealed that these norms are not being followed in most of the
cases. Many of the plants had been categorized as critical as they had
coal stocks less than 7 days. As on 13.05.2010, as many as 6 plants were
in super critical category having stock of less than 4 days. Slight negligence
from any of the involved agencies that supply coal to power stations
would result in shut down of the plants for the want of coal. Although
the Ministry of Coal take stock of the situation regarding supply of coal
to power stations on monthly basis yet various power stations were not
having coal stocks as per specified norms. The reasons for this situation
had been attributed to non-availability of proper and sufficient rail rakes,
pilferage during the transportation, constraints in existing rail
transportation infrastructure, old/outdated loading and unloading facilities
etc. The basic infrastructural facilities at mines, loading, safe/proper and
timely transportation need to be periodically reviewed to ensure the
availability of coal to power stations as per the norms. The Committee,
therefore, had strongly recommended that necessary steps should be taken

3
to augment the base work to ensure the assured coal supply to power
stations as per the stocking norms.
7. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated
as under:—
“With a view to have assured coal supply to power stations, coal
requirement for generation of power as well as building up stock
to a reasonable level has been taken into consideration, while
estimating the coal requirement for the Power Utilities.
Following steps have been taken to augment supply of coal to
thermal power stations in the country:
Power utilities have been advised to import coal to bridge the gap
between demand and its availability from domestic sources. Import
of coal by power utilities is being monitored on regular basis by
Ministry of Power/Central Electricity Authority.
Coal stock at the power stations as well as availability of adequate
railway rakes for transportation of coal to power stations are
reviewed in the meetings at various forums including the Inter-
Ministerial Sub-Group, Inter-Ministerial meetings and Infrastructure
Constraints Review Group meeting in the Cabinet Secretariat for
taking appropriate steps.
Coal India Limited is in the process of deploying mobile crushers.
Thermal Power Stations are also augmenting and expanding
unloading facilities, wherever required. Theft of coal en-route to
the power stations is taken up with the concerned State Governments
as well as Home Ministry . Expediting contracts for transportation
of coal by road from the mine head to railway sidings and owning
road transportation fleet by the coal companies are under
consideration of the coal companies of CIL.
Ministry of Coal/CIL has been requested to enhance the supply of
coal to the power sector to avoid generation loss due to shortage
of coal.
In a meeting held in the Ministry of Power on 15th June, 2011,
following decisions were taken:—
 (a) Ministry of Railways may make arrangements for providing
additional rakes at MCL (Ib) and SECL (Korba) to assist
the coal companies in liquidating the stock of coal at mine
heads.

4
(b) Ministry of coal may (i) expedite transportation of adequate
quantity of coal from mine head to railway siding so that
loading time could be reduced. (ii) Supply sized coal to enable
quick release of wagons.
As a result of measures taken approximately 13 MT coal has
reportedly been liquidated during April to July, 2011 from the stock
at mine heads of CIL.”
8. In their Action Taken reply the Ministry of Coal have replied
as under:—
“In order to monitor the coal stock at power stations, a monitoring
mechanism is already put in place in the Ministry of Coal.
An inter-ministerial Sub-group of the Infrastructure Review
Committee of Cabinet Secretariat, under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Coal reviews the coal stock available at
power stations and take contingency decisions in association with
Central Electricity Authority and Railways for priority movement
of coal to those power stations, where generation could suffer for
want of coal.
Following are the coal supplies to the power plants served by SCCL
for the year 2010-11:
Name of power Linkage Annual Supplies Stock No. of
plant  (LT) contract from position days
quantity 1.4.10 to as on stocks
(LT)  27.9.10 26.9.10
(LT) (LT)
KTPS 51.3 59.00 48.97 3.81 20
Muddanur 35.80 38.80 12.55 2.59 26
Stage-I and II
RDM-B 3.1 3.00 1.45 0.12 12
TOTAL 90.20 100.80 62.97 - -
APGENCO
Kakatiya TPP 21.60 21.60 4.48 3.30 -
KPCL 30.10 30.10 7.07* 3.67 26
MAHAGENCO 22.60 22.60 8.85 1.07 8
NTPC 102.00 102.00 51.30 1.29 3
From the above it can be inferred that power houses linked to SCCL are supplied
coal as per linkage and are having sufficient stocks.
*The shortage in supplies to KPCL is only due to non-drawal of coal supplies by
KPCL itself.

5
9. In reply to the recommendation of the Committee regarding
taking necessary steps to augment the base work to ensure the assured
coal supply to power stations as per the norms, the Ministry of Coal
have in a routine reply stated that in order to monitor the coal stock
at power stations, a monitoring mechanism is already in place. An
inter-ministerial Sub-group of the Infrastructure Review Committee of
Cabinet Secretariat, under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Coal reviews the coal stock available at power stations to take
contingency decisions in association with Central Electricity Authority
and Railways for priority movement of coal to those power stations,
where generation could suffer for want of coal. Whereas, the Ministry
of Power in their reply have stated that with a view to have assured
coal supply to power stations, coal requirement for generation of power
as well as building up stock to a reasonable level has been taken into
consideration, while estimating the coal requirement for the Power
Utilities. Further, they have enumerated various steps to augment supply
of coal to thermal power stations in the country viz. import of coal by
power utilities, review of availability of railway rakes for transportation
of coal to power stations, augmentation and expanding unloading
facilities by thermal power stations etc.
The Committee are surprised to note that despite having a
monitoring mechanism/and taking various steps by both the Ministries,
adequate coal stocks at various power stations as per norms are still
not maintained at various power plants and many plants are in super
critical category having stock of less than 4 days. From this it is apparent
that either the mechanism/steps taken themselves are ineffective or
have not been taken/being taken in right earnest. In any case the
situation is equally worrisome as any hiccup in supply of coal to these
critical and super critical power stations, even for short duration, will
result in shut down of power stations causing power generation loss
due to non-availability of fuel and will severly worsen the existing
power shortage in the Country. The Committee find it difficult to accept
that power plants with adequate coal allocations suffer generation loss
due to non-maintenance of adequate coal stocks at power station for
whatsoever reasons. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate
their recommendation and emphasize that effective steps should be
taken to augment the base work to ensure the assured coal supply for
stocking of sufficient coal stocks at power stations as per norms. The
Committee would emphasise that the recommendation should be
implemented in letter and spirit.

6
B. DEVELOPMENT OF COAL BLOCKS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.4)
10. In regard to allotment of coal blocks, the Committee in their
original Report had recommended as under:—
“It appears to the Committee that the process of allotment of coal
blocks is too officious, mechanical and unimaginative. As of now
it appears that coal blocks are allocated without analyzing their
usefulness to the allotee utilities. Instead of looking at the issue
in its entirety to take the process to logical ends i.e. the allotted
block become useful to the allocattee by meeting their requirement
and expectations as well, a short sighted view with limited role
and responsibility appears to be the hallmark in this regard. The
matter does not end with the routine mechanical process of allotting
a coal block and appending certain pre-conditions to develop it
within a specified time period. The Ministry of Coal should also
be responsible enough to become a facilitator to remove the
bottlenecks in the development of the coal blocks rather than playing
a role of big brother intimidating the power utilities for the reasons
for which they are not directly responsible. The allotment and the
subsequent de-allotment of the Kasta (East) coal block to the DVC
is glaring illustration of the manner in which the system is working
there. Instead of finding a solution as to how the Kasta coal block
can become economically viable for DVC, the blatant de-allocation
speak of the arrogance and displays the tendency of shedding its
own responsibility. Had the two adjutant blocks viz. Kasta (west)
and Kasta (south) been clubbed with Kasta (east) block, it might
have resulted in fruitful exercise solving the problem of DVC,
expediting and enhancing the coal production. The Plea that the
other two blocks are not identified and are not in the list of blocks
for the allocation does not hold good as the DVC might have been
reasonably assured of their allotment after the identification of the
blocks. There is lack of vision, will and determination on the part
of the Ministry of Coal to resolve the issue to the satisfaction of
the utilities. This kind of approach is bound to complicate the entire
process. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
allotment of the coal blocks to the power utilities should be done
in a transparent and objective manner. The requirement of the
power utilities should be met from the geographically adjutant
blocks to facilitate the smooth excavation and carriage of the coal
and to minimize the related storage/transportation costs involved
therein.”

7
11. The Ministry of Coal in their Action Taken Reply have stated
as under:—
“ Allocation of coal blocks for captive end use through the Screening
Committee route is done by an Inter-Ministerial and Inter-
Governmental Group called the Screening Committee. The
recommendations made by the Screening Committee for allocation
of coal blocks are based on the views of the concerned State
Governments, administrative nodal Ministries and CMPDIL. A copy
of the guidelines and procedure for allocation of coal blocks is
already available in the public domain on the Website of Ministry
of Coal. All the details of the coal blocks which are advertised for
allocation are also posted on the Website of Ministry of Coal. All
the applicants before applying are aware of the details and the
procedure followed for allocation of coal blocks. The system
therefore, is adequately transparent. A copy of the guidelines is
enclosed at Annexure.
Further, to bring in greater transparency in allocation of coal blocks,
the Government had introduced the Mines and Minerals (D&R)
Amendment Bill to enable auctioning of coal and lignite blocks
through competitive bidding process. The said Bill has since been
passed by both Houses of the Parliament in the Monsoon Session
of Parliament, 2010 and has been notified in the Gazette on
9th September, 2010. The Government has set up a Committee to
frame rules and guidelines for initiating competitive bidding.
M/s Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) was allocated five coal
blocks including Kasta (East) coal blocks with combined geological
reserves of 986.64 MT. That was sufficient to meet the requirement
of the power plants of DVC. As regards allocation of Kasta (West)
and Kasta (South) coal blocks, M/s DVC did not make any reference
in their first application for allocation of Kasta (East) coal block.
Their request came much later and during the period since the date
of allocation of Kasta (East), no development of coal block was
made by DVC. While DVC made satisfactory progress in
development of four blocks, the allocatee did not make much
progress with regard to Kasta (East).
Since DVC had expressed their inability to develop the Kasta (East)
block, the Ministry of Coal, after due examination, de-allocated the
said coal block in May, 2009. The de-allocation was without any
assurance for allocation of any alternative coal block in lieu of  the
surrendered coal block. The de-allocation was made after following
due procedure and taking into account all the facts and
circumstances of the case.

8
There are no policy guidelines available at present for allocation
of alternative coal blocks. Further, there are no coal blocks identified
and earmarked for allocation. The identification process is underway
and as and when the same is finalized, interested applicants,
including M/s DVC, can apply for allotment and the applications
would be considered on merits.”
12. After careful scrutiny of the matter related to de-allocation
of Kasta (East) coal blocks by the Ministry of Coal which was earlier
allocated to DVC, the Committee had strongly recommended that the
allotment of the coal blocks to the power utilities should be done in
a transparent and objective manner. In their action taken reply the
Ministry of Coal have stated that since DVC had expressed their
inability to develop the Kasta (East) block, the Ministry of Coal, after
due examination, de-allocated the said coal block in May, 2009. The
de-allocation was without any assurance for allocation of any alternative
coal block in lieu of  the surrendered coal block. The de-allocation was
made after following due procedure and taking into account all the facts
and circumstances of the case. Further, they have stated that there are no
policy guidelines available at present for allocation of alternative coal blocks.
The Committee are astonished at the callous reply of the Ministry
of Coal which instead of examining the feasibility/implementation of
the recommendation of the Committee, have merely stated the routine
procedure and resultant position. It seems that the Ministry, instead
of stating the specific steps taken as a follow up of the recommendations
of the Committee, has just compiled the facts in their action taken
reply. The Committee in their Report had desired that if an allotee
finds it difficult to develop a coal block, the Ministry of Coal instead
of resorting to de-allocation, should play a role of facilitator so that
the ways and means could be found for speedy development of the
coal block. Mere de-allocation of a coal block is not a solution as there
is all possibility that new allottee may also find it difficult to develop
the same. Accordingly, the Committee desired that the Ministry of
Coal instead of playing a role of big brother intimidating the power
utilities for the reasons for which they are not directly responsible
should also share the onus in timely development by examining all
the possible solution to remove the impediments in development of
coal blocks including the clubbing of other geographically adjacent
coal blocks as in case of Kasta (East) coal block allotted to DVC with
Kasta (West) and Kasta (South). The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation and would like the Ministry of Coal to formulate a
policy wherein it facilitates the allocattee in case it genuinely finds difficult
to develop the allotted coal blocks and address the problems instead of
taking punitive action by resorting to de-allocate the coal block.

9
C. IMPORT OF COAL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
13. The Committee had noted that there was perennial gap in
demand and supply of coal with the power utilities. On a short term
basis this supply deficit can be met only through the import of coal. The
deciding factor for supply of domestic coal for the power station is 90%
PLF or the actual performance of plant during the last three years if the
plants commissioned before March 2009. Deficit of 10% of the demand
is already established even before the requirement is placed. During the
year 2009-10 CIL was to import 4 MT of coal from overseas with the
provision that there might be increase in import by 2011-12 based on the
requirements of the utilities. However, the said import could not take
place due to absence of any firm commitment from the power utilities.
The Committee found this as a poor co-ordination between the power
utilities and CIL. The Committee had been apprised that the CIL was
in process of exploring and firming up port and other logistics required
for import of coal. They were also ascertaining the demand for import
of coal for power sector during 2010-11 to finalize the process of import
of coal. The Committee had also been informed that power utilities
themselves could make their own arrangement for import of coal against
the target fixed by the Ministry of Power. During 2009-10 the power
utilities imported 23.1 MT against the target of 28.70 MT fixed by the
Ministry of Power. The modalities and mechanism for such import of
coal are decided by the power utilities. There was also an element of
blending of imported coal with the indigenous one upto certain
percentage based on the boilers designs of power plants. The Committee,
therefore, had strongly recommended that with a view to obviate the gap
in the supply of coal to power utilities it has become necessary to plan
about the import of coal well in advance to achieve the capacity addition
targets as also to run the existing plants optimally. Hence, the plea of
no firm commitment from power utilities or the power utilities themselves
can import the coal will only add to the problem of coal supply. Coal
requirement of thermal power stations are known well in advance, based
on that estimation of domestic requirement can be arrived at. Thereby
deciding as to what quantity of coal has to be imported for meeting the
requirement. The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry of Power
to make mandatory for the power utilities to have advance planning for
import of coal either directly by power utilities or through Coal India
Ltd. They further desired that this essential import may be included in
Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) signed between the Ministry
of Power and central PSUs under its administrative control. Similarly,
this aspect should be reviewed by the Ministry/Ministry’ s representatives
on the Board of PSUs in Quarterly review meeting done in respect of

10
PSUs, review of MoUs. Board meetings etc. The Committee also
recommended that the Ministry of Coal should also review the working
of CIL in regard to its coal imports so as to ensure that proper co-ordination
is ensured with power utilities in regard to assessment of coal imports
and their timely imports at competitive prices. The Committee awaited
specific action by the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Coal in this
regard.
14. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated
as under:—
“Planning Commission had in July , 2009 set up a Sub-Committee
comprising Chairperson, CEA, Chairman, Coal India Limited and
Chairman, MMTC to look into the aspects of long-term import of
coal on sustainable basis. The Committee had, in August 2009
concluded as under:—
(i) The shortfall in domestic coal supplies during 2010-11 and
2011-12 based on the projected domestic production is
46 MT and 74 MT respectively. Accordingly, the import
requirement for power sector for plants based on indigenous
coal works out to be 31 MT and 49 MT respectively. It is
recommended that 30 MT imports may be planned on long
term basis. Balance requirement of imported coal could be
procured on year to year basis through annual contracts.
(ii) 30 MT of coal is required to be imported on long-term basis
and balance on short-term annual contracts by CIL for Power
Sector. To begin with, CIL may import about 20 MT during
2010-11 for a few major generating companies like NTPC.
CIL will come out with a paper on their strategy for import
of coal for the benefit of the generating companies. After the
methodology for long-term import is finalized in consultation
with the generating companies, CIL will take procurement
action for import of coal.
(iii) The ports where the imported coal has to be received will
be identified by CIL in consultation with Ministry of Shipping
and Transport and Railways keeping in view the proximity
to the power stations.
This was brought to the notice of the Power Utilities and other
concerned agencies in a meeting held in the Ministry of Power on
27th October, 2009 and was also communicated to Energy/Power
Departments of the concerned State Governments in

11
November, 2009, January, 2010 and April, 2010. NTPC, the major
importer of coal among the Power Utilities, is contemplating import
of coal through various routes comprising the procurement through
PSUs, Coal India Limited and also on their own. DVC has also
envisaged import of coal during 2010-11 by inviting bids and
through Coal India Limited.
Utility-wise target for import of coal by the Power Utilities during
2010-11 aggregating 35 Million Tonne was communicated in January,
2010. The modalities and mechanism for import of coal are decided
by the Power Utilities themselves. Under the New Coal Distribution
Policy, it is the responsibility of CIL/Coal companies to meet full
requirement of coal under Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) even by
resorting to imports, if necessary. NTPC and DVC have already
requested CIL to supply 4 MT and 0.8 MT of imported coal
respectively during 2010-11. Import of coal is being regularly
monitored by Ministry of Power with all the power utilities, Ministry
of Coal, Coal India Limited, Ministry of Railways and Department
of Shipping.
Import of coal assigned to the Central Power Utilities is reviewed
in the meetings in the Ministry of Power and also by the
representative of Ministry of Power on the Board of Public Sector
Undertakings. CPSUs under the administrative control of Ministry
of Power are being advised to include import in the Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU).”
15. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Coal have stated
as under:—
“ As per the recommendation of Fuel Infrastructure Committee of
Planning Commission, Coal India Limited (CIL) has already taken
action for importing coal for power utilities. Since it would not be
prudent to maintain stock of imported coal, a decision was taken
to import coal only on the basis of firm commitment from power
utilities. Accordingly, CEA as well as individual utilities were
approached to ascertain the exact requirement of imports to be
made by CIL. On the basis of the indications received so far from
utilities, CIL have taken decision to import 6 MT of coal during
the current fiscal year. Negotiations are going on with power utilities
to accept FOR unload port term for delivery of imported coal.
Once the terms of delivery are accepted by the Utilities, CIL will
initially import 6 MT of coal on short-term basis and will
subsequently going for long-term off-take contracts with overseas
mining companies to ensure competitive prices for Indian Utilities.”

12
16. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee to make
advance planning mandatory for the power utilities for import of coal
either directly by power utilities or through Coal India Ltd., the Ministry
of Coal in their action taken report have stated that as per
recommendation of Fuel Infrastructure Committee of Planning
Commission, Coal India Limited (CIL) has already taken action for
importing coal for power utilities. Since it would not be prudent to
maintain stock of imported coal, a decision was taken to import coal
only on the basis of firm commitment from power utilities.
The Ministry of Power have in their reply stated that National
Thermal Power Corporation, the major importer of coal among the
Power Utilities, is contemplating import of coal through various routes
comprising the procurement through PSUs, CIL and also on their own.
Utilities-wise target for import of coal by the Power Utilities during
2010-11 aggregating 35 Million Tonne was communicated in January,
2010. The Modalities and mechanism for import of coal are decided
by the Power Utilities themselves. They have further stated that under
the New Coal Distribution Policy, it is the responsibility of CIL/Coal
companies to meet full requirement of coal under Fuel Supply
Agreement (FSA) even by resorting to imports, if necessary. The
Committee finds the reply of Ministry of Power full of ambiguity and
contradiction in respect of import of coal as to who will import the
required coal and what will be the quantity. On the one hand the
Ministry has stated that the Modalities and mechanism for import of
coal are decided by the Power Utilities themselves while on the other
hand they have reported that the responsibility of import of coal lies
with the CIL/Coal companies. The Committee, in their earlier Report,
had noted that during the year 2009-10 CIL was to import 4 MT of coal
from overseas with the provision that there may be increase in import
by 2011-12 based on the requirements of the utilities. However, the
said import could not take place due to absence of any firm commitment
from the power utilities. Further in respect of recommendation for
including the import of coal in the Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) it has been stated that CPSUs under the administrative control
of Ministry of Power are being advised to include import in the MoU.
The Committee, considering the lack of adequate indigenous coal
supply, had concluded that import of coal is the only remedy for
avoiding power generation losses. The Committee expected that the
Ministry would ensure that all power utilities should have mandatory
advanced planning for their requirement of coal so that the firm order
for required quantity of imported coal may be placed and executed in
time. Instead of coming up with an unambiguous/clear reply and prompt
guidelines/orders in regard to import of coal, the Ministry of Power
vide their reply have foxed the issue. The Committee, therefore, expect

13
the Ministry of Power to apprise them about the concrete steps taken
to make it mandatory for power utilities to have advance planning for
import of coal and to bring clarity and specify whether the power
utilities or Coal India Limited will be responsible for import coal which
is required in order to avoid power generation losses.
D. TRANSPORTATION OF COAL BY RAIL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
17. The Committee had noted that lack of timely transportation of
coal had been the nagging problem forcing power plants to run below
their capacity. On being asked about the steps to ensure availability of
sufficient rakes to transport the coal on time, it had been stated that the
present coordination with the Ministry of Railways had been satisfactory.
Company-wise coal distribution in respect of power stations needs to be
reviewed in consultation with the Ministries of Railways, Coal, Power
and CEA keeping in view the constraints in the existing rail transportation,
infrastructure for transportation of desired types of railway rakes
commensurate with the coal loading and unloading facilities available
at the power stations. It had also been stated that the issue of availability
of adequate railways rakes for transportation of coal to the power stations
is also reviewed at the various forums. The Committee had been apprised
that in order to supply 333 MT of coal to the power utilities during
2010—11, they had planned an incremental off-take to the tune of 44 MT.
In order to achieve this incremental off-take the rail dispatch had been
projected at 185 rakes per day against present average loading of
165 rakes per day during 2009-10. Therefore, the additional requirement
of 29 rakes per day. Thus, the availability of rail rakes requires growth
by 19% to achieve the planned level of off-take against the actual growth
of 1% during the 2009-10. The Committee, therefore, had strongly
recommended that coordination mechanism must explore some new
avenues regarding availability of additional rail rakes to transport the
available coal in time. The further desired that the plan of dedicated
freight corridor should also be expedited and inter-alia cover the coal
belts to facilitate the quick and effective transportation of coal to the
power utilities.
18. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Power have stated
as under:—
“In the review meetings held in the Ministry of Power, it is
impressed on the Power Utilities that the unloading time of railway
rakes be reduced so that the turn-around time of railway rakes get
reduced and they are also persuaded to make use of lean demand

14
months for railway rakes for building stock of coal from domestic
sources as well as import of coal.
Ministry of Railways is being persuaded to expedite the Dedicated
Freight Corridor and procurement of additional wagons/
rakes commensurate with the increasing demand of the power
sector.”
19. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have
stated as under:—
“Coal loading on Indian Railways is done from various sources
like the mines of Coal India Limited, washeries, captive mines,
mines of other coal companies like Singareni Collieries Company
Ltd. Goods sheds and imported coal both for power houses and
for the other sectors. Transportation  capacities on the Indian
Railways are uniform for the year and do not fluctuate substantially
from one quarter to another quarter.  It is thus, necessary that the
transportation capacities are utilized optimally for the entire year.
Coal dispatched from Coal India Ltd. sources is not only dependent
on the Railways but also on other modes like Merry-Go-Round
systems, road dispatches etc.
Demand and supply gaps exist due to seasonal fluctuations,
operational constraints limitations of terminals, etc. The Indian
economy has a peak season from October to March with another
peak between January-March. The transportation capacities planned
for, are uniform throughout the year. Sudden spurts in peak time
demand result in bottlenecks in transportation capacity.
The issue of less loading by Coal India in the first half of the year
leading to loss in transportation capacities has been raised at various
fora. Accordingly, Chairman, Coal India Ltd. had written vide his
letter No. CIL:DLI:CH:20010/2/90-2203 dated 30.3.2010 addressed
to Chairman, Railway Board that for meeting their yearly
requirement of 185 rakes/day in the year 2010-11, Railways has
assured supplying the same provided the band fluctuates between
180-190 rakes per day. In the same letter, Coal India Ltd. proposed
to load 190 rakes per day in the first quarter of 2010-11, as against
which Coal India Ltd. has barely managed to load approximately
155-160 rakes per day despite adequate availability of rakes. An
important issue is increasing, the transportation of coal from
pitheads to the railway sidings. Less transportation of coal from
pitheads to railway sidings in the first five months of the current
fiscal by CIL, has led to lesser dispatch than the desired levels.

15
At the same time, the import of coal for Thermal Power Sector was
planned for a level of 35 million tonnes in 2010-11. It was decided
that 60% of the total imports for the thermal power sector would
be planned in the first half of the year so that Railway’s
transportation capacity in the first half of the year was optimally
utilized, and also ensuring higher rake availability for Coal India
loading in the second half of the year. As against this, the imports
for the thermal power sector upto end of August, 2010 was only
10.171 MT as against the desired level of 17.5 million tonnes, 60%
in first five months. Thus, imports for power sector will again get
bunched in the second half of the year, thereby leading to lesser
availability of rakes for Coal India Ltd.
The Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) being constructed
from Dankuni to Ludhiana would cater mainly to the coal traffic
from the mines to the power houses. The feeder routes connecting
the coal fields to the DFC are being strengthened concurrently with
the DFC construction. Feeder routes for port connectivity with the
Eastern and Western DFCs for movement of the ported coal are
also being developed. Both the Eastern and Western DFCs are
targeted for commissioning in 2016-17.”
20. On finding that lack of timely transportation of coal has been
the nagging problem forcing power plants to run below their capacity,
the Committee had strongly recommended that coordination mechanism
must explore some new avenues regarding availability of additional
rail rakes for timely transportation of coal. In reply, the Ministry of
Power have stated that they have impressed on power utilities to reduce
unloading time of railway rakes so that the turn-around time of railway
rakes get reduced and they are also persuaded to make use of lean
demand months for railway rakes for building stock of coal from
domestic sources as well as import of coal.
On the other hand, the Ministry of Railways have replied
that transportation capacities of the Indian Railways are uniform
for the year and do not fluctuate substantially from one quarter to
another quarter. It is thus, necessary that the transportation capacities
are utilized optimally for the entire year. Demand and supply gaps
exist due to seasonal fluctuations, operational constraints limitations
of terminals, etc. The Indian economy has a peak season from
October to March with another peak between January-March. The
transportation capacities planned for are uniform throughout the year.
Sudden spurts in peak time demand result in bottlenecks in
transportation capacity. They have also referred to a letter written by
the Chairman, Coal India Ltd. to the Chairman, Railway Board

16
proposing to load 190 rakes per day in the first quarter of 2010-11.
Against this CIL has barely managed to load approximately 155-160
rakes per day despite adequate availability of rakes. They have further
stated it was decided that 60% of the total imports for the thermal
power sector would be planned in the first half of the year so that
Railway’s transportation capacity in the first half of the year was
optimally utilized. This would also ensure higher rake availability for
CIL loading in the second half of the year. Against this, the imports
for the thermal power sector upto end of August, 2010 was only 10.171
MT while the desired level was 17.5 million tonnes, i.e. only 60% in
the first five months. Thus, import for the power sector will again be
bunched in the second half of the year thereby leading to lesser
availability of rakes for CIL.
The Committee is unhappy to know the mis-management, short-
sightedness, and lackadaisical approach of CIL in respect of using rail
rakes for transportation of coal. The Committee feel that transportation
of required coal can be achieved from the present capacity of Railways
if rakes are used judiciously and efficiently by CIL and power utilities.
The Committee, therefore, is inclined to infer that hue and cry made
by CIL in respect of lack of rail rakes to transport coal is nothing but
an act of passing the buck. In view of this, the Committee expect that
CIL and other concerned should review and revisit their defective
mechanism of transportation of coal by using rail rakes and apprise
the Committee about the steps taken in this regard. It is imperative
that the Railways should also gear up for increasing rail rakes in wake
of anticipated increase in future demands of coal resultant of increase
in power generation capacity.
E. AVAILABILITY OF GAS FOR POWER SECTOR
Recommendation, (Sl. No. 11 Para No. 2.11)
21. The Committee in their report had noted that Iran-Pakistan-
India (IPI) Gas Pipeline Project, India was supposed to receive a 30
mmscmd in Phase- I and 45 mmscmd in Phase-II. Whereas, the proposed
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline has the total
capacity  of supplying 90 mmscmd of gas. Considering the importance
of these two pipelines, the Committee in their Report recommended that
all out efforts should be made to expedite the matter by resolving the
issues involved. The Committee had further recommended that as the
execution of these pipelines was in unclear domain due to international
political issues, therefore, the Government should simultaneously focus
on strengthening the internal sources of gas and leave no stone unturned
in respect of exploring and developing the new indigenous sources of

17
gas. The Committee had strongly recommended that the maximum
possible share of existing gas production and the gas that would be
available in future should be allotted to the Power Sector.
22. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas have stated as under:—
“To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement
(GSPA), bilateral and multilateral meetings have been held among
the four countries and their gas companies participating in the
Turkmenistan- Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline project.
Regarding security and safety of the pipeline, suitable provisions
have been made in the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) and
Gas Pipeline Framework Agreement (GPFA) signed by the
Governments of Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India in
December 2010. The discussions relating to the TAPI Project,
particularly the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement (GSPA) have reached
an advanced stage.
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline Project has been under
discussion with the Governments of Iran and Pakistan 60 mmscmd
of gas is proposed to be supplied in Phase-I, to be shared equally
between India and Pakistan and 90 mmscmd of gas is envisaged
to be supplied in Phase-II. Several rounds of discussions have taken
place, involving the India-Pakistan-Iran Joint Working Group, India-
Pakistan JWG and the India-Iran Special JWG. The matter has also
been discussed at the Ministerial level; the last such meeting between
India and Pakistan was held in Islamabad on 25.4.2008. Several
critical issues, viz., the delivery point of Iranian gas, the project
structure, guarantees related to safety of the pipeline and security
of supply, besides pricing of gas are yet to be resolved.
Government has adopted a multi-pronged strategy to enhance
availability of natural gas from domestic sources in the country
consisting, inter alia , of the following:—
(i) Intensification of domestic Exploration and Production (E&P)
activities through New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP),
(ii) Coal Bed Methane (CBM) E&P activities,
(iii) Development of Gas Hydrates.
(iv) Early completion of Shale Gas reserve mapping and finalizing
a regulatory regime for Shale gas exploration and production
in the country.

18
(v) Diversifying the import sources of  Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG), and
(vi) Participating in Transnational pipelines, viz., Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline and Iran-Pakistan-
India (IPI) pipeline.
The Committee’s recommendation to attach high priority to the
power sector in the allocation of gas is noted for guidance.”
23. While the taking note of the efforts made by the Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas with regard to the international
arrangements for gas supply, the Committee are of the view that a lot
need to be done on domestic front also to optimize the production of
gas from available and known sources while laying greater emphasis
on identifying and exploring the other avenues for enhanced gas
availability. Further, the Committee had also strongly recommended
that the maximum possible share of existing gas production and the
gas that would be available in future should be allotted to the Power
Sector after considering the acute shortage of gas for power sector. In
their action taken report the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
have stated that the Committee’s recommendation to attach high priority
to the power sector in the allocation of gas is noted for guidance.
Considering the fact that the power sector plays an important role in
economic development of the country and plays a vital role in every
industry, the Committee would like to re-emphasize that the sector
needs top priority in allocation of gas.

19
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the process of allocation and development
of coal blocks is long, cumbersome and fraught with uncertainties. So
far, 93 captive coal blocks and 208 coal blocks with approximate reserves
of 48.82 billion tones have been allotted to various utilities in power
sector. However, the production has commenced in only 5 coal blocks
and the production was 30.02 million tones during the year 2008-09 from
these coal blocks. This is highly unsatisfactory situation. The Committee
understand the problems involved in the development of coal blocks
such as forest clearance for exploration, clearance before exploration,
problems in land acquisition, forest clearance for coal mining, delay in
grant in licensing etc. However, despite these obstacles, the gestation
period of 3 to 7 years for reaching the production stage and another
2 to 3 years for reaching the optimum capacity is too high. The Committee
have been informed that the allocate of coal blocks who have not started
the production so far, are in various stages of obtaining the statutory
clearances and mining lease, preparing mining plans, acquisition of land,
procuring machinery etc. for both mining as well as end use production.
However, no data has been made available to the Committee with regard
to specific time schedule as to when these blocks will commence
production. The responsibility of developing the coal blocks rest entirely
with the allocated company within a specified period, failing which
possibility of de-allocation always looms large. In the opinion of the
Committee, this is an extremely unilateral approach and tantamount to
transferring the yoke. With pre-conditions like forest clearances,
land acquisitions, forest clearance before commencement of the
exploration etc., it is likely that delay may occur. De-allocation of the coal
blocks will make the matter worse. Some penal provisions may be
enshrined to expedite the development of coal blocks. Rather, it will be
befitted if the Ministry of Coal and the allocated company shoulder
responsibility in conjunction. Being the specialist in the field, the
Ministry of Coal is in a position to foresee the problems related to the
development of the coal blocks and suggest various pre-emptive measures
to the allocattee utility. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the

20
Ministry of Coal may first prepare an inventory of coal reserves in the
country alongwith the possible problems and their likely solutions
with regard to the each coal blocks before taking a decision for their
allocation. This will not only help in reducing the gestation period of
coal production but will also remove the air of uncertainty about future
course of action.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
In para 2.3 of the Report of the Standing Committee it is stated
that 93 captive coal blocks and 208 coal blocks with approximate reserve
of 48.82 billion tones have been allocated to various utilities in power
sector. However, as per information available on web site of Ministry of
Coal and the details furnished in a recent review meeting on Development
of coal/lignite blocks and associated end use plants held by Ministry of
Coal with various coal block allottees in New Delhi on 20-21 July 2010,
98 coal blocks are allocated for power generation. The status of captive
coal blocks allocated for power generation is given below:—
98 captive coal blocks allocated for power generation have total
Geological Reserves of 31.23 billion tones. Out of these 98 blocks, 10 nos.
of blocks having geological reserves of 1074 MT have been allocated for
captive power plants. Break up details of balance 88 nos. coal blocks
having total geological reserves of about 30 billion tonnes allocated to
power utilities including UMPPs are as follows.
Utility Coal blocks Geological Reserves
(MT)
CPSU 14 7752
State Utilities 45 14124.56
UMPPs 10 4520.91
Private 19 3756.05
Total 88 30153.52
The status is briefly given below:—
(i) 13 (Thirteen) nos. of captive coal blocks are under production
with a total production capacity of about 22.15 million tones
of coal per year.
(ii) Out of remaining 75 blocks, 46 (Forty six) coal blocks are
explored blocks and Mining plan approval have been obtained
for (33) (thirty three) nos. of coal blocks with estimated coal
production of about 245.8 million tones per year. For most

21
of these blocks, developers are in the process of obtaining
environment and forest clearance. For remaining 13 (Thirteen)
explored blocks, developers are taking action to prepare
mining plan.
(iii) 27 (Twenty seven) nos. of blocks are unexplored blocks
requiring detailed exploration or need studies to establish
feasibility of mining. Utilities are taking action to obtain
license for prospecting or are in the process of detailed
exploration.
(iv) One coal block namely Korba (East) has been surrendered
by DVC on 15.9.2008 as the same was not commercially viable.
For one coal block namely Lohara West and Lohara Extn.,
ToR has been cancelled by MoE&F.
It may be mentioned that fourteen (14) captive coal blocks allocated
to Central and State PSUs having geological reserves of about 4.2 billion
tones and six (6) captive coal blocks allocated for UMPPs having geological
reserves of about 2.1 billion tones are falling in the Category ‘ A’ as
intimated by MoE&F. The forest clearance to these category ‘ A’ blocks
is separately under discussion with MoE&F. Inter-Ministerial Team were
constituted to visit the sites of end use projects to ascertain the status
of implementation of the projects, the investment already made/committed,
etc. and the reports on the same are under consideration.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 13/7/2010-TH. II, dated: 09.12.2010]
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
The responsibility of developing the coal block as per the prescribed
guidelines and milestone chart attached with the allocation letter rests
entirely with the allocattee company. In the terms and conditions of
allocation, it is categorically mentioned that in the event of willful delay
in the development of coal blocks and in setting up of the end use project,
the Government will take appropriate action leading to de-allocation of
the said block. Government, in line with this, periodically monitors and
reviews the development by the allocattee companies. Wherever, delays
are noticed, Government issued show cause notices and advisories to
such allocattees cautioning them to bring the coal blocks into production
as per the guidelines/milestones chart. Similarly, the Coal Controller’s
office is also monitoring on regular basis the achievement of different
milestones.
As per the terms and conditions of allocation letter, for the blocks
allocated before 2007, the allocates are required to furnish bank guarantee

22
which is linked to the production performance till the mine reaches its
peak rated capacity. In case of blocks allocated after 2007, bank guarantee
is linked with development as well as production. Under the first category,
50% bank guarantee is linked with development before the commencement
of production and 50% is linked with production performance. In case
of blocks allocated after June 2007, the provision of bank guarantee is
also applicable for allocatees of blocks allocated under Section 3 (3) (a)(i)
of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. The Coal Controller’s Office
has been entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring of the coal block
as well as submission of bank guarantee of the allocattee companies. For
reviewing and monitoring of bank guarantee submitted by the coal/lignite
block allocatees, a Committee has been set up under the Chairmanship
of Addl. Secretary (Coal) with Joint Secretary (Coal), Joint Secretary and
Financial Adviser, Adviser (Projects) and Coal Controller as member of
the Committee. If the allocattee does not submit the bank guarantee, the
allocated block is withdrawn/de-allocated, after following due procedure.
As on date, 26 coal blocks have come into production. The coal
production from these blocks is reported to be 35.51 million tonnes during
2009-10. As regards excess time allegedly given to the block allocattees
for development of coal block, it may be noted that there are 16 steps/
milestones, which are to be achieved by a block allocattee before the
production from the block is started. Recently , it has been observed that
the process of land acquisition and Environment/Forest clearance, where
State Government/other Ministries are involved, is taking too long causing
abnormal delays in development of the coal blocks.
As regards action taken by this Ministry on delay in development
of coal blocks on the part of coal block allocattees, there is a provision
of deduction of bank guarantee amount from the bank guarantee
submitted by the allocattee companies. During the review meeting held
on June, 2009, a decision was taken to deduct bank guarantees in respect
of 6 coal block allocattees. Hence, the Government first explores the option
of deducting the BG in case of minor lapses in developing the coal block,
whereas in case of willful inordinate delay, the Government sometimes
resorts to de-allocation of the coal block, so that the same block can be
allocated to a more serious player. Recently three coal/lignite blocks have
been de-allocated by this Ministry.
As regards, preparation of inventory of coal reserves in the
country alongwith the possible problems and their likely solutions, the
Ministry of Coal has already entrusted CMPDIL to prepare the inventory
of all coal blocks on offer for allocation and also to identify the major

23
constraints for their development. It has also been suggested that before
offering any coal block, the Ministry of Environment and Forests may
be consulted.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December, 2010]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee are happy to note that some efforts are underway
to put an institutional mechanism for acquisition of coal mines abroad.
The process involves numerous activities which could be time consuming
as well. Several safeguards like necessary statutory clearances, effective
transport arrangements, smooth carriage of coal, synchronization of
imported coal with the needs of local power utilities of the country and
economic viability of the entire exercise, etc. are necessary pre-requisites
for any venture pertaining to the acquisition of the coal mines abroad.
The creation of International Coal Ventures Pvt. Ltd. (ICVL), a
conglomeration of SAIL, CIL, NTPC, RINL and NMDC aims at securing
metallurgical coal and thermal coal assets from overseas. The Committee
have been apprised that the due diligence of the proposal is underway.
Besides, NTPC is also currently exploring the possibility of acquiring
stakes in Indonesia, South Africa and Mozambique. In order to meet our
long term coal requirements for ever-increasing targets of power capacity
addition, there efforts, if materialize, will greatly ease the much strained
domestic coal supply and will also smoothen the entire process of coal
allocation and distribution to the power utilities in the country. Needless
to emphasis the urgency in the matter, the issue merit expediting the
entire process of acquiring the coal blocks abroad. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the newly formed Joint Venture and other
PSUs like NTPC should go whole hog in the hot pursuit of acquiring
the much needed coal reserves abroad so as to enable us not to meet
our coal requirements for our thermal power generation but also to save
our indigenous reserves for the future.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
NTPC, a Maharatna Company under the administrative control of
Ministry of Power is actively pursuing for acquisition of Coal Mines
Abroad on its own, as well as through International Coal Ventures Pvt
Ltd. (ICVL). ICVL is a JV amongst SAIL, CIL, NTPC, RINL and NMDC.
1. Presently , NTPC is carrying out due diligence of two coal
assets in Indonesia for which Financial, Technical and Legal
consultants have been appointed. NTPC is also exploring new
opportunities in Australia, Indonesia, South Africa and
Mozambique.

24
2. ICVL is pursuing opportunities for acquisition of mines for
coking coal as well as thermal coal and has participated in
four (04) bidding processes in the past. Presently, it is pursuing
two opportunities one each in Australia and Indonesia.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
• International Coal Ventures Pvt. Ltd. (ICVL) is also actively
pursuing acquisition of one coal asset in Australia and one
coal asset in Indonesia.
• Govt. of Mozambique has allotted exploration license for two
coal blocks. A-1 and A-2 covering an area of about 224 sq.
km. in the Moatize district of Tete province to CIL through
a bidding process.
Coal India Africana Limitada was registered and incorporated on
04.09.2009 under the Commercial Code of Republic of Mozambique and
was granted prospecting licence. The company shall take up the business
of exploration in order to assess the qualitative and quantitative parameters
of the coal asset.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December, 2010]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee note that there is perennial gap in demand and
supply of coal with the power utilities. On a short term basis this supply
deficit can be met only through the import of coal. The deciding factor
for supply of domestic coal for the power station is 90% PLF or the actual
performance of plant during the last three years if the plants commissioned
before March, 2009. Deficit of 10% of the demand is already established
even before the requirement is placed. During the year 2009-10 CIL was
to import 4 MT of coal from overseas with the provision that there may
be increase in import by 2011-12 based on the requirements of the utilities.
However, the said import could not take place due to absence of any
firm commitment from the power utilities. This is astonishing and reflects
poorly on the co-ordination between the power utilities and CIL. The
Committee have been apprised that the CIL is now in process of exploring
and firming up port and other logistics required for import of coal. They
are also ascertaining the demand for import of coal for power sector
during 2010-11 to finalize the process of import of coal. The Committee
have also been informed that power utilities themselves can make their
own arrangement for import of coal against the target fixed by the Ministry

25
of Power. During 2009-10 the power utilities imported 23.1 MT against
the target of 28.70 MT fixed by the Ministry of Power. The modalities
and mechanism for such import of coal are decided by the power utilities.
There is also an element of blending of imported coal with the indigenous
one upto certain per centage based on the boilers designs of power plants.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that with a view to
obviate the gap in the supply of coal to power utilities it has become
necessary to plan about the import of coal well in advance to achieve
the capacity addition targets as also to run the existing plants optimally.
Hence, the plea of no firm commitment from power utilities or the power
utilities themselves can import the coal will only add to the problem of
coal supply. Coal requirement of thermal power stations are known well
in advance, based on that estimation of domestic requirement can be
arrived at. Thereby deciding as to what quantity of coal has to be imported
for meeting the requirement. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Ministry of Power to make mandatory for the power utilities to have
advance planning for import of coal either directly by power utilities or
through Coal India Ltd. This essential import may be included in
Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) signed between the Ministry
of Power and central PSUs under its administrative control. Similarly,
this aspect should be reviewed by the Ministry/Ministry’ s representatives
on the Board of PSUs in Quarterly review meeting done in respect of
PSUs, review of MoUs, Board meetings, etc. The Ministry of Coal should
also review the working of CIL in regard to its coal imports so as to
ensure that proper coordination is ensured with power utilities in regard
to assessment of coal imports and their timely imports at competitive
prices. The Committee would await specific action by the Ministry of
Power and the Ministry of Coal in this regard.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
Planning Commission had in July, 2009 set up a Sub-Committee
comprising Chairperson, CEA, Chairman, Coal India Limited and
Chairman, MMTC to look into the aspects of long term import of coal
on sustainable basis. The Committee had, in August, 2009 concluded as
under:—
(i) The shortfall in domestic coal supplies during 2010-11 and
2011-12 based on the projected domestic production is
46 MT and 74 MT respectively. Accordingly, the import
requirement for power sector for plants based on indigenous
coal works out to be 31 MT and 49 MT respectively. It is
recommended that 30 MT imports may be planned on long
term basis. Balance requirement of imported coal could be
procured on year to year basis through annual contracts.

26
(ii) 30 MT of coal is required to be imported on long term basis
and balance on short-term annual contracts by CIL for Power
Sector. To begin with, CIL may import about 20 MT during
2010-11 for a few major generating companies like NTPC.
CIL will come out with a paper on their strategy for import
of coal for the benefit of the generating companies. After the
methodology for long term import is finalized in consultation
with the generating companies, CIL will take procurement
action for import of coal.
(iii) The ports where the imported coal has to be received will
be identified by CIL in consultation with Ministry of Shipping
and Transport and Railways keeping in view the proximity
to the power stations.
This was brought to the notice of the Power Utilities and other
concerned agencies in a meeting held in the Ministry of Power on
27th October, 2009 and was also communicated to Energy/Power
Departments of the concerned State Governments in November, 2009,
January, 2010 and April, 2010. NTPC, the major importer of coal among
the Power Utilities, is contemplating import of coal through various routes
comprising the procurement through PSUs, Coal India Limited and also
on their own. DVC has also envisaged import of coal during 2010-11 by
inviting bids and through Coal India Limited.
Utility-wise target for import of coal by the Power Utilities during
2010-11 aggregating 35 Million Tonne was communicated in January, 2010.
The modalities and mechanism for import of coal are decided by the
Power Utilities themselves. Under the New Coal Distribution Policy, it
is the responsibility of CIL/Coal companies to meet full requirement of
coal under Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) even by resorting to imports,
if necessary. NTPC and DVC have already requested CIL to supply 4 MT
and 0.8 MT of imported coal respectively during 2010-11. Import of coal
is being regularly monitored by Ministry of Power with all the power
utilities, Ministry of Coal, Coal India Limited, Ministry of Railways and
Department of Shipping.
Import of coal assigned to the Central Power Utilities is reviewed
in the meetings in the Ministry of Power and also by the representative
of Ministry of Power on the Board of Public Sector Undertakings. CPSUs
under the administrative control of Ministry of Power are being advised
to include import in the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU).
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]

27
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
As per the recommendation of Fuel Infrastructure Committee of
Planning Commission, Coal India Limited (CIL) has already taken action
for importing coal for power utilities. Since it would not be prudent to
maintain stock of imported coal, a decision was taken to import coal only
on the basis of firm commitment from power utilities. Accordingly, CEA
as well as individual utilities were approached to ascertain the exact
requirement of imports to be made by CIL. On the basis of the indications
received so far from utilities, CIL have taken decision to import 6 MT
of coal during the current fiscal year. Negotiations are going on with
power utilities to accept FOR unload port term for delivery of imported
coal. Once the terms of delivery are accepted by the Utilities, CIL will
initially import 6 MT of coal on short-term basis and will subsequently
going for long-term off-take contracts with overseas mining companies
to ensure competitive prices for Indian Utilities.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that lack of timely transportation if coal has
been the nagging problem forcing power plants to run below their capacity .
On being asked about the steps to ensure availability of sufficient rakes
to transport the coal on time, it has been stated that the present
coordination with the Ministry of Railways has been satisfactory.
Company-wise coal distribution in respect of power stations needs to be
reviewed in consultation with the Ministries of Railways, Coal, Power
and CEA keeping in view the constraints in the existing rail transportation
infrastructure for transportation of desired types of railway rakes
commensurate with the coal loading and unloading facilities
available at the power stations. It has also been stated that the issue of
availability of adequate railways rakes for transportation of coal to the
power stations is also reviewed at the various forums. The Committee
have been apprised that in order to supply 333 MT of coal to the
power utilities during 2010-11, they have planned an incremental
off-take to the tune of 44 MT. In order to achieve this incremental
off-take the rail dispatch has been projected at 185 rakes per day
against present average loading of 165 rakes per day during 2009-10.
Therefore, there is additional requirement of 29 rakes per day . Thus,
the availability of rail rakes requires growth by 19% to achieve the planned
level of off-take against the actual growth of 1% during the 2009-10.

28
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that coordination
mechanism must explore some new avenues regarding availability of
additional rail rakes to transport the available coal in time. The plan of
dedicated freight corridor should also be expedited and should  inter-alia
cover the coal belts to facilitate the quick and effective transportation of
coal to the power utilities.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
In the review meetings held in the Ministry of Power, it is impressed
on the Power Utilities that the unloading time of railway rakes be reduced
so that the turn-around time of railway rakes get reduced and they are
also persuaded to make use of lean demand months for railway rakes for
building stock of coal from domestic sources as well as import of coal.
Ministry of Railways is being persuaded to expedite the Dedicated
Freight Corridor and procurement of additional wagons/rakes
commensurate with the increasing demand of the power sector.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Railways)
Coal loading on Indian Railways is done from various sources like
the mines of Coal India Limited, washeries, captive mines, mines of other
coal companies like Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. Goods sheds and
imported coal both for power houses and for the other sectors.
Transportation capacities on the Indian Railways are uniform for the year
and do not fluctuate substantially from one quarter to another quarter.
It is thus, necessary that the transportation capacities are utilized optimally
for the entire year. Coal dispatched from Coal India Ltd. sources is not
only dependent on the Railways but also on other modes like Merry-
Go-Round systems, road dispatches etc.
Demand and supply gaps exist due to seasonal fluctuations,
operational constraints limitations of terminals, etc. The Indian economy
has a peak season from October to March with another peak between
January-March. The transportation capacities planned for, are uniform
throughout the year. Sudden spurts in peak time demand result in
bottlenecks in transportation capacity.
The issue of less loading by Coal India in the first half of the year
leading to loss in transportation capacities has been raised at various
fora.  Accordingly, Chairman, Coal India Ltd. had written vide his letter
No. CIL:DLI:CH:20010/2/90-2203, dated 30.3.2010 addressed to Chairman,

29
Railway Board that for meeting their yearly requirement of 185 rakes/
day in the year 2010-11, Railways has assured supplying the same provided
the band fluctuates between 180-190 rakes per day. In the same letter,
Coal India Ltd. proposed to load 190 rakes per day in the first quarter
of 2010-11, as against which Coal India Ltd. has barely managed to load
approximately 155-160 rakes per day despite adequate availability of rakes.
An important issue is increasing, the transportation of coal from pitheads
to the railway sidings. Less transportation of coal from pitheads to railway
sidings in the first five months of the current fiscal by CIL, has led to
lesser dispatch than the desired levels.
At the same time, the import of coal for Thermal Power Sector was
planned for a level of 35 million tonnes in 2010-11. It was decided that
60% of the total imports for the thermal power sector would be planned
in the first half of the year so that Railway’s transportation capacity in
the first half of the year was optimally utilized, and also ensuring higher
rake availability for Coal India loading in the second half of the year.
As against this, the imports for the thermal power sector upto end of
August, 2010 was only 10.171 MT as against the desired level of
17.5 million tonnes, 60% in first five months. Thus, imports for power
sector will again get bunched in the second half of the year, thereby
leading to lesser availability of rakes for Coal India Ltd.
The Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) being constructed
from Dankuni to Ludhiana would cater mainly to the coal traffic from
the mines to the power houses. The feeder routes connecting the coal
fields to the DFC are being strengthened concurrently with the DFC
construction. Feeder routes for port connectivity with the Eastern and
Western DFCs for movement of the ported coal are also being developed.
Both the Eastern and Western DFCs are targeted for commissioning in
2016-17.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that the supply of gas to the gas based power
plants is not keeping pace with the growing demand. Although the supply
has improved over the years yet a lot is required to be done to meet the
gas requirements of power utilities. The present gas based power

30
generation capacity of about 15000 MW. As against the requirement of
about 75 mmscmd, the allotted gas is about 60.42 mmscmd, leaving a
gap of about 14 mmscmd. Further, as allotment of 10 mmscmd has also
been made to captive power plants on fall back basis. Thus out of total
firm allocation of 63.175 mmscmd, allocation of 32.677 mmscmd
constituting about 50% of the total allocation has been made to power
sector (32.66 mmscmd firm allocation, 12 mmscmd fall back allocation
and another 10 mmscmd fall back allocation for captive power plants.)
is 54.67 mmscmd out of 93.88 mmscmd. This is about 58% of the total
allocation constituting the highest allocation to the power sector. On
the other hand, on the security of the data, the Committee find that
against the demand of gas for power sector the supply during the
year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 has been only 58%, 60% and 80%
respectively.
The Committee, note that the pre-KG D-6 shortfall of natural gas
has been estimated around 95 mmscmd. The present projection regarding
KG D-6 production is a maximum level of 80 mmscmd. Hence, the
expected production from the KG D-6 can be utilized only in meeting
the existing shortfall. The existing gas based power capacity is 15000 MW
and 25000 MW additional capacity is proposed to be installed during the
12th Plan. The future demand from various quarters has been estimated
to be around 300 mmscmd and this cannot be met from the KG D-6 field.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that besides firming up
the KG D-6 field. To optimize its production, sincere efforts should be
made for identification of the gas reservoirs in the county/outside the
country with a view of harness them for our requirements.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas)
As against the allocation of 32.68 MMSCMD of KG D6 gas to the
power sector, the supply has been 24.57 MMSCMD in Oct, 2011. There
has been a fall in the production KG D6 due to which the supply to
various consumers has had to be reduced. In term of priority, the power
sector has been placed after fertilizer and LPG plants, and any gas
allocations under NELP are being made accordingly . Recently, Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural gas (MoPNG) has allocated 7.235 MMSCMD
of Non-APM gas produced from new fields of nominated blocks of
ONGC. Of this, MoPNG has allocated 4.214 MMSCMD to various power
plants. As the domestic demand is far exceeding supply in India and
there are few new domestic sources available, additional demand will
have to be catered either through imported LNG in the future or gas
imports through pipeline. As on date, LNG re-gasification capacity in the
country is around 50 MMSCMD and is likely to grow to 184 MMSCMD
by 2016-17

31
The Government has adopted a multi-pronged strategy to enhance
availability of natural gas in the country , consisting, inter alia , of the
following:—
(i) Intensification of domestic Exploration and Production (E&P)
activities through New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP)
rounds,
(ii) Coal Bed Methane (CBM) E&P activities,
(iii) Gas Hydrates,
(iv) Diversifying the import sources of Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG),
(v) Participating in Transnational pipelines, viz., Turkmenistan -
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline and Iran-
Pakistan-India (IPI) pipeline, and
(vi) Acquisition of gas assets abroad.
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas OM No. L-15016/10/09-
GP Dated January , 2012]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that even though power sector utilities are
going for captive mines, direct import of coal, acquisition of coal assets
abroad, there appears no efforts to make participation in petroleum/gas
sector. It would be great help to power utilities to have participation in
Joint Venture engaged in exploration and production of gas in the country
and abroad. This would help the power sector in ensuring assured and
enhanced gas supply to run their power plants at optimal level.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
NTPC which is a Central PSU has ventured into upstream oil and
gas exploration in 2005 with intent for achieving fuel security. It partnered
with M/s Geopetrol International Inc. (French Company) and M/s Canoro
Resources Ltd. (Canadian Company) and won an Exploration Block in
Arunachal Pradesh under Government of India, New Exploration and
Licensing Policy (NELP) in round V . Geopetrol was the Operator and
NTPC had 40% stake in the block.
NTPC has been regularly participating in domestic NELP rounds
and has recently won four blocks in the last NELP-VIII round. While in

32
one of the block, NTPC is itself an operator with 100% Participating
Interest (PI), the other three blocks are in partnership with ONGC, where
ONGC is the Operator. In KG-OSN-2009/1 Block ONGC, NTPC and
APGIC are the partners. In KG-OSN-2009/4 Block, ONGC, NTPC, APGIC
and Oil India Limited are the partners, and in Block AN-DWN-2009/13,
ONGC Ltd., NTPC, GAIL and GSPC Ltd. are the consortium partners.
The details of the blocks are as under:—
Sl. Block Name Sedimentary Consortium NTPC’s Operator
No.  Basin partners PI
1. CB-ONN-2009/5 Cambay NTPC 100% NTPC
(Onland)
2. KG-OSN-2009/1 Krishna- ONGC Ltd. 10% ONGC
Godavari NTPC
(Shallow water) APGIC*
3. KG-OSN-2009/4 Krishna- ONGC Ltd. 10% ONGC
Godavari NTPC
(Shallow water) APGIC
Oil India Ltd.
4. AN-DWN-2009/ Andaman ONGC Ltd. 10% ONGC
13 (Deepwater) NTPC
GAIL
GSPC Ltd.
APGIC* - Andhra Pradesh Gas Infrastructure Corporation Pvt. Limited.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]

33
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
The Committee note that there has been anticipated generation
of 525 billion unit from thermal based power stations during the year
2009-10.  To meet this generation and build stock upto reasonable level,
coal requirement for the year worked out to be 404 MT. Against this
requirement, total indigenous coal availability has been estimated to be
363 MT leaving the gap of 41 MT. Similarly, for the year 2010-11, the
requirement of coal is 444 MT and total availability of indigenous coal
is 388 MT leaving a shortfall of 56 MT. For the year 2011-12, coal requirement
has been estimated to be 532 MT against the availability of 414 MT. After
the introduction of New Coal Distribution Policy, coal supply to all
consumers including power sector are covered under Fuel Supply
Agreement (FSA). The Committee note that while planning and forecasting
the requirement of coal for the power stations, the calculation is done
on the normative requirement which is 90% of the plant load factor of
that power station. For power stations commissioned by 31st March,
2009, coal requirement was estimated on the basis of actual performance
of the power plants during the last three years. However, for the new
power plants i.e. power stations commissioned after 1st April, 2009,
Annual Contracted Quantity (ACQ) is yet to be decided. The Committee
also note from the list furnished by the Ministry of Power that there
are various thermal power stations where ACQ under FSA was less than
the normative requirement of the coal. Coal supply position for the
plants commissioned after 1st April, 2009 and for the new power plants
which are likely to be commissioned in 2010-11, 2011-12 and beyond is
likely to aggravate further in view of the substantial addition in the coal
based power capacity. In respect of power plants commissioned after
31st March, 2009, the arrangement between CIL and CEA for supply of
coal has not fully been materialized so far as the allocation being made
by the CEA for the new power plants is over and above the incremental
availability being offered by CIL for the year 2010-11. Total demand
of coal in the country in the terminal year of the 11th Plan viz. 2011-12
is 713.24 MT, whereas the indigenous availability is envisaged

34
at 591.78 MT. Out of this CIL contribution is 486.50 MT only leaving huge
deficit of 121.46 MT. Taking into consideration the availability constraints,
CIL took conscious decision to make available only 50% of the normative
requirement of any consumer including power stations in future. The
term of FSA for new consumers including power stations has also been
reduced to 5 years from 20 years. The Committee infer that the coal
demand and supply scenario in future is extremely gloomy. Bulk of the
capacity addition depends on thermal power. To bridge the gap some
emergent steps are required in the short term and a detailed strategy for
smooth coal supply to meet our requirement in future is need of the
hour. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that there should
be a uniform criteria for ACQ for the power plants irrespective of their
date of commissioning. Besides, for immediate resolution of the problem
import of the required quantity of coal should be immediately tied up.
As a long term measure, avenues should be explored wherein the
indigenous coal production can be augmented, gestation period in the
development of coal blocks is brought down, new coal mines areas are
identified, latest technology is used to increase production-minimize
expenses and acquisition of the coal mines abroad are done to achieve
our energy targets.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
Keeping in view the anticipated requirement of coal and its
availability from indigenous sources Power Utilities have been advised
to import coal on a year to year basis. In view of import of coal becoming
imperative, Power Utilities, as a long term strategy , have been advised
to enter into long term contract for import of coal with part of the
requirement on fixed price and the balance on variable price.
In view of limited availability of 306 Million Tonne coal committed
by Coal India Limited in the year 2009-10 for Thermal Power Stations/
Units commissioned upto 31st March, 2009, Annual Contracted Quantity
(ACQ) for these power stations/units has been fixed on the basis of their
performance during the last three years. For the new units which have
been commissioned w.e.f. 1st April, 2009, a uniform criteria for ACQ has
been adopted wherein the ACQ is kept equal to long-term linkage granted
by the Ministry of Coal or the quantity specified in the Letter of Assurance
issued by the Coal company.
In view of limited availability of indigenous coal, power utilities
have been advised to import coal to bridge the gap between demand and
availability of indigenous coal. For the year 2010-11, against an import
target of 35 MT, Power Utilities have imported 11.4 MT of coal till 30th
September, 2010.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]

35
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
That indigenous availability of coal is less than the demand, is a
reality. Therefore, the up-coming power units would not be getting their
full requirement of coal from indigenous sources. Considering the
widening gap between demand of power utilities and indigenous
availability of coal, Coal India Limited (CIL) and Central Electricity
Authority (CEA) agreed that in each year, CIL would indicate the
incremental availability of coal for power utilities out of the total
production plan of CIL. CEA would allocate the annual contracted
quantity for each of the power stations commissioned in the previous
year for signing Fuel Supply Agreement and the residual quantity would
be allocated for power stations to be commissioned in the year for
meeting their ‘part of the year’ requirement. This arrangement would
ensure uniform conditions in FSA between existing and up-coming
power stations. Alternatively , up-coming power stations may sign
FSA on the basis of the Model available for new units, wherein CIL
takes the responsibility of indigenous supply up to 50% of the
normative requirement instead of 90% for existing units, drawing coal
as on 31.3.2009 with the tenure of the FSA also being shortened
from 20 years to 5 years.
Power utilities account for about 73% of the dispatch from CIL
sources. However, considering the emerging demand, CIL during the
current year offered 335 Million Tonnes (MT) of coal for utilities, 22 MT
more than the Annual Plan target of 313 MT in 2009-10. The incremental
production during the current year being envisaged at 25.5 MT, CIL offered
more than 86% of it to power utilities. Besides, CIL has also offered 15
MT of coal on ‘best effort’ basis from the pithead stock for utilities subject
to availability of requisite logistics infrastructure.
To meet the enhanced demand of coal in near future, CIL has taken/
proposed to take following action for augmentation of coal production
by exploring avenues in its command areas:—
• Phasing out of manual loading by inducting intermediate
mechanization.
• Introduction of mass production technology with continuous
miners and shuttle car combination, SDL/LHD with high
speed mechanized drilling etc.
• Some of the underground coal mines/ blocks have been
identified for development, construction and operation at high
capacity with state-of the art technology .

36
• A few abandoned/ derelict undergrounds mines not being
worked for reasons of safety and economy, have also been
identified for salvaging, rehabilitation and operation.
• Up gradation to high capacity equipment matching with
bench height and stripping ratio.
In addition to the above, CIL has taken the following action towards
capacity addition by starting of new projects and acquisition of coal blocks
abroad:—
• CIL has identified 142 projects during XI Plan period, whose
ultimate capacity will be 380.22 MT. Out of 142 identified
projects, 77 projects have been approved so far, and the
expected contribution from these new projects is 118.95 MT.
in the terminal year of XI Plan (2011-12).
• Plans are afoot for CIL to acquire coal resources abroad
through Equity Stake in working or green field projects. It
floated a global EOI for selection of strategic partners for
overseas operations. A Panel of Investment Bankers has been
formed to scout for acquisition opportunities abroad and assist
in due diligence/transaction. CIL holds 28.57% equity in the
SPV “International Coal Ventures Limited” formed is a Joint
Venture with a consortium of PSUs – SAIL, RINL, NMDC
and NTPC.
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) has been supplying
coal to the following power stations and the details of ACQ are as
under:—
APGENCO:  SCCL has been supplying coal to the following power
plants of APGENCO
(Figs. in LTP A)
Name of power plant Linkage ACQ
KTPS 51.3 59.00
Muddanur Stage-I 15.00 18.00
Muddanur Stage-II 20.80 20.80
RDM-B 3.1 3.00
Total 90.20 100.80
Kakatiya TPP 21.60 21.60
The ACQ was fixed based on the historical supplies.

37
KPCL: Following are the Linkage and ACQ of KPCL.
(Figs. in LTP A)
Name of power plant Linkage ACQ
KPCL 30.10 30.10
The ACQ was fixed based on the linkage quantity .
MAHAGENCO:  Following are the Linkage and ACQ of
MAHAGENCO
(Figs. in LTP A)
Name of power plant Linkage ACQ
MAHAGENCO 22.60 22.60
The ACQ was fixed based on the linkage quantity .
NTPC: Following are the Linkage and ACQ of NTPC.
(Figs. in LTP A)
Name of power plant Linkage ACQ
NTPC, Ramagundam 102.00 102.00
The ACQ was fixed based on the linkage quantity .
Efforts of SCCL to augment production
To sustain the present level of production and to cater to future
needs, SCCL has been planning and implementing new projects.
— Two high capacity (plus 2.0 MTPA) Long Wall projects are
under construction.
— Two Continuous Miners are working to liquidate the standing
pillars in SCCL mines. SCCL has plans to introduce a good
number of Continuous Miners in its underground mines to
enhance production potential. Based on the success of these
projects, SCCL has plans to replicate the same in future
projects.
— 100 tonne capacity Dumpers and 12 cu.m Shovels are
introduced in opencast mines in SCCL, to augment the
production potential and overburden removal.
With a view to sustain the present rate of production and to grow
further, SCCL has been requesting Government of India to allocate the

38
following coal blocks outside the State of Andhra Pradesh.
1. Kundanali-lohori Talcher, Orissa
2. Burapahar Ib valley, Orissa
3. Bandha Singrauli, UP
4. Gand Bahera Ujheni Singrauli, UP
5. Barapalli-Kamitikra Mand Raigarh, MP
6. Phutamera Mand Raigarh, M.P.
The non-availability of suitable blocks for opencast mines is likely
to impact the growth plans of SCCL. This would further increase the
demand-supply gap in Southern India.

39
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that there are coal stocking norms for power
stations of different categories based on their distance from the coal mines.
It is 15 days for pit head power stations, 20 days for stations located upto
500 km, 25 days upto 500-1000 km and 30 days for beyond 1000 km. The
stocking norms are aimed to achieve optimal power generation, if properly
adhered to. However, the Committee’s examination has revealed that
these norms are not being followed in most of the cases. Many of the
plants have been categorized as critical as they have coal stocks less than
7 days. As on 13.05.2010 as many as 6 plants were in super critical
category having stock of less than 4 days. Slight negligence from any of
the involved agencies that supply coal to power stations would result
in shut down of the plants for the want of coal. Although the Ministry
of Coal take stock of the situation regarding supply of coal to power
stations on monthly basis yet various power stations are not having coal
stocks as per specified norms. The reasons for this situation have been
attributed to non-availability of proper and sufficient rail rakes, pilferage
during the transportation, constraints in existing rail transportation
infrastructure, old/outdated loading and unloading facilities etc. The basic
infrastructural facilities at mines, loading, safe/proper and timely
transportation need to be periodically reviewed to ensure the availability
of coal to power stations as per the norms. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that necessary steps should be taken to augment
the base work to ensure the assured coal supply to power stations as per
the norms.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Power)
With a view to have assured coal supply to power stations, coal
requirement for generation of power as well as building up stock to a

40
reasonable level has been taken into consideration, while estimating the
coal requirement for the Power Utilities.
Following steps have been taken to augment supply of coal to
thermal power stations in the country:
Power utilities have been advised to import coal to bridge the gap
between demand and its availability from domestic sources. Import of
coal by power utilities is being monitored on regular basis by Ministry
of Power/Central Electricity Authority.
Coal stock at the power stations as well as availability of adequate
railway rakes for transportation of coal to power stations are reviewed
in the meetings at various forums including the Inter-Ministerial
Sub-Group, inter-ministerial meetings, Infrastructure Constraints Review
Group in the Cabinet Secretariat and Fuel Infrastructure Committee in
the Planning Commission for taking appropriate steps.
Coal India Limited is in the process of deploying mobile crushers.
Thermal Power Stations are also augmenting and expanding unloading
facilities, wherever required. Theft of coal en-route to the power stations
is taken up with the concerned State Governments as well as
Home Ministry. Expediting contracts for transportation of coal by road
from the mine head to railway sidings and owning road transportation
fleet by the coal companies are under consideration of the coal companies
of CIL.
Ministry of Coal/CIL has been requested to enhance the supply
of coal to the power sector to avoid generation loss due to shortage of
coal.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No.13/7/2010-TH.II, dated: 09.12.2010]
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
In order to monitor the coal stock at power stations, a monitoring
mechanism is already put in place in the Ministry of Coal. An
inter-ministerial Sub-group of the Infrastructure Review Committee of
Cabinet Secretariat, under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Coal reviews the coal stock available at power stations and take
contingency decisions in association with Central Electricity Authority
and Railways for priority movement of coal to those power stations,
where generation could suffer for want of coal.

41
Following are the coal supplies to the power plants served by SCCL
for the year 2010-11.
Name of power Linkage Annual Supplies Stock No. of
plant  (LT) contract from position days
quantity 1.4.10 to as on stocks
(LT)  27.9.10 26.9.10
(LT) (LT)
KTPS 51.3 59.00 48.97 3.81 20
Muddanur 35.80 38.80 12.55 2.59 26
Stage-I and II
RDM-B 3.1 3.00 1.45 0.12 12
TOTAL APGENCO 90.20 100.80 62.97 - -
Kakatiya TPP 21.60 21.60 4.48 3.30 -
KPCL 30.10 30.10 7.07* 3.67 26
MAHAGENCO 22.60 22.60 8.85 1.07 8
NTPC 102.00 102.00 51.30 1.29 3
*The shortage in supplies to KPCL is only due to non-drawal of coal supplies by KPCL
itself.
From the above it can be inferred that power houses linked to
SCCL are supplied coal as per linkage and are having sufficient stocks.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.4, Para No. 2.4)
It appears to the Committee that the process of allotment of coal
blocks is too officious, mechanical and unimaginative. As of now it appears
that coal blocks are allocated without analyzing their usefulness to the
allotee utilities. Instead of looking at the issue in its entirety to take the
process to logical ends i.e. the allotted block become useful to the allocattee
by meeting their requirement and expectations as well, a short sighted
view with limited role and responsibility appears to be the hallmark in
this regard. The matter does not end with the routine mechanical process
of allotting a coal block and appending certain pre-conditions to develop
it within a specified time period. The Ministry of Coal should also be
responsible enough to become a facilitator to remove the bottlenecks in
the development of the coal blocks rather than playing a role of big
brother intimidating the power utilities for the reasons for which they

42
are not directly responsible. The allotment and the subsequent de-allotment
of the Kasta (East) coal block to the DVC is glaring illustration of the
manner in which the system is working there. Instead of finding a solution
as to how the Kasta coal block can become economically viable for DVC,
the blatant de-allocation speak of the arrogance and displays the tendency
of shedding its own responsibility . Had the two adjutant blocks viz. Kasta
(west) and Kasta (south) been clubbed with Kasta (east) block, it might
have resulted in fruitful exercise solving the problem of DVC, expediting
and enhancing the coal production. The Plea that the other two blocks
are not identified and are not in the list of blocks for the allocation does
not hold good as the DVC might have been reasonably assured of their
allotment after the identification of the blocks. There is lack of vision,
will and determination on the part of the Ministry of Coal to resolve the
issue to the satisfaction of the utilities. This kind of approach is bound
to complicate the entire process. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the allotment of the coal blocks to the power utilities
should be done in a transparent and objective manner. The requirement
of the power utilities should be met from the geographically adjutant
blocks to facilitate the smooth excavation and carriage of the coal and
to minimize the related storage/transportation costs involved therein.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
Allocation of coal blocks for captive end use through the Screening
Committee route is done by an Inter-Ministerial and Inter-Governmental
Group called the Screening Committee. The recommendations made by
the Screening Committee for allocation of coal blocks are based on the
views of the concerned State Governments, administrative nodal Ministries
and CMPDIL. A copy of the guidelines and procedure for allocation of
coal blocks is already available in the public domain on the Website of
Ministry of Coal. All the details of the coal blocks which are advertised
for allocation are also posted on the Website of Ministry of Coal. All the
applicants before applying are aware of the details and the procedure
followed for allocation of coal blocks. The system therefore, is, adequately
transparent. A copy of the guidelines is enclosed at Annexure.
Further, to bring in greater transparency in allocation of coal blocks,
the Government had introduced the Mines and Minerals (D&R)
Amendment Bill to enable auctioning of coal and lignite blocks through
competitive bidding process. The said bill has since been passed by both
Houses of the Parliament in the Monsoon Session of Parliament, 2010
and has been notified in the Gazette on 9th September, 2010. The
Government has set up a Committee to frame rules and guidelines for
initiating competitive bidding.

43
M/s Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) was allocated five coal
blocks including Kasta (East) coal blocks with combined geological
reserves of 986.64 MT. That was sufficient to meet the requirement of
the power plants of DVC. As regards allocation of Kasta (West) and Kasta
(South) coal blocks, M/s DVC did not make any reference in their first
application for allocation of Kasta (East) coal block. Their request came
much later and during the period since the date of allocation of Kasta
(East), no development of coal block was made by DVC. While DVC
made satisfactory progress in development of four blocks, the allocattee
did not make much progress with regard to Kasta (East).
Since DVC had expressed their inability to develop the Kasta (East)
block, the Ministry of Coal, after due examination, de-allocated the said
coal block in May, 2009. The de-allocation was without any assurance for
allocation of any alternative coal block in lieu of the surrendered coal
block. The de-allocation was made after following due procedure and
taking into account all the facts and circumstances of the case.
There are no policy guidelines available at present for allocation
of alternative coal blocks. Further, there are no coal blocks identified and
earmarked for allocation. The identification process is underway and as
and when the same is finalized, interested applicants, including M/s DVC
can apply for allotment and the applications would be considered on
merits.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. L-54012/4/2009-CPD,
dated 6th December, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that efforts are afoot for transnational gas
projects yet given the geo-political realities, their becoming a reality in
near future is highly unlikely. In respect of Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI)
Gas Pipeline Project, India was supposed to receive a 30 mmscmd in
Phase-I and 45 mmscmd in Phase-II. Whereas, the proposed Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline has the total capacity of
supplying 90 mmscmd of gas. These two gas pipelines projects, if
materialize, would greatly ease our gas requirement. However, the scrutiny
by the Committee reveals that there has been inordinate delay in the
finalization of both the pipeline projects on the ground of security and
tariff issues. All out efforts should be made to expedite the matter by

44
resolving the issues involved. The Committee further recommend that
as the execution of the above pipeline are in unclear domain due to
international political issues, therefore, the Government should
simultaneously focus on strengthening the internal sourcese of gas and
leave no stone unturned in respect of exploring and developing the
new indigenous sources of gas. Needless to emphasis the importance
that the Power Sector hold for the development of the country, the
Committee strongly recommend that the maximum possible share of
existing gas production and the gas that would be available in future
should be allotted to the Power Sector.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas)
To settle various issues related to the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement
(GSPA), bilateral and multilateral meetings have been held among the
four countries and their gas companies participating in the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline project. Regarding security
and safety of the pipeline, suitable provisions have been made in the
Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) and Gas Pipeline Framework
Agreement (GPFA) signed by the Governments of Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India in December 2010. The discussions
relating to the TAPI Project, particularly the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement
(GSPA) have reached an advanced stage.
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) Gas Pipeline Project has been under
discussion with the Governments of Iran and Pakistan 60 mmscmd of
gas is proposed to be supplied in Phase-I, to be shared equally between
India and Pakistan and 90 mmscmd of gas is envisaged to be supplied
in Phase-II. Several rounds of discussions have taken place, involving the
India-Pakistan-Iran Joint Working Group, India-Pakistan JWG and the
India-Iran Special JWG. The matter has also been discussed at the
Ministerial level; the last such meeting between India and Pakistan was
held in Islamabad on 25.4.2008. Several critical issues, viz., the delivery
point of Iranian gas, the project structure, guarantees related to safety
of the pipeline and security of supply, besides pricing of gas are yet to
be resolved.
Government has adopted a multi-pronged strategy to enhance
availability of natural gas from domestic sources in the country consisting,
inter alia,  of the following :—
(i) Intensification of domestic Exploration and Production (E&P)
activities through New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP),
(ii) Coal Bed Methane (CBM) E&P activities,

45
(iii) Development of Gas Hydrates.
(iv) Early completion of Shale Gas reserve mapping and finalizing
a regulatory regime for Shale gas exploration and production
in the country.
(v) Diversifying the import sources of Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG), and
(vi) Participating in Transnational pipelines, viz., Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan- Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline and Iran-
Pakistan-India (IPI) pipeline.
The Committee’s recommendation to attach high priority to the
power sector in the allocation of gas is noted for guidance.
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas OM No. L-15016/10/09-
GP dated January 30, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.23 of Chapter-I of the Report)

46
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the environmental clearance is a statutory
obligation without which no activity with regard to the development of
coal mines and mining of coal can take off. As many as 89 coal projects
are awaiting clearances from the Ministry of Environment and Forest.
This has adversely affected the planned enhanced coal production. The
Committee have been informed that a period of about three years is
taken to give any clearance by MOEF. On being asked by the Committee
about the reasons for such a long time, the MOEF submitted that
Environmental Clearance is a three stage process involving.
(i) Terms of reference for preparation of Environmental  Impact
Assessment , Study – Environmental Management Plan,
(ii) Conduct of public hearing and
(iii) Preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment Report—
Environmental Management Plan for the projects.
Thereafter, Expert Appraisal Committee initiates the process as per
the laid down procedures. It has also been informed that a time limit
of 105 days has been prescribed in Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) notification for the grant of Environment Clearance (EC). However,
the main cause for delay as stated by MOEF is the submission of proposal
for TOR/EC without completion of exploration of coal blocks. The exercise
of exploration is undertaken to ascertain the extent of mineable coal
reserves. This is the pre-condition before submitting the proposal for
EC. The Ministry of Coal often allocate coal blocks without completion
of exploration process. Mining plans are also approved with partial or
incomplete exploration. Resultantly, project proponents are submitting
proposals for EC for such coal blocks for which EIA reports are prepared
even without the specific assessment of coal reserves to be mined. Since

47
the impact on environment cannot be assessed unless the mining of the
coal blocks is undertaken; this is a very major lacuna in the EC process.
Coal blocks are also being allocated in new virgin areas of coalfields with
a large number of reserve/protected forests. To meet the situation MoEF
is in the process of identifying ‘Go’ and ‘No Go’ areas in all major coalfields
of the country where blocks have been allocated by overlaying forest
map on coal atlas map. The Committee find that the problem of
environmental clearance has been created by the Ministry of Coal. Even
the decisions taken at a joint meeting with the officials of the Ministry
of Coal, MoEF, CIL and other subsidiaries of CIL are not being adhered
to by CIL and its subsidiary companies and other utilities by the frequent
up-gradation of projects. The submission of proposals, without exploration
frequent up-gradation of projects, poor functioning of the technical wings
of the coal companies to address the environmental issues properly etc.
appear to be more cogent reasons for face off between the two Ministries.
The reasons like (i) delay in acquisition of land (ii) adverse geo-mining
condition (iii) delay due to law and order problems are also very important
factors in the overall delay in the development of coal mines. Therefore,
the holistic view should be taken to identify all activities responsible for
delay and suggesting appropriate efficacious remedial measures.
Environmental reservations are equally sacrosanct and cannot be allowed
to be violated for maximizing the productions blindly. The Committee,
therefore, would like the coal companies and other block allocatee
companies to complete all processes in a time bound manner before
approaching the Ministry of Environment and Forest. The MoEF should
also expedite process of granting clearance so as to achieve the given
time frame in all cases. The Committee, therefore, recommend that with
a view to avoid delay in grant of EC, some independent mechanism
should be put in place to examine and certify that proposals of the Ministry
of Coal conform to all statutory requirements for Environmental Clearance.
This will also help in clearing the air of suspicion, uncertainty and blame
game between the two Ministries of the Government. The proposal for
EC should be sent only after the approval by such independent agency .
The base date for computing the period for EC should be the date when
it is received in MoEF from such designated agency. Thereafter, the EC
must be accorded within a specified time frame failing which MoEF
should be held accountable for the delay.
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Coal)
• The three stage process of obtaining Environmental Clearance
(EC) is being followed by Coal India Limited (CIL) and its
subsidiaries.

48
• CIL and its subsidiary companies prepare application for  EC
and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) reports on the
basis of approved projects reports/ Feasibility reports that
are based on detailed geological exploration report and mine
plans. Hence, the cause mentioned for delay “Submission of
proposal for ToR/EC” without completion of exploration of
coal blocks is not applicable.
• At present all EIA/EMP reports are prepared on the basis of
normative and peak production capacity of projects to avoid
frequent up-gradation. In some cases, due to sudden increased
demand, incremental capacity of projects are being created
so that project proponents can obtain EC for the higher
capacity. At present the major causes of pending clearances
are:—
> Delay in Public hearing.
> Delay in consideration of projects falling under Critically
Polluted Area.
> Delay in consideration of projects falling under Wildlife
Reserve Corridor and Buffer Zone of Reserve Forests.
In addition, some of the projects are also being awaiting final EC.
Over the years, CMPDI has acquired experience and expertise in
many sphere of Environmental Management including preparation of
EIA/EMPs. Till date CMPDI has prepared more than 500 EIA/EMPs, out
of which about 322 nos. obtained Environmental Clearance (EC) from
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). CMPDI has also made
EIA/EMPs of other than CIL projects which have also received EC from
MoEF. As per the instruction of MoEF, CMPDI has submitted an
accreditation application as EIA/EMP consultant to Quality Council of
India (QCI). CMPDI has also Environmental Lab with State- of-the- Art
technology and is recognized by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB),
New Delhi.
From the above, it can be seen that CMPDI has the requisite
experience and expertise and is equipped with qualified technical
manpower and infrastructure. Hence the need of independent mechanism
to examine and certify the proposals of EIA/EMPs submitted by CMPDI
is not felt at this point of time. However, an independent agency could
be considered as needed, but only after ensuring that the same does not
become an added cause of delay.

49
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL)
No coal mining projects of Singareni Collieries Company Limited
(SCCL) are pending at MoEF for grant of Environmental Clearance.
However, the following action are being taken by SCCL for early grant
of Environmental Clearances by MoEF:—
1. Application for grant of Terms of References (ToRs) are being
submitted to MoEF with conceptual reports after detailed
exploration of coal mining blocks and finalization of Draft
Mining Plan.
2. Generation of Base Line Data (BLD) is planned in advance
for the projects for early preparation of EIA/EMP reports
after obtaining ToR from MoEF. Collection of secondary data
for EIA/EMP preparation is also being undertaken
simultaneously during generation of BLD.
3. Pre-requisite information like Mining plan approval, Ground
water clearance, Flora and fauna certificate from DFO, Forest
Clearance status etc. is being furnished to MoEF with the
application for Environmental Clearance.
4. The projects are planned “for peak production capacities” in
order to avoid the “revised clearances under expansion
programme”.
Since, SCCL is submitting final EIA/EMPs with complete
information including other pre-requisite clearances; the Environmental
Clearances are being obtained from MoEF in a stipulated time frame.
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.L-54012/4/2009-CPD, dated
6th December, 2010]
Reply of the Government (Ministry of Environment and Forest)
Reply in respect of Ministry of Environment and Forest is awaited
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
1 May, 2012 Chairman,
11 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

50
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITEEE ON ENERGY
MINUTES OF THE NINETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 25TH APRIL, 2012 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri P .C. Chacko
4. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5. Shri Baliram Jadhav
6. Shri C. Rajendran
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
9. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
10. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
11. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam

51
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Additional Director
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee, and apprised the Committee about day’s agenda.
4. The Committee then took up for consideration three Draft
Reports viz;
(i) 26th Report on  Action Taken on the recommendations
contained in the Tenth Report on ‘ Availability of Gas and
Coal for Power Sector’.
(ii) 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy .
(iii) 28th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Power.
At the discussion, the Committee adopted the three draft Reports
with minor modifications.
5. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above- mentioned Reports after taking into consideration the consequential
changes arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned
Ministries and also to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament
during the current session.
The Committee then adjourned.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”

52
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 10TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 11
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total : 06
Percentage : 55%
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Sl. No. 1
Total : 01
Percentage : 09%
(iv) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which the replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2, 4 and 11
Total : 03
Percentage : 27%
(v) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 5
Total : 01
Percentage : 09%