STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on the subject 'Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects']
TWENTY FIRST  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)
21

TWENTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Funding of New and
Renewable Energy Projects']
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)

COE No. 215
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2011 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ....................................... 13
CHAPTER  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
 replies ................................................................................ 23
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration............................... 24
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 29
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
1st December, 2011. .................................................. 30
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the 15th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy .............................................. 32

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P.C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V.P . Singh Badnore
24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 21st Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 15th Report of the Standing Committee
on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Funding of New and Renewable Energy
Projects’.
2. The 15th Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 18th March, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 15th June, 2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 01st December, 2011.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 15th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
12 December, 2011 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects’ pertaining to the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
18th March, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Report contained 11 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10 and 11
Total-07
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:—
Serial No. 9
Total-01
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the reply
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:—
Serial Nos. 3, 6 and 7
Total–03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
Serial. No. Nil
Total-00
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Potential of Renewable Energy vis-à-vis achievement
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.1)
6. The Committee had noted that the country has estimated
potential of 90312 MW of new and renewable energy excluding the solar
power which has estimated capacity of 20-30 MW per sq.km. for most
part of the Country. Against this, the Country’s present installed capacity
from various renewable energy sources is only 16817 MW. The Committee
had also observed that had we been able to use even a small percentage
of total available solar energy potential that would have been more than
enough to offset the gap between the demand and supply of power.
Moreover, renewable energy sources are not only highly beneficial from
energy point of view but also from ecological point of view as it is totally
different from the energy that is coming from conventional sources i.e.
coal/gas or any other fossil fuel of which sources are limited. The
renewable energy sources are also everlasting, self sustaining without
involving any human efforts in their evolution, development and
sustenance. The Committee, considering the benefits of renewable energy
and taking into account the present poor infrastructure, had strongly
recommended that all out efforts should be made by the Government
to evolve a comprehensive policy framework to facilitate the rapid growth
of new and renewable energy projects so as to optimal utilization of
available renewable sources in minimum possible time.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have Stated:—
“The Ministry is already implementing the National Solar Mission
launched in January last year, which lays down a comprehensive

3
policy framework for speedy development and deployment of solar
energy systems in the country. Recently, the Ministry has prepared
a Strategic Plan for New and Renewable for the next 5 year period
till 2017. This includes resource specific targets for next
5 years, the aspiration goals for 2022 and action plan for achieving
the same. …..Further; a Working Group has been constituted by
the Planning Commission for formulation of 12th plan proposals
for the new and renewable energy sector. This exercise is
expected to be completed by September 2011 and the Strategic Plan
will be modified suitably based on the report of the Working
Group.”
8. The Ministry in their action taken reply have Stated that they
have prepared a Strategic Plan for new and renewable for the next
10 years period till 2022 including aspiration goals and action plan for
achieving the same. The Ministry have further Stated that a Working
Group has been constituted by the Planning Commission for
formulation of 12th Plan proposals for the new and renewable energy
Sector. This exercise is expected to be completed by September 2011
and the Strategic Plan will be modified suitably based on the report
of the Working Group. The Committee do appreciate the Ministry for
preparing a Strategic Plan for new and renewable for the next 10 years.
The Committee feel that it is important to have long term strategy for
effective control and coordination for structured and phased
development of the sector and review the performance periodically.
However, the Committee would like to emphasize the need for proper
execution of these plans in a time bound manner. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Government to not only keep constant vigil
for timely execution of the planned programmes/strategy but also to
foresee and take preemptive measures for the hurdles/problems that
may come in future in implementation of plans/programmes and may
impede the progress of the sector. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the recommendations of the Working Group constituted
by the Planning Commission for formulation of 12th Plan proposals
for the new and renewable energy sector and the conclusive action
taken by the Ministry in this regard.
B. Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.2)
9. The Committee, after scrutiny of data and considering the
slow pace of the work had expressed their concern over the possibility
of under achievement of target of setting up 1000 MW of grid connected
Solar Power projects under the first phase of National Solar Mission

4
by 2013. Further, the Ministry had informed that Rs. 12,000 crore to
Rs. 15, 000 crore will be needed to set up the said 1000 MW of grid solar
power projects. IREDA alone would not be able to fulfil this huge demand
of funds. On the other hand the Ministry had not come up with any kind
of collaboration or understanding with any nationalized bank or financial
institutions to fund the projects coming up in Solar Mission. The Ministry
was expected to have done collaboration/understanding with some
nationalized banks/financial institutions and should have apprised them
beforehand about the provisions made by the Government in regard to
support of renewable energy projects making it easier for promoters to
raise funds from these institutes. The Committee, therefore, had strongly
recommended that the Government should act with urgency and
dedication to make Jawaharlal Nehru Solar Mission a grand success and
take all necessary steps to remove the hurdles of all kinds in proper
implementation of the projects and set up a monitoring mechanism to
evaluate the success of the Mission from time to time to ensure proper
remedial measures for problems that may surface during the
implementation of the projects.
10. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their written
reply have Stated:—
“Out of 1,000 MW capacity grid solar power projects through NTPC
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN) in 2010-11 a total of 704 MW capacity
projects have been sanctioned. Solar PV projects of about 300 MW
capacity are to be sanctioned in 2011-12, by December, 2011. These
projects are all expected to be commissioned by 2013. This was
done to ensure that (i) benefit of declining cost of PV modules is
available for the PV projects as these projects can be completed in
12 months time, and (ii) bunching of large number of projects
seeking funding is also avoided. The progress of sanctioning of the
projects is as per schedule.
Ministry is regularly reviewing the progress of implementation of
these grid solar power projects with the concerned States and the
project developers to facilitate State level clearances and assistance.
Recently the progress was reviewed on 28th April, 2011 in
New Delhi. Another review was held on 2nd May, 2011 at Jodhpur
with the project developers who are setting up solar power projects
in Rajasthan. A similar review was held with project developers
from Andhra Pradesh in Hyderabad on 16th May, 2011. Ministry
is also holding meetings with the banks and other financial
institutions to assist the project developers in financial closure of
the projects, although it is the primary responsibility of the
developers to make necessary financial arrangements.

5
With regard to the financial closure of the projects, out of 52 grid
solar power projects for which PPAs have been signed by NNVN,
so far 26 grid solar projects have reported financial closure through
banks or internal resources. This includes 16 projects covered under
migration. The financial closure of the remaining 26 projects is
progressing. The reports from the project developers indicate that
most of the other projects will be able to arrange financial closure
by end of June, 2011, which is within the time limit, which is
9th July, 2011. The project developers are approaching various
funding agencies. As a preference the project developers are first
approaching their own bankers. IREDA, PFC, REC, SBI, ICICI, Yes
Bank are among the various funding agencies who have been
approached by the project developers for the grid solar power
projects.
In addition, Ministry has held inter-ministerial consultations to
prepare a proposal to provide need based budgetary support to
NVVN as a payment security mechanism to ensure that NVVN is
able to make regular payments to the project developers. This step
has been taken to address the concerns of the banks about
bankability of the proposal in view of likely defaults by the State
distribution companies in making timely payments to NVVN for
the purchase of solar power.
Ministry is fully conscious of the fact that the success of the first
phase of the Mission is crucial for the launching and success of
the second phase of the Mission. Therefore, all necessary actions
are being taken to facilitate implementation of the projects.”
11. The Committee are happy to note that out of 1,000 MW
capacity grid solar power projects through NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam
(NVVN) in 2010-11, a total of 704 MW capacity projects have been
sanctioned and Solar PV projects of about 300 MW capacity projects
are to be sanctioned in 2011-12, by December, 2011. These projects are
expected to be commissioned by 2013. However, the Committee observe
that the financial closer of the 26 projects is yet to take place despite
various measures taken by the Government. It should be ensured that
this is not allowed to result in time and cost overrun of the proposed
projects and delay in the achievement of targets. The Ministry have
also informed the Committee that the projects developers are
approaching various funding agencies. As emphasized by the
Committee in their 15th Report, they expect the Government to closely
monitor the progress of projects under the Nation Solar Mission and
ensure the adequate fund availability to the projects developers so that
these projects can be commissioned within the stipulated time limit

6
i.e. by 2013. The Committee also feel that the proposal to provide need
based budgetary support to NVVN as a payment security mechanism
to ensure that NVVN is able to make regular payments to the projects
developers is a step in right direction and will certainly help to boost
the confidence of banks to finance the projects under the National
Solar Mission.
C. Research and Development Projects related to New and
Renewable Energy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
12. The Committee were unhappy to note the past performance of
the MNRE in the field of R&D relating to the development of new and
renewable energy sector. Budget outlays for R&D had been very less and
the Ministry failed in spending even half of the allocated fund. The
Ministry in the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 could spend only
Rs. 31.74 crore, Rs. 27.80 crore and 43.85 (upto 28.02.2010) against the
outlay of Rs. 60 crore, Rs. 100 crore and Rs. 78 crore respectively. In brief,
the Government spent Rs. 103.39 crore which is mere 43% of the total
outlay of Rs. 238 crore. The Committee also felt that the most common
deterrence in promotion of renewable energy sources is the high initial
cost of installation especially in case of solar energy. To bring down the
same to a reasonable level technological advancement has to play a pivotal
role. The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended that the
Government should not only focus in merely increasing the installed
capacity but also in technological advancement as the same would make
the renewable energy sector commercially viable resulting in massive
increase in installed capacity due to private investment that too without
being dependent on the aid and subsidy from the Government.
13. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action
taken reply have Stated:—
“Ministry has been supporting R&D in solar energy to meet the
challenges of reducing the cost and improving the overall
performance of solar energy in general and solar power in particular.
Several initiatives have been taken to support academic, research
organizations and industry. In addition, industry on its own is also
taking necessary steps to meet the short term technical challenges
to improve the performance and reduce the cost. In the last two
years the cost of grid solar power plants has already reduced from
an average of Rs. 18 crore per MW to 12-14 crore per MW. The
recent R&D efforts would help in further reduction in cost in the
coming years.”

7
14. The Committee had noted that the Ministry in the years
2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 could spend only Rs. 103.39 crore which
was mere 43% of the total outlay of Rs. 238 crore. Being unhappy over
the under utilization of fund allocated for R&D in the field of new
and renewable energy, the Committee expected the Government to
ensure optimum utilization of allocated fund for the same. The
Committee is dismayed to note that the Government in their action
taken reply have mentioned nothing about this. Further, the Committee
while emphasizing the pivotal role of technological advancement in
bringing down the cost of new and renewable energy projects, had
strongly recommended the Government to also focus on the
technological advancement in the field of renewable energy with their
efforts to increase the installed capacity as the same have the potential
to give much needed thrust to renewable energy sector. In their action
taken reply the Ministry have mentioned that they have been supporting
R&D in solar energy to meet the challenges of reducing the cost and
improving the overall performance of solar energy in general and solar
power in particular. In addition, industry on its own is also taking
necessary steps to meet the short term technical challenges to improve
the performance and reduce the cost. The Committee is happy to note
that in the last two years the cost of grid solar power plants has already
reduced from an average of Rs. 18 crore per MW to 12-14 crore per MW
but at the same time feel that still there is much scope for further
reduction in cost if the research in this field are supported well by the
Government. It is a well known fact that the most vital challenge for
renewable energy sector in the Country is the high operational and
maintenance cost that can only be brought down by in-depth research
and innovation and for that Government’s positive and effective
intervention is imperative. The Committee would like that the
Government should focus on Research and Development in the field
for renewable energy to reduce the high cost. Simultaneously, the
Government should ensure that the funds allocated for R&D purposes
are optimally utilized.
D. Role of Central Government in Funding of Renewable Energy
Projects
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
15. The Committee had noted that the Government provides
financial assistance/subsidy ranging from about 10% to as high as 90%
of project costs of the new and renewable energy projects. The Committee
felt that the Government besides providing financial assistance/subsidy
must also ensure the monitoring of the projects which avail the benefits
from the Government. It is likely that in absence of any regulation from

8
the Government, many manufacturers might not adhere to standard and
quality as prescribed and make/install substandard products. The
Committee also observed that there is also very poor after sale service
of renewable energy products due to absence of proper infrastructure in
this regard. This shakes the confidence of the end user, and poses a big
deterrence in popularization of renewable products. The Committee,
therefore, had strongly recommended that the Government should focus
on developing specifications, certification, and standardization of
renewable energy systems and products by making it mandatory for all
the manufactures to obtain a quality control certification from a agency
such as ISI etc. Simultaneously, for strengthening the after sales service
network of new and renewable energy projects/ products, the Committee
had also recommended that the Government should plan for setting up
a dedicated nodal agency entrusted with the task of establishment of
more and more after sale/ installation service centres for projects/ products
related to various sectors of new and renewable energy i.e. Solar, Wind,
Small Hydel etc. by collaboration of State Governments, manufactures
and technology institutions.
16. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have Stated:—
“The recommendations of the Committee for ensuring that
government subsidy is utilized for deployment of quality products
have been noted.
The Ministry has already prescribed Quality Standards to be
followed for systems to be deployed under the National Solar
Mission.
In case of Wind energy sector, installation of only such wind
turbines which possess a valid type certificate from recognized
certifying body or as per C-WET Type Certification Scheme
known as TAPS-2000, is permitted. The task of preparation of
BIS standards on various aspects of wind turbines has also
been taken up by the wind turbines Sectional Committee-ET
42, constituted by BIS, of which C-WET is a member and is
providing technical inputs.
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation for setting up a
dedicated nodal agency entrusted with the task of establishment
of more and more after sale/installation service centres by
collaboration of State Governments, manufactures and technology
institutions, it is submitted that the specific sales/service requirements
are highly region specific and can be best addressed by the
State level Nodal Agencies (SNAs) already set up by respective

9
State Governments for promotion of renewable energy. The
Ministry’s endeavour is to support the efforts of the SNAs through
suitable incentive mechanism under different programmes.”
17. The Committee are happy that the Ministry have prescribed
Quality Standards to be followed for systems to be deployed under
the National Solar Mission. In wind energy sector also they are coming
up with the standardization of products by BIS. However, there is
scope for extending these activities to remaining segments of the
renewable energy also. With regard to the Committee’s recommendation
for setting up a dedicated nodal agency entrusted with the task of
establishment of more and more after sale/installation service centers
by collaboration of State Governments, manufactures and technology
institutions, the Ministry have apprised that the specific sales/service
requirements are highly region specific and can be best addressed by
the State level nodal agencies (SNAs) already set up by respective
State Governments for promotion of renewable energy. They have
further, Stated that the Ministry’s endeavour is to support the efforts
of the SNAs through suitable incentive mechanism under different
programmes. The Committee feels that the quality and reliability of
equipments, particularly for decentralized applications is one of the
weaknesses of the Renewable Energy Sector in India. Further, the
Committee have time and again felt that poor after sales service network
poses a great deterrence in popularity of renewable energy devices.
Although after sales/service requirements may be region specific,
nonetheless, the Committee feel that even this region specific system
has been in place with the active involvement and assistance of the
Government. Hence to deflect the issue by putting onus on SNAs in
this regard may lead to unbalanced/unequal service to the people and
uneven development of the sector. The role the Government should
be of a central catalyst rather than that of an indirect supporter or
promoter. Therefore, a Nodal Agency be set up by the Government for
specific purpose which can be an effective instrument for the Ministry
to coordinate, guide and support the existing State level nodal agencies
(SNAs). Moreover, the proposed Central Nodal Agency may also be
entrusted with the task of formulating policies/providing financial/
fiscal incentives to SNAs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation of setting up a dedicated nodal agency at Centre,
entrusted with the task of establishment of more and more after sale/
installation service centers for projects/products related to various
sectors of new and renewable energy. Such an institution should be
a centre for excellence in the field with facilities of training, testing
of new product/technologies and should be empowered to collaborate
with similar foreign institutions.

10
(V) Role of States in funding/implementation of Renewable Energy
Projects
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
18. The Committee had been apprised that the States are responsible
for putting in place suitable/conducive policy and regulatory framework
at their level for promotion of renewable energy projects and also for
State level statutory clearances for large capacity projects. The major
problems in wind and hydro power sector are delays in land allotment,
forest clearance, timely availability of evacuation and transmission
facilities, regulatory issues at State level, uncertainness about the State
policies on tariff, wheeling, banking, techno-economic approval from State
(for hydro). It had been further informed that there is limited role of the
Central Government in timely completion of the projects. The Committee
had noted that the most common reason cited by the Ministry for delay
in regard to the renewable energy Project has been the inactiveness or
non-cooperation of the State Government. The Committee desired that
being the central nodal agency for the promotion of renewable energy,
the Ministry should share the responsibility of removing the obstacles
coming in the way of promotion and funding of renewable energy projects.
The Committee, therefore, had recommended a comprehensive policy in
regard to the setting up of new and renewable energy project, which
should be formulated by the involvement of all the States, so that its
effective implementation can be ensured. The States may be given leverage
to acclimatize the policy, according to their local needs without diluting
the thrust areas, before its notification for implementation in the respective
States. The Committee had also desired that the role of Centre should
not be limited to providing only fiscal incentives and subsidy to the
States but should expand to provide guidance and expertise also. Being
the Nodal Agency in the field of new and renewable Energy, the Ministry
should extend the suggestions/latest technological expertise to the States,
help them to overcome the barriers, if any, in setting up renewable energy
projects.
19. The Ministry in their written reply have Stated:—
“Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for a comprehensive
policy to be formulated by the involvement of all the States, for
effective implementation of New and renewable energy projects,
it is submitted that electricity is a concurrent subject and the States
are free to frame and adopt their own promotional policies for
development of renewable power projects within the framework
of the Electricity Act 2003. Furthermore, the viability of renewable
energy projects is highly region and resource specific and also

11
depends upon local conditions that vary widely. It also very
much depends on the State level facilitations/incentives which
cannot be expected to be uniform. Nonetheless, resource specific
guidelines are issued by the Ministry that provide an umbrella
policy and incentives framework for States and Developers for
planning and implementation of different categories of projects.
Guidelines are also issued from time to time through CERC on
different aspects like fixation of tariffs, trading of renewable power,
etc.
With regard suggestion of the Committee that the Ministry
 should extend the suggestions/latest technological expertise to the
States, help them to overcome the barriers, if any, in setting up
Renewable Energy projects, it is submitted that most projects
are being set up in private sector. Necessary technical guidance
is provided to interested developers through the technical
institutions of the Ministry (Solar Energy Center, C-WET, NIRE)
and the AHEC at IIT, Roorkee. Bottlenecks in implementation are
addressed through periodic review meetings at States/Central
level.”
20. The Committee are unhappy over the evasive reply of the
Ministry, in regard to formulation of a comprehensive policy, that
electricity is a concurrent subject and the States are free to frame and
adopt their own promotional policies for development of renewable
power projects within the framework of the Electricity Act, 2003. The
Committee had noted that the country has estimated potential of 90312
MW of new and renewable energy excluding the solar power which
has estimated capacity of 20-30 MW per sq.km. for most part of the
Country. Against this, the Country’s present installed capacity from
various renewable energy sources is only 16817 MW. It is apparent that
we are utilizing only small portion of the renewable energy sources
that the country has been endowed. The Committee has been apprised
time and again that the one of the reason for non-deployment/delay
of renewable energy projects is the inactiveness/non-cooperation of
States. Some States are doing well in establishing renewable energy
projects, whereas, others performances are far from being satisfactory.
It is beyond doubt that the present day fuel supply crisis for power
sector is here to stay, causing loss in power generation and to fill this
vacuum; share of renewable energy in power mix has to be increased.
In this scenario, where the Country badly needs power for growth, and
so much potential for renewable energy is there in the Country, the
need for comprehensive policy becomes more acute. Therefore, the
matter of developing renewable energy sources cannot be left in lurch
just for the reason that some State(s) are not taking desired initiative

12
for proper facilitation for setting up renewable energy projects. With
a view to ensure that promotion/development/utilization of renewable
energy is not limited to only a few States but to all the States endowed
with various renewable energy sources, the Committee had
recommended formulation of a comprehensive policy. Such an umbrella
policy can be region, resource and technology specific, encompassing
the divergent local conditions. As its guidelines are being issued by
the Government which are region and resource specific. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation and would like to be apprised
of the development in this regard.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 2.1)
(I) Potential of Renewable Energy vis-à-vis achievement
2.1 The Committee note that the country has estimated potential
of 90312 MW of New and Renewable Energy excluding the solar power
which has estimated capacity of 20-30 MW per sq.km. for most part
of the Country. Against this, the Country’s present installed capacity
from various Renewable Energy sources is only 16817 MW. We are
using very small part of currently available renewable energy whereas
it should have been harnessed more. Had we been able to use even
a small percentage of total available solar energy potential that would
have been more than enough to offset the gap between the demand
and supply of power. Renewable Energy sources are not only highly
beneficial from energy point of view but also from ecological point
of view also as it is totally different from the energy that is coming
from conventional sources i.e. coal/gas or any other fossil fuel of which
sources are limited. The Renewable Energy sources are everlasting,
self sustaining without involving any human efforts in their evolution,
development and sustenance. Therefore, the more emphasis we lay on
utilizing the available New and Renewable Energy sources the better
it will be for environment as well as for the development of the Country.
Though, the MNRE have lately come up with some specific plans and
have started doing well in comparison to the cumulative achievement
made upto the end of 10th Five Year Plan, there is still a long way to
go. As the Country has herculean task in hand and the MNRE has their
own limitations in terms of funds and infrastructure particularly in far
off/ hilly areas, there is a need for a comprehensive policy encompassing
all aspects including accurate assessment of potential, effective and
efficient infrastructure, friendly regulatory system and an investment
friendly environment to give a much needed thrust to this sector.
Considering the importance of the Renewable Energy, the Committee
strongly recommend that all out efforts should be made by the
Government to evolve a comprehensive policy framework to facilitate
the rapid growth of New and Renewable Energy projects so as to optimal

14
utilization of available Renewable sources in minimum possible time.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the detailed action plan
of the MNRE in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is already implementing the National Solar
Mission launched in January last year, which lays down a comprehensive
policy framework for speedy development and deployment of solar
energy systems in the country. Recently, the Ministry has prepared a
Strategic Plan for New and Renewable Energy for the next 5 year period
till 2017. This includes resource specific targets for next 5 years, the
aspiration goals for 2022 and action plan for achieving the same. This
plan is available on the Ministry’s website....Further, a Working
Group has been constituted by the Planning Commission for formulation
of 12th plan proposals for the new and renewable energy sector.
This exercise is expected to be completed by September 2011 and the
Strategic Plan will be modified suitably based on the report of the Working
Group.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 8 of Chapter – I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 2.2)
(II) Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
2.2 The Committee are happy to note that the Government has
approved the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) which
aims at setting up of 20,000 MW of grid solar power, 2,000 MW off-
grid solar power including 20 million solar lights and 20 million square
meter solar thermal collector area by the year 2022. The Mission also
aims at the development and deployment of solar energy technologies
in the Country to achieve parity with grid power tariff by 2022. The
entire Mission will be implemented in three phases. On successful
achievement of the targets set under this Mission, it is expected that
the Country will be established as a global leader in Solar Energy. But
the enormity of the target set under the Mission can be understood
better when we juxtapose the targets set and the present installed
capacity of solar energy of the Country which is meager 10 MW(peak)
along with the preparatory framework put in place for the first phase
of the Mission which is already in operation and will be completed

15
by March 2013. It is not that the target set is impossible to achieve but
keeping in view the previous performance, the pace of work so far,
the Committee would like the Ministry to play an aggressive approach
for achieving targets set for first phase fully.
The Committee have been informed that the implementation of
the second and third phase of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar
Mission would depend on the success of the implementation of the
first phase. Further, the Ministry have Stated that in case of grid
connected solar power projects, the major component of 1,000 MW in
the first phase of National Solar Mission is to be implemented through
NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN). No funding for this has been
proposed by the Ministry.
The Ministry has Stated that developers for setting up 620 MW
of grid connected solar power projects have been identified. 30 project
developers have been selected to set up 150 MW capacity of grid
connected photovoltaic power plants and 7 promoters have been selected
to set up 470 MW of solar thermal power plants. In addition to that
16 project developers have been selected to setup 84 MW capacity grid
solar power plants under migration scheme from their respective
existing arrangements to Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission.
The Committee have been further informed that these projects
are expected to complete their financial closure by July, 2011. For PV
related projects 12 months are provided for commissioning of the Plants,
whereas in case of the solar thermal power projects, the time given
is 28 months. This means that if all projects complete their financial
closure by July, 2011 as planned, even than some of the projects may
miss the deadline of year 2013 as envisaged for setting up of 1000 MW
of solar power under phase-I of the Solar Mission. Moreover, at present
this set up at best will achieve only 704 MW of solar power, including
the 84 MW projects which has been migrated to Solar Mission from
the existing installation. For remaining 296 MW, developers are yet to
be selected. In brief, the achievement of targets of 1000 MW, set under
the first phase of the Solar Mission, whose success would decide the
fate of the remaining two phases of the Mission, is highly unlikely
to be achieved. When the success of whole Solar Mission critically
depends on how the things turn out in first phase of the Mission, the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in implementing the first phase
of Mission is not only disappointing but also unacceptable.
Further, the Ministry have informed that Rs. 12,000 crore to
Rs. 15, 000 crore will be needed to set up the said 1000 MW of grid
solar power projects. IREDA alone will not be able to fulfill this huge

16
demand of funds. On the other hand the Ministry have not come up
with any kind of collaboration or understanding with any nationalized
bank or financial institutions to fund the projects coming up in Solar
Mission. The solar power developers have been left in lurch as far as
the finances of the projects are concerned. From the quantum of loans
advanced by the Financial Institutions to this Sector, it appears banks
and financial institutions are still reluctant to finance the solar power
project due to the uncertainty of their economical viability. The Ministry
was expected to have done collaboration/ understanding with some
nationalized banks/financial institutions and should have apprised
them beforehand about the provisions made by the Government in
regard to support of Renewable Energy projects making it easier for
promoters to raise funds from these institutes.
The Committee are inclined to infer that the Government is trying
to achieve an extraordinary target with ordinary efforts and planning.
Being the nodal agency for implementation of the Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission it has the onus to remove the hurdles faced
or anticipated in setting up of solar power projects, be it funding,
various clearances or streamlining of the procedures. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should act with
urgency and dedication to make Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar
Mission a grand success and take all necessary steps to remove the
hurdles of all kinds in proper implementation of the projects and set
up a monitoring mechanism to evaluate the success of the Mission
from time to time to ensure proper remedial measures for problems
that may surface during the implementation of the projects.
Reply of the Government
Out of 1,000 MW capacity grid solar power projects through NTPC
Vidyut Vyapar Nigam (NVVN) in 2010-11 a total of 704 MW capacity
projects have been sanctioned. Solar PV projects of about 300 MW capacity
are to be sanctioned in 2011-12, by December, 2011. These projects are
all expected to be commissioned by 2013. This was done to ensure that
(i) benefit of declining cost of PV modules is available for the PV projects
as these projects can be completed in 12 months time, and (ii) bunching
of large number of projects seeking funding is also avoided. The progress
of sanctioning of the projects is as per schedule.
Ministry is regularly reviewing the progress of implementation of
these gird solar power projects with the concerned States and the project
developers to facilitate State level clearances and assistance. Recently the
progress was reviewed on 28th April, 2011 in New Delhi. Another review
was held on 2nd May, 2011 at Jodhpur with the project developers who

17
are setting up solar power projects in Rajasthan. A similar review was
held with project developers from Andhra Pradesh in Hyderabad on
16th May, 2011. Ministry is also holding meetings with the banks and
other financial institutions to assist the project developers in financial
closure of the projects, although it is the primary responsibility of the
developers to make necessary financial arrangements.
With regard to the financial closure of the projects, out of 52 grid
solar power projects for which PPAs have been signed by NVVN, so far
26 grid solar projects have reported financial closure through banks or
internal resources. This includes 16 projects covered under migration.
The financial closure of the remaining 26 projects is progressing. The
reports from the project developers indicate that most of the other projects
will be able to arrange financial closure by end of June, 2011, which is
within the time limit, which is 9th July, 2011. The project developers are
approaching various funding agencies. As a preference the project
developers are first approaching their own bankers. IREDA, PFC, REC,
SBI, ICICI, Yes Bank are among the various funding agencies who have
been approached by the project developers for the grid solar power
projects.
In addition, Ministry has held inter-ministerial consultations to
prepare a proposal to provide need based budgetary support to NVVN
as a payment security mechanism to ensure that NVVN is able to make
regular payments to the project developers. This step has been taken to
address the concerns of the banks about bankability of the proposal in
view of likely defaults by the State distribution companies in making
timely payments to NVVN for the purchase of solar power.
Ministry is fully conscious of the fact that the success of the first
phase of the Mission is crucial for the launching and success of the second
phase of the Mission. Therefore, all necessary actions are being taken to
facilitate implementation of the projects.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 11 of Chapter – I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 2.4)
2.4 The Committee also find that the Country has yet not achieved
excellence in any sphere of R&D related to Renewable Energy when
we compare it with the achievement of other advanced countries in

18
this field. Therefore, the Government should concentrate on Research
and Development by developing indigenous technology by making
available enough funds and incentives to not only IITs but also to
private sector where enthusiastic and result oriented technical research
is being done as well as by collaboration with the technologically
advanced countries in the field of New and Renewable Energy.
Providing incentives/aids to the technology institutions such as IITs
will be an investment, the benefit of which will be reaped sooner or
later. Simultaneously, the Committee also strongly recommend that
there is greater urgency for substantial increase in the outlay for
Research and Development in New and Renewable Energy sector for
much needed thrust required for this sector.
 Reply of the Government
The Ministry accepts the recommendation to enhance the outlay
for R&D. This recommendation will be a guiding force for formulation
of the R&D budget and R&D needs in the 12th plan period.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.5)
2.5 The Committee note that there is a considerable gap between
budget estimation and the actual spending of the Ministry. The actual
spending of the Ministry during the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10
has been Rs. 478.72 crore, Rs. 441.79 crore and Rs. 548.83 crore, against
the budget estimation of Rs. 628 crore, Rs. 620 crore and Rs. 620 crore
respectively during the three years. The Committee are unhappy to
find under-utilization of earmarked funds. The Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy have already been fixing moderate targets,
furthermore, they have failed to achieve even that consistently. Less
spending of the Budget fund by the Government also means less
achievement in terms of physical targets.
The Committee have also been apprised that the budget outlay
for 2010-11 is Rs. 1,000 crore and Rs. 1,500 crore for the year 2011-12
to achieve the goals set up during the 11th Plan Period as approved
at Mid-term Appraisal stage. After examining the subject in detail, the
Committee have found that after the announcement of the Jawaharlal
Nehru National Solar Mission in 2009, the scenario of Renewable Energy
sector has changed significantly. The awareness about the importance
and promotion of New and Renewable Energy has increased. Mammoth
targets in terms of installed capacity set under the National Solar
Mission as well as in 12th Plan have, increased the responsibilities of

19
the Ministry many folds. On the other hand the resources of the Ministry
have not been increased in that proportion. Against this backdrop, the
Committee feel that the MNRE should play a leading role of expert,
mentor and patron in promotion of Renewable Energy in the Country.
To achieve this, proactive role of the MNRE is essential to ensure not
only adequate resources required by the Sector but also for investor
friendly environment. As Renewable Energy sector is new and there
is lack of infrastructure, the investors are not very enthusiastic to make
investment in this sector. Therefore, endeavour of the Ministry should
be on development of infrastructure for New and Renewable Energy
projects. The Ministry has set a huge target of capacity addition of
New and Renewable Energy to the tune of 13320 MW, whereas the
Country’s total present installed capacity is only 16817 MW. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that with a view to achieve the target,
corresponding increase should also be ensured in the Budget of the
Ministry to commensurate with the quantum of targets set under 12th
Plan. This would enable the Ministry to play more influential role in
development of necessary infrastructure and more assured/effective
funding of projects related to Renewable Energy.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
Ministry will continue its proactive efforts for development of the sector
as suggested by the Committee with increased vigor. It is also in full
agreement with the Committee’s recommendation to enhance the Budget
of the Ministry commensurate with the increased targets envisaged for
12th plan period, and will duly highlight the same before the Planning
Commission in the Plan proposals.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.8)
(VI) Role of IREDA in Funding of Renewable Energy Projects
2.8 The Committee note that the corpus of the Indian
Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) has been
Rs. 797 crore, Rs. 870 crore, Rs. 950 crore for the years 2007-08,
2008-09, 2009-10 respectively. The Committee have been apprised that
the IREDA, the only PSU and the financing arm of the Ministry, is
entrusted with the financing of Renewable Energy projects for which
it arranges resources from the market through borrowings from the
market and bilateral/multilateral agencies, internal accruals and Equity
provided by the Ministry. In regard to the requirements of funds for

20
the forthcoming 12th Plan, the Committee have been given to
understand that a total investment to the tune of Rs. 1,50,000 crore
shall be required. However, the sources of this fund requirement are
yet to be identified. Against this backdrop, the corpus of the IREDA,
which is the sole fund lending institution dedicated to New and
Renewable Energy Projects, is woefully insufficient. Being the specialist
institution in this sector, IREDA has to play a role of catalyst in
promotion and the funding of New and Renewable Energy projects
and to instill the confidence among other Financing Institutions about
the Renewable Projects as also about their economic viability. IREDA
has been involved in this field for quite a long time and has vast
experience. Although, IREDA has been a profit making PSU which has
earned profit (after tax) to the tune of Rs. 10.20 crore, Rs. 13.16 crore
and Rs. 16.91 crore during the years 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10
respectively, yet it is in no position to play a pivotal role in the funding
of New and Renewable Energy projects as envisaged to attain the targets
set in this sector for the coming years. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should properly utilize the expertise of
IREDA in funding of Renewable Energy projects by taking effective
measures to increase its corpus, encouraging to join the bandwagon
for developing this sector and enabling to become a leading light for
Financial Institutions. Needless to emphasise that the Ministry would
take necessary steps to expand the capital base of IREDA alongwith
requisite technical power support.
Reply of the Government
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation for taking effective
measures to increase IREDA’s corpus, the same would require infusion
of additional equity either by the Government itself, or from the market
by way of a public issue/ IPO. The Ministry has been regularly providing
equity support of up to Rs. 50 cr. each year, increasing its capital base
to Rs.639.60 cr. Need for allocation of more funds for expanding
the capital base of IREDA will be placed before Planning Commission
in the 12th plan proposals of the Ministry. Equity augmentation
from the market through an IPO could also be considered at an
appropriate stage depending on IREDA’s performance and market
conditions.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.10)
2.10 The Committee note that the short gestation period for
installing wind turbines, and the increasing reliability and performance

21
of wind energy machines has made wind power a favoured choice for
capacity addition in the Country. These reasons have led to joining of
this sector by private players in a big way providing the lion’s share
to wind power sector out of present installed capacity of New and
Renewable Energy. In the case of wind power projects, the Ministry
had not been providing any financial support but only fiscal incentives
and the wind power capacity has been achieved mainly through private
sector participation. Recently the Government has introduced
Generation Based Incentive (GBI) scheme for the developers who are
not availing Accelerated Depreciation benefit which in view of the
Committee is a step in right direction as it will encourage the project
developers to generate more and more wind power instead of
abandoning the projects after availing the benefits from the
Government. Further, the Ministry has set a capacity addition target
of wind energy to the tune of 17400 MW for 12th Plan against the
target of 9000 MW for the ongoing 11th Five Year Plan. The wind
power projects are capital intensive; hence, huge amount of fund will
be required in setting up of these projects to achieve the target fixed
for 12th Plan. Though, It has been stated by the Ministry that the
funding of wind projects has not been a constraint as IREDA and other
financial institutions like Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and
Nationalized Banks are providing loans to wind power projects, the
scrutiny of the Committee revealed that there were slippages during
the year 2008-09 and 2009-10 in the achievement of target in this sector.
The reasons for the same have been assigned by the Ministry to global
economic recession, policy/regulatory issues and local problems in some
of the States which has adversely affected the private sector investment.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all efforts should be made
to persuade the States endowed with enough potential for setting up
wind power projects to formulate favourable policies for this sector
so that the barriers in setting up of wind power projects can be removed,
making this sector investor friendly. Moreover, with a view to keeps
the momentum going, required facilities and availability of finances
should also be ensured to private entrepreneurs to give the proper
thrust for further development of this Sector.
Reply of the Government
The target of wind power for the 12th Plan is 11200 MW. The wind
power development is taking place with private sector investment. The
installations during 2008-09 and 2009-10 were low. Ministry took all efforts
through consultation, review meetings and visits by its officers etc. in
the problematic States. The situation during the year 2010-11 improved
and the installations increased substantially as compared to 2008-09 and
2009-10. A capacity of 2350 MW was installed against a target of 2000

22
MW during 2010-11. Ministry will put all efforts to keep the momentum
going as suggested by the Committee.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.11)
2.11 The Committee note the fact that Small Hydel Projects (SHPs)
have the potential to meet power requirements of remote and isolated
areas. Also they do not encounter the problems associated with large
hydel projects of deforestation and resettlement. SHPs have reached
commercial stage, therefore, private sector has started showing interest
in investing in this sector. The Country has the estimated power
generation potential of 15380 MW from SHPs. Acknowledging the
importance of the subject the Committee have examined the subject
Small and Mini Hydel Projects in detail and presented their Report
on the Subject. The Committee expect the Government to make sincere
efforts to implement the recommendations of the Committee made in
the Report in letter and spirit.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is making sincere efforts to implement the
recommendations made by the Committee in the 16th Report on small
and mini hydel projects. Action Taken Report on this is being submitted
separately to the Committee.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]

23
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.9)
2.9 The Committee also observe that the number of projects
sanctioned by the IREDA during the years 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10
has been 29, 47 and 29 respectively. It shows that the financing of
IREDA has been limited to few and relatively bigger projects. The
Committee also found that arranging fund for bigger Renewable Energy
Projects is relatively easier than the small projects due to their
economical viability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that IREDA
should also focus in funding the smaller Renewable Energy Projects
with more attractive interest rates and simpler procedures to obtain
loan, thereby facilitating the growth of the sector throughout the
Country particularly in the areas which are deprived of the electricity.
Reply of the Government
To encourage deployment of small solar energy systems in rural
areas the Ministry is implementing a special “Solar Off-Grid Refinance
Scheme” through NABARD for providing loan with more attractive
interest rates and simple procedures, keeping in view of NABARD’s better
positioning than IREDA w.r.t. establishment as well as outreach via its
large network of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) besides commercial banks.
IREDA is also in the process of introducing such a refinancing scheme
though commercial banks in the country.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]

24
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.3)
(III) Research and Development Projects related to New and Renewable
Energy
2.3 The Committee observe that we are aspiring for a mammoth
target under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, the success
of which will much depend on the technological acumen and expertise
we have. The technological advancement has direct role in bringing
the cost down to reasonable level, efficacy, efficiency and durability
of the equipments required by solar energy sector. Therefore, rapid
advancement instead of gradual improvement in the Renewable Energy
technology can be the only way in the attainment of ambitious target
of National Solar Mission. The Committee are anguished to note the
past performance of the MNRE in the field of R&D relating to the
development of New and Renewable Energy sector. Budget outlays for
R&D have been very less and the Ministry has failed in spending even
half of the allocated fund. The Ministry in the year 2007-08, 2008-09
and 2009-10 could spend only Rs. 31.74 crore, Rs. 27.80 crore and 43.85
(upto 28.02.2010) against the outlay of Rs. 60 crore, Rs. 100 crore and
Rs. 78 crore respectively. In brief, the Government have spent Rs. 103.39
crore which is mere 43% of the total outlay of Rs. 238 crore. The
Committee feel that the most common deterrence in promotion of
Renewable Energy sources is the high initial cost of installation
especially in case of solar energy. To bring down the same to a
reasonable level technological advancement has to play a pivotal role.
The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should
not only focus in merely increasing the installed capacity but also in
technological advancement as the same would make the renewable
energy sector commercially viable resulting in the massive increase in
installed capacity due to private investment that too without being
dependent on the aid and subsidy from the Government. The
Committee note that major thrust in R&D revolves around Solar Energy

25
sector and 19 R&D Projects are under implementation on different
aspects of solar thermal and PV technologies. Centre of Excellence are
also proposed in this regard working in the development of solar grade
polysilicon material, high efficiency solar cells, multifunction thin film
modules, organic solar cells, dye sensitized solar cells etc. However,
all this work is still at the incipient stage and may take a while before
its universal usage as anticipated.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has been supporting R&D in solar energy to meet the
challenges of reducing the cost and improving the overall performance
of solar energy in general and solar power in particular. Several initiatives
have been taken to support academic, research organizations and industry.
In addition, industry on its own is also taking necessary steps to meet
the short term technical challenges to improve the performance and reduce
the cost. In the last two years the cost of grid solar power plants has
already reduced from an average of Rs. 18 crore per MW to 12-14 crore
per MW. The recent R&D efforts would help in further reduction in cost
in the coming years.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 14 of Chapter – I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.6)
2.6 The Committee note that the Government provides financial
assistance/subsidy ranging from about 10% to as high as 90% of project
costs of the New and Renewable Energy projects. The Committee feel
that the Government besides providing financial assistance/subsidy
must also ensure the monitoring of the projects which avail the benefits
from the Government. It is likely that in absence of any regulation
from the Government, many manufacturers may not adhere to standard
and quality as prescribed and make/install substandard products. There
is also very poor after sale service of renewable energy products due
to absence of proper infrastructure in this regard. This shakes the
confidence of the end user, and poses a big deterrence in popularization
of renewable products. We cannot expect from a common man that he
would invest dearly in renewable energy products that too with no
guarantee of proper working and after sale services just to save the
environment. The Government should ensure that the financial
assistance/subsidy provided are utilized for installation of quality
products otherwise the role of the Government will be limited to the

26
spending of allocated budget only. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Government should focus on developing
specifications, certification, and standardization of renewable energy
systems and products by making it mandatory for all the manufacture
to obtain a quality control certification from a agency such as ISI etc.
Further, it will be better if the onus of providing long term after sale
services is also decided involving manufacturer of the products.
Simultaneously, for strengthening the after sales service network of
New and Renewable Energy projects/products, the Committee
recommend that the Government should plan for setting up a dedicated
nodal agency entrusted with the task of establishment of more and
more after sale/installation service centers for projects/products related
to various sectors of New and Renewable Energy i.e. Solar, Wind, Small
Hydel etc. by collaboration of State Governments, manufactures and
technology institutions.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee for ensuring that
Government subsidy is utilized for deployment of quality products have
been noted.
The Ministry has already prescribed Quality Standards to be
followed for systems to be deployed under the National Solar Mission.
In case of Wind energy sector, installation of only such wind turbines
which possess a valid type certificate from recognized certifying body
or as per C-WET Type Certification Scheme known as TAPS-2000, is
permitted. The task of preparation of BIS standards on various aspects
of wind turbines has also been taken up by the wind turbines Sectional
Committee-ET 42, constituted by BIS, of which C-WET is a member and
is providing technical inputs.
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation for setting up a
dedicated nodal agency entrusted with the task of establishment of
more and more after sale/installation service centers by collaboration of
State Governments, manufactures and technology institutions, it is
submitted that the specific sales/service requirements are highly region
specific and can be best addressed by the State level Nodal Agencies
(SNAs) already set up by respective State Governments for promotion
of renewable energy. The Ministry’s endeavour is to support the efforts
of the SNAs through suitable incentive mechanism under different
programmes.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]

27
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 20 of Chapter – I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.7)
(V) Role of States in funding/implementation Renewable Energy
Projects
2.7 The Committee have been apprised that the programmes of
promoting and financing of Renewable Energy Projects are mostly
implemented through State Nodal Departments/State Nodal Agencies
and in some cases through prominent NGOs also. Some of the States
also provide additional subsidy to beneficiaries for the installation of
renewable energy systems. The States are also responsible for putting
in place suitable/conducive policy and regulatory framework at their
level for promotion of renewable energy projects and also for State
level statutory clearances for large capacity projects. The major problems
in wind and hydro power sector are delays in land allotment, forest
clearance, timely availability of evacuation and transmission facilities,
regulatory issues at State level, uncertainness about the State policies
on tariff, wheeling, banking, techno-economic approval from State (for
hydro). It has been further informed that there is limited role of the
Central Government in timely completion of the projects. The
Committee note that the most common reason cited by the Ministry
for delay in regard to the Renewable Energy Project has been the
inactiveness or non-cooperation of the State Government. The
Committee believe that even though the Ministry do not undertake the
New and Renewable Energy Projects directly, their responsibility in
respect of creating favourable conditions for setting Renewable Energy
projects does not lessen in any manner. Being the central nodal agency
for the promotion of Renewable Energy, the Ministry should share the
responsibility of removing the obstacles coming in the way of promotion
and funding of Renewable Energy projects. In this scenario, the
Committee feel that there is need for a policy which should provide
impetus to the States in regard to the promotion and facilitation of the
Renewable Energy projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend a
comprehensive policy in regard to the setting up of New and Renewable
Energy project, which should be formulated by the involvement of all
the States, so that its effective implementation can be ensured. The
States may be given leverage to acclimatize the policy, according to
their local needs without diluting the thrust areas, before its notification
for implementation in the respective States. This mechanism will not
only bring uniformity in regard to the promotion of the Renewable
Energy but also help in streamlining the process of obtaining the various

28
clearances. Once, the problem of clearances and avoidable hindrances
are overcome this sector will become more attractive for private
investment.
Moreover, the role of Centre should not be limited to providing
only fiscal incentives and subsidy to the States but should expand to
provide guidance and expertise also. Being the Nodal Agency in the
field of New and Renewable Energy, the Ministry should extend the
suggestions/latest technological expertise to the States, help them to
overcome the barriers, if any, in setting up Renewable Energy projects.
This positive atmosphere will definitely attract more domestic as well
as direct foreign investment in New and Renewable Energy sector.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for a comprehensive
policy to be formulated by the involvement of all the States, for effective
implementation of New and Renewable Energy projects, it is submitted
that electricity is a concurrent subject and the States are free to frame
and adopt their own promotional policies for development of renewable
power projects within the framework of the Electricity Act, 2003.
Furthermore, the viability of renewable energy projects is highly region
and resource specific and also depends upon local conditions that vary
widely. It also very much depends on the State level facilitations/ incentives
which cannot be expected to be uniform. Nonetheless, resource specific
guidelines are issued by the Ministry that provide an umbrella policy
and incentives framework for States and Developers for planning and
implementation of different categories of projects. Guidelines are also
issued from time to time through CERC on different aspects like fixation
of tariffs, trading of renewable power, etc..
With regard to suggestion of the Committee that the Ministry should
extend the suggestions/latest technological expertise to the States, help
them to overcome the barriers, if any, in setting up Renewable Energy
projects, it is submitted that most projects are being set up in private
sector. Necessary technical guidance is provided to interested developers
through the technical institutions of the Ministry (Solar Energy Center,
C-WET, NIRE) and the AHEC at IIT, Roorkee. Bottlenecks in implementation
are addressed through periodic review meetings at States/Central level.
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  File No. 8/9/2009-P&C
Dated 15-6-2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph 23 of Chapter – I of the Report)

29
CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
12th December, 2011 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

30
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 1st DECEMBER, 2011 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Baliram Jadhav
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri V.P . Singh Badnore
10. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
11. Shri Mohammad Shafi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary

31
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Motilal Vora, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
the sitting in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members of the
Committee.
4. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
7. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports
on (i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 15th Report
on “Funding of New and Renewable Energy Projects” and (ii) Action
Taken on the recommendations contained in the 16th Report on  “Small
and Mini Hydel Projects”. The Committee adopted both the Reports
without any modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairman
to finalize the Reports and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
8. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
9. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

32
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
15TH REPORT  (15TH LOK SABHA) OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations:— 11
(ii) R ecommendations/Observations which
have been accepted by the Government:—
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10 and 11
Total : 07
Percentage : 64
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:—
Sl. No. 9 Total : 01
Percentage : 09
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which the replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:—
Sl. Nos. 3, 6 and 7
Total : 03
Percentage : 27
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:—
Sl. No. Nil
Total : 00
Percentage : 00