STANDING COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power
for the year 2011-12]
25
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power
for the year 2011-12]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.12.2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


COE No. 219
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
17
41
45
53
54
56
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) .............................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report.....................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government....................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies......................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and require reiteration..........................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
28th December, 2011...............................................
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the 19th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Energy ...................................
PAGE
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2011-2012)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Mohammad Azharuddin
4. Dr. Baliram
5. Shri P.C. Chacko
6. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat
10. Shri Devendra Nagpal
11. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Jagdambika Pal
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Radha Mohan Singh (Purvi Champaran)
20. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
21. Shri Makansingh Solanki
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Govindrao Adik
23. Shri V.P. Singh Badnore
24. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
26. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
27. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi
30. Shri Motilal V ora
31. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this 25th Report on the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 19th Report of the Standing Committee on
Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Power for the year 2011-12’.
2. The 19th Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 17th August, 2011. Replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 17th November,
2011.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 28th December, 2011.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 19th Report of the Committee is given
at Appendix-II.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
(v)
 N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADA V,
28 December , 2011 Chairman,
7 Pausa , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2011-12.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
17th August, 2011 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the
same day. The Report contained 13 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 13.
Total-08
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
Serial Nos. 6 and 12.
Total-02
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 3, 10 and 11.
Total-03
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Recommendation/Observations in respect of which the final
reply of the Government are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-V
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. 11th Five Year Plan – targets and achievements
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
6. The Committee had noted that the utilization of the funds by
the Government in 1st Quarter has been abysmally low throughout
the 11th Plan period. It was 6.07%, 0.08% and 8.15% for the year
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively. The Committee had observed
that poor spending in 1st Quarter had the cascading effect and put pressure
in spending patterns of later Quarters. The Ministry had given various
reasons for erratic quarterly spending. The Committee had found it difficult
to understand that despite the fact that expenditure pattern was monitored
on a weekly/monthly/quarterly basis by the Ministry, there are not a single
year in the entire 11th Plan when all the four quarterly spending were
according to the norms laid down by the Ministry itself. The Committee,
therefore, had strongly recommended that the Ministry should not only
recast its present monitoring system to make it more accountable and
trustworthy to ensure the uniform quarterly spending as per the norms
but also taking proper correctives to avoid recurrence of the lapses
responsible for sluggishness in the achievement.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The recommendation of Standing Committee on energy is noted.
They have also stated that the expenditure vis-a-vis allotment is

3
discussed in Senior Officers Meeting and follow up action on
directions given by the Secretary are also renewed.”
8. The Committee in their 19th Report had noted that the
utilization of the funds by the Government in First Quarter had been
abysmally low throughout the 11th Plan period. It had been 6.07%,
0.08% and 8.15% for the year 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11
respectively. The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended
that the Ministry should not only recast its present monitoring system
to make it more accountable and trustworthy to ensure the uniform
quarterly spending as per the norms. The Committee expected the
Ministry to come up with some plan to refurbish the present
monitoring system, as the same has failed to achieve the desired
objectives. Instead, the Ministry in their action taken reply have
stated that the recommendation of Standing Committee on energy
has been noted. Further, the expenditure vis-a-vis allotments are
discussed in Senior Officers Meeting and follow up action on
directions given by the Secretary are also renewed. The Committee
are not satisfied with the routine, brief reply of the Ministry. The
Committee firmly believe that a strong co-relation exist between the
poor spending in first quarter and non-achievement of annual targets
as the initial lapses have cascading effects that put pressure in
spending patterns of later quarters. The Committee, therefore, would
like to reiterate their recommendation and would await necessary
follow-up action.
B. Fuel Supply to Power Sector
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
9. The Committee had noted that against the coal requirement of
480 MT for plants designed on indigenous coal for the year 2011-12,
the total availability would only be 417.5 MT including 319 MT from
CIL, leaving a gap of 62.5 MT. The Ministry of Power had stated that
against the earlier indication by CIL for supplying 360 MT of coal, it
would supply 319 MT to power sector. The Ministry had further stated
that the reduction of 41 MT of coal by the CIL would affect the new

4
generating capacity to the extent of 15,000 MW. The Committee also
acknowledged the fact that various power plants are already running well
below their installed capacity for want of coal. In a situation where the
country is facing a peak shortage of power of around 13%, the short
supply of coal would acutely aggravate the problem. Further, the Ministry
of Power have been planning for a massive capacity addition program
for the 12th Five Year Plan, mostly based on coal. Considering the limitation
on quantity of coal that can be imported due to blending limit and the
high cost of imported coal, the Committee had recommended that the
Coal India while augmenting excavation of coal, should give first priority
to power sector in allocation of coal. The Committee had further
recommended that for the time being coal stock, lying at pithead, as
reported by the Ministry of Power, should be supplied to power stations
facing acute shortage of coal as a stop gap arrangement. The Committee
also, strongly recommended that the GoM should give appropriate
directions to the Ministry of Coal/Coal India Limited to ensure that power
plants do not suffer power generation loss for want of coal.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:—
“Ministry of Power had taken up the matter for enhancing coal supply
to Thermal Power Stations at various fora. Coal India Limited (CIL)
has agreed to coal supply target of 347 MT for the power stations
during 2011-12 but it's materialization would depend on actual
supplies.”
11. The Committee are happy to note that the Coal India
Limited (CIL) has agreed to coal supply target of 347 MT for the
power stations during 2011-12 instead of 319 MT as reported earlier
by the Ministry of Power.  However, the Ministry have also stated
that materialization of agreed quantity of coal would depend on actual
supplies. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the
actual supply of coal from Coal India Limited (CIL) and other source
to power sector during the year 2011-12. The Committee would also
like to be apprised about the extent to which generation target would
be achieved following the improved supply of coal during the year.

5
C. Renovation and Modernization of Power Plants
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
12. The Committee had noted that 69 units had been identified for
implementation of Renovation and Modernization (R&M) work involving
generation of capacity of more than 15,500 MW of electricity. In the
Central Sector, 20 units were for implementation of Life Extension
programme, whereas, 49 units were for Renovation and Modernization
work. The PLF in the Central Sector was around 80-85%, whereas, it
was much lower in the State. The Committee had also found the reasons
given for the non-achievement of the targets under Renovation and
Modernization of power plants for 11th Plan, not convincing as BHEL
was not in a position to supply the original products for power plants
which it had taken upon itself by entering into an agreement with buyers.
Hence, to expect BHEL to supply technology including equipment for
Renovation and Modernization which is definitely more advanced and
complex, is nothing but most unrealistic and amounts to keeping the
Renovation and Modernization efforts in the backburner. The Committee,
therefore, had strongly recommended that Renovation and Modernization
efforts should be reinvigorated, thoroughly examined and properly
channelized. Necessary budgetary allocation should also be made with the
target set for each of the plant identified for this exercise to make them
competitive and efficient with the realization of optimum Plant Load Factor.
13. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Power have stated:—
“The UMPPs are implemented as green field projects based on
supercritical technology and contribute in increasing in installed power
generation capacity of the country. Renovation and Modernization
(R&M) interventions are undertaken in existing plants after the
15 years of operation whereas the Life Extension (LE) activities are
undertaken after 25 years of operation.
The various manufacturing units of BHEL are heavily loaded towards
supply of equipments/materials to various green field projects and
these units do not have adequate capacity for timely supply of
equipments/materials for LE works being executed at thermal power
stations of various utilities. The requirement for R&M/LE works is

6
a huge and in majority of the cases for implementation of LE projects,
BHEL (the Original Equipment Manufacturer) have been executing
agency for LE works and it appears that BHEL have not been able
to gear themselves towards timely completion of LE works
undertaken by them. The completion of LE works being executed
by BHEL almost gets delayed.
With a view of developing new vendors for undertaking R&M/LE
works, interactions have been done with following manufacturers/
vendors for assessment of their capacity and interest for R&M
works.
(i) M/s Dooshan Heavy Industries & Construction, Korea.
(ii) M/s Alstom Power Limited, U.K. (with M/s NASL).
(iii) M/s Dong Fang Electric Corporation, China.
(iv) M/s L&T.
(v) M/s Toshiba, Japan.
In fact, the manufacturers/vendors such as Dooshan (Korea),
ALSTOM Power (India), Toshiba (Japan), Dong Fang Electric
Company (China), NASL etc., have shown their interest to take up
execution of R&M/LE works in India. Dooshan and ALSTOM Power
have also submitted their bids for execution of World Bank aided
210 MW units at Bandel TPS of WBPDCL.
In addition to above following actions have been taken for speedy
implementation of various R&M/LE works :
1. In, December, 2009, a National Perspective Plan was formulated
for R&M/LE works during 11th & 12th Plan.
2. CEA has issued guidelines for R&M and LE works of thermal
power stations in December, 2009.
3. Apart from PFC/REC, external funding from World Bank, KfW
and JBIC have also been arranged to finance LE programme
of some utilities at their identified TPSs.

7
4. During meetings, the utilities implementing the LE works have
been requested to set up dedicated R&M team at plant level
as well as at Headquarters for implementation of the works.
5. The preparation of DPRs for LE works at 7 units of 210 MW
by M/s Evonik-Germany, with grant from KfW under
Indo-German Energy Forum, is in final stage, (unit-3 Nasik,
unit 1,2 & 3 of Kolaghat TPS, unit 1,2&3 of Bokaro TPS).
6. The preparation of standard documents, with grant from KfW
in Phase-II activity under Indo-German Energy Forum, is in
progress.
7. Technical studies would be carried out for mitigation of barriers
to the R&M in India with grant from GEF/World Bank.
8. A Task Force, under the Chairmanship of Member (Thermal),
CEA has already been constituted for promotion of R&M works
in India with members from NTPC, DVC, MSPGCL, WBPDCL,
HPGCL, APGENCO, CERC, PFC, WORLD BANK & KfW.
9. CEA has prepared a Base Paper for allocation of power from
unallocated quota of Central Pool to the State Power Utilities
to carry out LE works during the planned shutdown of their
thermal units. The paper has been sent to the State Utilities
for stakeholder consultations.
Further it is to mention that, R&M works are carried out by
the concerned power utilities. Power Finance Corporation Ltd.
(PFC) and Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) are providing
necessary fund for R&M of thermal power projects. Moreover,
the R&M work of Muzaffarpur and Barauni Thermal Power
Plants of Bihar is being carried out under the Special Plan for
Bihar component of backward region grant fund at an estimated
cost of ` 1053 crore.”
14. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have
realized the apprehension of the Committee expressed in their
19th Report about the overdependence on BHEL for R&M activities.
In this regard they have stated in action taken reply that

8
manufacturing units of BHEL are heavily loaded towards supply of
equipments/ materials to various green field projects and these units
do not have adequate capacity for timely supply of equipments/
materials for LE works being executed at thermal power stations
at various utilities. The Ministry in their reply have further stated
that with a view of developing new vendors for undertaking R&M/
LE works, interactions have been done with some other
manufactures/vendors from abroad. While endorsing the step of the
Government, the Committee would like to emphasize that the
contract with them should be arrived at in such a manner so as
to ensure the timely supply of required machinery/ services which
should not only be efficient and akin to our needs but also at the
competitive cost. This will help us avoiding BHEL like situation and
the same will help in timely execution of Renovation and
Modernization projects of various power plants.
D. Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(Recommendation Sl.No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
15. The Committee had found inordinate delays in implementation
of RGGVY scheme in some of the States. The Committee had also noted
that the transformers installed were of a lower capacity so any further
connections required in future could not be accommodated within the
installed infrastructure. Further, they were of the opinion that the process
of sub-letting of the contract under the scheme should be kept at minimum
level as the same not only leads to avoidable delay at each level but also
compromises on quality of works besides scope for pilferage of the funds
earmarked for the scheme without producing adequate results. The
Committee had also recommended that the concept of electrification of
the village needs to be relooked and considered afresh specifying the
percentage of electrification of village qualifying as the electrification of
that particular village. The Committee had also strongly recommended that
the scheme of RGGVY should have strong inclusive monitoring systems
with regard to its implementation and achievement of the target. The
involvement of the elected representative of the people at the District Level
Committee should be made mandatory in order to ensure the proper
coverage of villages as well as BPL households under the scheme besides,

9
ensuring the proper quality of work. The Committee had also desired the
involvement of people's representatives at local level i.e. Panchayats,
Gramsabhas and Block Level.
16. The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply have stated:—
“Under RGGVY , the DPRs have been formulated by the implementing
agencies of the States in accordance with the RGGVY guidelines.
Under the scheme, the villages are electrified as per new definition
of village electrification as amended in year 2004-05 wherein number
of households electrified should be at least 10% of the total number
of households in the village. Further, the scheme envisage providing
free electricity connections to all BPL households in a village which
in case of most of the villages is much more than 10% of the total
households in a village.
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana — Scheme for Rural
Electricity Infrastructure & Household Electrification was launched
in 2005 merging the existing scheme of 'Accelerated Electrification
of one lakh villages and one crore households'. Some of the projects
in the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh sanctioned under the earlier
scheme have been implemented under RGGVY which did not cover
all majras/tola of revenue villages. The un-covered areas of such
projects including majras/tolas having population more than 300 are
proposed to be covered in Phase-II of RGGVY in XI Plan.
Under RGGVY , High V oltage Distribution System (HVDS) has been
envisaged. Under HVDS, instead of one large capacity transformer
more number of smaller capacity transformers are provided to reduce
the chances of power theft and overall AT&C losses. The number
and size of the transformers depend on the consumers to be served
from the transformers.
Under RGGVY , the executing agencies are sub-letting the contracts
with the prior approval of the concerned implementing agency.
However, the overall responsibility for execution of the contract within
time and accepted quality rests with the main turnkey contractor.

10
Besides Monitoring Committee, REC and MOP regularly review
implementation of RGGVY projects and periodic review meetings are
conducted to monitor the progress in detail and also to resolve the
issues hampering the progress. REC through its zonal and project
offices located in the state headquarters also regularly monitor
execution of RGGVY works.
There is a provision to co-opt. public representatives in the
District Level Electricity Committee. Further, the implementing
agencies are required to obtain a certificate from Gram Panchayat
regarding completion of electrification works in a village which results
into participation of village level representative in the scheme."
 17. The Committee in their Report have expressed their
displeasure over the fact that transformers installed under RGGVY
are of a lower capacity, therefore, any further connection required
in future cannot be accommodated within the installed infrastructure.
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated that under
RGGVY, High Voltage Distribution System (HVDS) has been
envisaged. Under HVDS, instead of one large capacity transformer
more number of smaller capacity transformers are provided to reduce
the chances of power theft and overall AT&C losses. Further, they
have stated that the number and size of the transformers depend
on the consumers to be served from the transformers. The
Committee find the reply of the Ministry convincing to some extent
only. The real apprehension of the Committee was about the
availability of lesser capacity transformers than the actual
requirement and not just the number of transformers. As it has been
found, that the installed transformers are of lower capacity and with
the increase of even few more connection, it collapses due to overload.
In view of the Committee, it is imperative that either the
transformers of higher capacity or more number of smaller
capacity transformers should be provided in the villages covered
under RGGVY so that their capacity should match not only the
actual present demands but also take care of near future needs as
well.

11
Further, the Committee had recommended to keep the
sub-letting of the contract under the scheme at minimum level as
this not only leads to avoidable delay at each level but also
compromises on quality of works besides scope for pilferage of the
funds earmarked for the scheme without achieving adequate results.
The Ministry in their reply have stated that under RGGVY, the
executing agencies are sub-letting the contracts with the prior
approval of the concerned implementing agency. However, the overall
responsibility for execution of the contract within time and accepted
quality rests with the main turnkey contractor. Again, the Committee
are not convinced with the reply. If agencies are sub-letting the
contracts with the prior approval of the concerned agency,
nonetheless, more level of sub-letting have inherent disadvantages
like difficulty in ensuring quality control and certainty of cost
escalation due to involvement of agencies which are there only for
earning profits by sub-letting. The Committee, therefore suggest that
level of sub-letting should be kept at bare minimum. The Committee
are also not satisfied with the reply of the Government with regard
to inclusion of people's representatives. It is not only evasive but
also misleading as taking completion certificate from Gram Panchayat
is different from ensuring their actual participation in the
implementation process of the programme. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation.
E. Re-structured Accelerated Power Development Reform Program
(R-APDRP)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
18. The Committee had noted that against the sanction of ` 3,059.28
crores under Part-A and ` 11,795.15 crores under Part-B of the R-APDRP
for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 only ` 1,332.72 crores and ` 1,940.92
crores respectively were released. Budget estimate for R-APDRP for the
year 2011-12 had been kept as ` 2,034 crores. The Committee found
that the budget for the programme for the current fiscal had been reduced.

12
The lesser allocation for the programme clearly indicates that the
programme is not coming up on expected lines, whereas, AT&C losses
continued to remain on the higher side. The Committee, therefore, had
strongly recommended that the scheme of R-APDRP should envisage the
analysis of reasons responsible for losses, efficacious remedial measures
and a coordination mechanism wherein States and several implementing
agencies are entrusted with earmarked role and identified responsibilities
for losses reduction.
19. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated:—
“Government of India has launched Restructured Accelerated Power
Development and Reform Programme (R-APDRP) in July, 2008 as
a central sector scheme for XI Plan aimed at turnaround of power
distribution sector. The scheme comprises of two parts—Part-A &
Part-B. Part-A of the scheme being dedicated to establishment of
IT enabled system for achieving reliable & verifiable baseline data
system. Part-B deals with regular Sub Transmission & Distribution
system strengthening & up-gradation projects. The Schemes
sanctioned under R-APDRP are project oriented; therefore the funding
mechanism has been worked out and approved by GoI as follows:—
For Part-A Schemes
• Initially 100% funds as loan for Part A shall be provided by
the Government of India through Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS). The GOI loan is being disbursed to the State Power
Utilities through Nodal Agency as follows:
(a) Up to 30% of the project cost is being released as GoI
loan up front on approval of the Project.
(b) 60% of project cost would be disbursed in two equal
tranches (of 30% each) as GoI loan upon utilization of
the cumulative amount released and submission of duly
certified supporting documents/claims by utilities to PFC
based on progress/utilization against achievement of
identified milestones.

13
(c) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only after full utilization of the loan disbursed
through earlier tranches.
• The entire amount of loan for Part-A projects shall be converted
into grant once the establishment of the required Base-line data
system is achieved and verified by an independent agency
appointed by Ministry of Power.
For Part-B Schemes
• 25% (90% for special category States) funds for Part B projects
shall be provided through loan from the Government of India.
The balance funds for Part B projects shall be raised from
financial institutions. The loan shall be disbursed to the State
Power Utilities through Nodal Agency as follows:
Non-Special Category States:
(a) 15% of the project would be released as GoI loan up
front on approval of Project.
(b) Progressive release of 75% of the project cost as loan
from Financial Institutions (FIs)/own resources based on
progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones.
(c) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only after full utilization of GoI and FIs' loans
disbursed through earlier tranches.
Special Category States:
(a) 30% of the project cost would be released as GoI loan
up front on approval of Project.
(b) Progressive release of 10% of the project cost as loan
from Financial Institutions (FIs)/own resources based on
progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones.

14
(c) 50% of project cost would be disbursed as GoI loan
progressively against certified claims from Utility based
on progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones.
(d) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only against full utilization of GoI and FIs' loans
disbursed through earlier tranches.
• Up-to 50% (90% for special category States) of the project
cost of Part-B projects shall be converted into grant in five
equal tranches on achieving the 15% AT&C loss in the project
area on a sustainable basis for a period of five years. In addition,
utility level loss reduction (AT&C losses) @ 3% per annum
for utilities with baseline loss levels exceeding 30% and @ 1.5%
for utilities with baseline loss levels less than 30% have to be
achieved.
So far under Part-A of R-APDRP, 1401 IT projects worth
` 5177 crore, 42 SCADA projects worth ` 982.45 crore and
under Part-B, 907 projects worth ` 19367.43 crore sanctioned
by the Government of India and the eligible amount of first
installment as described above have been released to the State
Utilities.
It is therefore submitted, before the Committee, that there is
not any short fall in fund allocation for the scheme, the required
funds to the eligible utilities as per R-APDRP guidelines have
already been released and for the current financial year the funds
allocation has been made based on actual requirement.
It is expected that on successful completion of the scheme,
the AT&C losses will be reduced to the extent of 15% in the
project areas. The exact result will be known after successful
completion of the scheme.”
20. The Committee in their Report have noted that against the
sanction of ````` 3,059.28 crores under 'Part-A' and ````` 11,795.15 crores

15
under Part-B of the scheme for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 only
````` 1,332.72 crores and ````` 1,940.92 crores respectively were released.
Further, budget estimate for R-APDRP for the year 2011-12 had been
kept as ````` 2,034 crores. On finding lesser allocation for the current
fiscal, the Committee inferred that the programme is not coming
up on expected lines, since AT&C losses continue to remain on the
higher side. The programme has been restructured but the desired
results are not forthcoming. Against this backdrop, the Committee
have strongly recommend that the scheme of R-APDRP should
envisage the analysis of reasons responsible for losses, efficacious
remedial measures and a coordination mechanism wherein States and
several implementing agencies are entrusted with earmarked role
and identified responsibilities for losses reduction. The Ministry, in
their action taken reply, have inter-alia stated that so far under
Part-A of R-APDRP, 1401 IT projects worth ````` 5177 crore, 42 SCADA
projects worth ````` 982.45 crore and under Part-B, 907 projects worth
````` 19367.43 crore sanctioned by the Government of India and the
eligible amount of first instalment as described above have been
released to the State Utilities. The Ministry have further submitted
that there is not any short fall in fund allocation for the scheme,
the required funds to the eligible utilities as per R-APDRP guidelines
have already been released and for the current financial year the
funds allocation has been made based on actual requirement. It seems
that the Ministry have mis-understood the recommendation of the
Committee. As the quantum of fund utilization has direct relation
with the physical outcome/achievements, therefore, the Committee
found the reduction in fund allocation as a sign of slowdown in the
activities of the programme as AT&C losses are still very high and
complete infrastructure for lowering the same has yet not been put
in place. So the concern of the Committee was not the concern for
any deficit of fund but for reduction in actual requirement of fund/
slowdown of the programme. The Ministry have further stated that
it is expected that on successful completion of the scheme, the AT&C

16
losses will be reduced to the extent of 15% in the project areas.
The exact result will be known after successful completion of the
scheme. The Committee are well aware of the very objective of the
program i.e. to reduce the AT&C losses to 15%. Moreover, if the
result will be know only after completion of the scheme then the
Committee wonder what kind of monitoring system is there to rectify
the errors/slippages that occur during the execution of the
programme. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation
and also expect the Ministry to send clear, concise and to the point
action taken replies including the time frame to bring AT&C losses
at 15% level.

17
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
The Committee note that the Planning Commission had initially fixed
a capacity addition target of power generation at 78,700 MW for the
11th Plan period (2007-12). Subsequently, based on the assessment by
the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) at the time of Mid-Term Appraisal
of the 11th Plan, the capacity addition target was brought down to
62,374 MW. The Ministry have now submitted that so far capacity addition
to the tune of 34,462 MW has been commissioned, whereas, the remaining
27,912 MW capacity is still under construction. Further, capacity addition
targets for 2011-12, which happens to be terminal year of 11th Plan, has
been kept at 17,600 MW including 2,000 MW of Nuclear Power. As a
result, even if the target for 2011-12 is fully achieved, only 52,062 MW
capacity additions will be attained in the entire 11th Plan Period. Hence,
at best only about 66% of the original target for capacity addition in the
11th Five Year Plan is likely to be achieved. Projects of 10,312 MW capacity
will be carried over to the 12th Five Year Plan. The main reasons for
the shortfall in achievement of targets have been assigned by the Ministry
to the delay and non-sequential supply of material for main plant, delay
in placement of order for Balance of Plants (BoPs), shortage of skilled
manpower for erection and commissioning, inadequate deployment of
construction machinery, shortage of fuel, law and order problems etc.
The Ministry has reportedly been taking various steps to ensure that
capacity addition targets are fully achieved. However, considering the end
result it seems that steps taken are neither adequate nor effective. In order
to fully achieve the targets of Five Year Plan it is essential that the Ministry
should make yearly plan, propose a time schedule, perform consistently

18
throughout the plan period and achieve yearly targets. In case there is
slippage in any particular year, its reasons be analyzed and followed by
quick remedial measures. In the process, it should also be ensured that
reasons for low performance do not recur and impair the performance
of the next year. Rather efforts should be invigorated in such a manner
that it compensates the non-achievement, if at all, of the targets of
preceding year. But the Ministry has failed to achieve the yearly targets
leading to the dismal cumulative performance in terms of capacity addition
during the 11th Plan period. The plea of the Ministry that capacity addition
in the 11th Plan is highest as compared to earlier Plans is hardly convincing
as any comparison to justify the poor performance is nothing but feeble
attempt to seek recluse under indefensible cover. The Committee have time
and again, considering the pace of work and other factors, expressed their
apprehension over the achievement of even the reduced capacity addition
target of 62,374 MW and cautioned for execution of the capacity addition
programme in a time bound, coordinated and accountable manner which
should be closely monitored on monthly basis. However, due attention was
not paid to such words of wisdom and the Ministry was oozing with
confidence in achieving the reduced target of 11th Plan with high level
of certainty. Now, the Ministry has stated that projects of 10,312 MW
capacity will slip into the 12th Plan. It reflects not only on planning,
execution and monitoring of the projects by the Ministry but also its
obtrusiveness with regard to amenability to suggestions made for improving
its performance. Most of the reasons tendered by the Ministry for
non-achievement of the targets are routine in nature which are neither
unexpected nor insurmountable. With a little alertness and planning the
factors responsible for the non-attainment of the targets could have been
easily sorted out. As the 11th Plan is terminating this year, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Government should strive hard to achieve
the maximum possible capacity addition in 11th Plan. Further necessary
steps should be taken to ensure the non-recurrence of reasons responsible
for low achievement of the targets.
Reply of the Government
Against the Mid-Term Appraisal target of 62,374 MW fixed for
11th Plan, a capacity of 34,462 MW has been achieved during the first

19
four years of the 11th Plan. A capacity addition target of 17,601 MW
has been fixed for 2011-12. Against this target, a capacity of
7455.50 MW has been achieved till 15.10.2011. Thus, a capacity of
41,917.50 MW has been achieved till 15.10.2011 in the 11th Plan period
so far.
A number of steps have also been taken to improve the power
scenario during the remaining period of the Eleventh Five Year Plan and
beyond. These include augmentation of manufacturing capacity of BHEL
from 10,000 MW in December, 2007 to 20,000 MW by 2012; periodic
review of issues related to supply of power equipment from BHEL by
a Group under the chairmanship of Secretary (Heavy Industry); formation
of several new joint ventures to manufacture supercritical boilers and
turbine-generators for thermal power plants; bulk ordering of 11 units of
660 MW each with supercritical technology with mandatory phased
indigenous manufacturing programme to promote indigenous manufacturing;
sensitization of stakeholders to enlarge the vendors base to meet Balance
of Plants requirements; rigorous monitoring of projects at different levels
including by Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority, Power Project
Monitoring Panel and Advisory Group under the chairmanship of Minister
of Power; and introduction of web-based monitoring system.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 10/3/2011-Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendation Sl.No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee also recommend that keeping in view the dismal
performance in capacity addition program during 11th Plan so far, the
Government while planning the capacity addition targets for 12th Plan,
should examine all the ground realities, hindrances as well as opportunities,
in more scientific and accurate manner, so that a realistic and achievable
target is fixed. In addition, the Government should review its present
monitoring system with a view to make it more effective in ensuring the
timely completion of the projects.
Reply of the Government
The target of capacity addition for the 12th Five Year Plan has not
yet been finalized. The Planning Commission has set up a Working Group

20
on Power for formulation of 12 Five Year Plan under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Power). Nine specialized sub-groups have been formed to
look into all the aspects of the power sector. Based on the reports of
the sub-groups, the Working Group will finalize its report including the
capacity addition programme for the 12th Five Year Plan which will be
finally decided by the Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 10/3/2011-Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendations Sl.No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the country has the total installed power
generation capacity of 1,73,626.40 MW. Against the requirement of
8,30,594 MU of power only 7,46,644 MU of power could be made available
during the year 2009-10, leaving a gap of 83,950 MU, i.e. 10.1% of the
requirement. Further, during 2010-11, 8,11,142 MU of power could be
made available against the target of 8,31,000 MU. It is clear that the
generation of power has failed to keep pace with the country's ever growing
power demand. It is evident that the demand for power has been growing
at the rate of 5-10% annually. The Committee is surprised to know that
the power generation target for 2010-11 was equal to the actual power
requirement of previous year i.e. 2009-10. Moreover, even this target could
not be fully achieved. Explaining the shortfall in achievement, the Ministry
has stated that generation target is primarily dependent on commissioning
and stabilization of new generating units and availability of fuel and water
for generation of thermal and hydro power respectively.
The Committee further note that the capacity addition of
12,160.50 MW during the year 2010-11, which is reportedly the highest
ever, is only 60% of the target. The reasons attributed by the Ministry
for the shortfall in achievement has been slow progress of civil works,
poor geology, delay and non-sequential supply of material for main plant,
shortage of skilled manpower for erection and commissioning, contractual
dispute between project developers and their sub-vendors/sub-contractors,
inadequate deployment of construction machinery, shortage of fuel, law
& order problems etc. It is certain that all the factors may not have
happened in most of the plants. The Committee believe that one or the

21
other reasons might have taken place in a disparate manner here and there,
but to put them together as a shield for laxity and inaction in all the
projects betrays the Commitment and sincerity of purpose. The Committee
feel that the reasons given by the Ministry are such that can be anticipated
well in advance and accordingly a remedial action plan could be formulated
and strictly executed to ensure that targets are fully achieved. However,
it is regretted that these foreseeable and avoidable reasons could not be
foreseen and it is a matter of concern as these problems may recur during
the 12th Plan period also. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an
effective mechanism should be put in place to overcome such routine
and anticipated issues in a time bound manner so that the targeted capacity
addition is achieved. The Committee further desire that the generation
targets for a particular year should commensurate with the anticipated
demand for that period. They advice that realistic targets should be fixed
keeping in view the present demand as well as the possible growth in
demand for power in the ensuing year.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Power has adopted a robust monitoring system for
the capacity addition programme so as to see that the projects are executed
in time. Monitoring of power projects are carried by the Ministry at
different levels i.e. by the Central Electricity Authority, by the Ministry
of Power, through the Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) and the
Advisory Group. The Capacity Addition Programme is also monitored by
the Planning Commission, PMO and the Cabinet Secretariat, as well. The
suggestions of the Committee for putting in place an effective Monitoring
Mechanism to overcome routine and anticipated issues in the time bound
manner and streamlining the procedure have been noted.
The targets for power generation from the conventional sources are
fixed on a year-to-year basis prior to commencement of the next financial
year keeping in view the age and performance of existing generating
stations, their maintenance requirements, likely commissioning and
stabilization of new generating units, availability of fuel and its quality,
availability of water, etc. which influence generation of electricity. The
generation target for the year 2011-12 was fixed as 855 Billion Unit. The

22
total electricity generation in the country from the conventional energy
sources, during the current financial year (upto 31st October, 2011) was
5,09,197 million unit (MU) against a target of 4,98,116 million unit (MU)
representing an achievement of approximately 102.2%.
[Ministry of Power, O.M. No. 10/3/2011-Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendations Sl.No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that against the coal requirement of 480 MT
for plants designed on indigenous coal for the year 2011-12, the total
availability would be only 417.5 MT including 319 MT from CIL, leaving
a gap of 62.5 MT. The Ministry of Power have stated that against the
earlier indication by CIL for supplying 360 MT of coal, it will now supply
319 MT to power sector. The Ministry have further stated that the
reduction of 41 MT of coal by the CIL would affect the new generating
capacity to the extent of 15,000 MW. It is a well known fact that various
power plants are already running well below their installed capacity for
want of coal. In a situation where the country is facing a peak shortage
of power of around 13%, the short supply of coal would acutely aggravate
the problem. Further, the Ministry of Power is planning for a massive
capacity addition program for the 12 Five Year Plan, mostly based on
coal. Since power sector is the backbone of economic development of
a country, the significance of power generation capacity cannot be
compromised and the self reliant fuel linkage issue cannot be left in the
domain of uncertainty. In this context the long term solution has become
extremely important. Although, efforts have been made for acquiring coal
mines abroad besides allotment of coal blocks to the power utilities like
NTPC etc. yet, the realization of coal from these efforts still remain a
far cry. To make matter worse, issues like supply of coal to a power
plant from far off mines, non-availability of even bare minimum stock
of coal and pilferage of coal contributes significantly in the non-achievement
of generation targets. Considering the limitation on quantity of coal that
can be imported due to blending limit and the high cost of imported coal,
the Committee recommend that the Coal India while augmenting excavation
of coal, should give first priority to power sector in allocation of coal.
The Committee further recommend that for the time being coal stock,

23
lying at pithead, as reported by the Ministry of Power, should be supplied
to power stations facing acute shortage of coal as a stop gap arrangement.
The Committee are aware of the constraints of the Ministry of Power
with regard to the issue of fuel linkage and they strongly feel that a long
term solution to the problem should be worked out in the Group of
Ministers (GoMs) meetings and/or International economic tie-up/
cooperation. Further Ministry of Power has made certain suggestions to
the Group of Ministers (GoM) which inter-alia involves positive response
from Coal India Limited with regard to optimum utilisation of mines and
committed liabilities of CIL to power utilities before resorting to e-auction
at premium. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the GoM
should give appropriate directions to the Ministry of Coal/Coal India Limited
to ensure that power plants do not suffer power generation loss for want
of coal.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Power had taken up the matter for enhancing coal supply
to Thermal Power Stations at various fora. Coal India Limited (CIL) has
agreed to coal supply target of 347 MT for the power stations during
2011-12 but it's materialisation would depend on actual supplies.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011-Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee note that the Country has hydro power potential to
the tune of 1,48,701 MW including 62,604 MW of potential in North-
Eastern (NE) Region. The identified potential in NE Region constitutes
about 43% of the total identified hydro power potential in the country.
The Committee also note that out of the above, a capacity of 1,686 MW
has so far been harnessed in NE region which is less than 3% of the
total potential available in NE region. Thus, more than 97% of the identified
hydro capacity is yet to be exploited. The Committee find that it is totally
unsatisfactory situation in view of global warming concern and acute

24
shortage of fossil fuel supply for the thermal power stations, hydro power
can be a suitable, substantial and sustainable source of clean energy. Despite
the huge potential available in the NE region, the pace of development
of hydro sector has been slower to the level of distress due to one reason
or the other. The main reasons given for the poor hydro power development
in NE region are environment and forest clearance, infrastructural facilities,
non-availability of hydrological and other data, funding arrangements,
evacuation of power, non-availability of skilled man power etc. The
Committee observe that much of the problems faced in development are
hydropower in NER are related with the State Governments and cannot
be resolved without their support. Therefore, the special attention of the
Central Government is needed in this matter. The Committee also find
that the most hydel projects involves issues such as environment
clearances, rehabilitation and resettlements. Various Hydro Power Projects
get inordinately delayed as the developers find it difficult to overcome
these issues. The Committee feel that it would be better if the Government
after detailed analysis/survey of the Hydro Power potential available in the
Country, resolve the issues of environmental clearances, resettlement of
displaced persons and other anticipated issues related to each of the site,
if any, before its allotment to the developers as the same would minimise
the interruption of work after their allotment for developing hydel power
projects and accelerate the pace of development of this Sector. There
should also be accurate and complete hydrological data so that the possible
constraints are well taken care of at the beginning itself. The Committee
strongly recommend that keeping in view the huge potential in this Sector,
the Government should expedite a workable and holistic policy on Hydro
Power assimilating the recommendations/suggestions of the high powered
Committee and Groups (setup earlier), and timely completion of projects.
All foreseeable constraints must be taken care of, involvement of public
as well as private sector be encouraged and special attention be given
to North-Eastern region for proper development of the Hydro Sector with
a view to minimising over-dependence on thermal sector.
Reply of the Government
At present 13 HE projects with an aggregate installed capacity of
6752 MW (about 10.8% of the identified capacity) are under construction

25
in NE Region & Sikkim. Further, a total number of 128 HE Schemes
(above 25 MW capacity) with an aggregate capacity of 44513.5 MW have
been allotted by the States in NE region including Sikkim for implementation
during 12th Plan and beyond which are yet to be taken up for construction.
Out of these, 115 Schemes with aggregate capacity of 35536.5 MW have
been allotted to Private Sector while 13 Schemes with an aggregate capacity
of 8977 MW have been allotted to CPSUs.
Regarding 'Resolution of various Issues including Environmental
Clearances, Resettlement of displaced persons etc. before allotment to the
Developer', it is stated that after the projects are allotted, detailed studies
and investigations are carried out by the prospective Developers to analyse
assess the impact of these project on environment and ecology etc. It
is difficult to anticipate all the problems before the allotment.
The following measures have been taken by the Government for
expeditious and timely completion of the project assimilating the
recommendations/suggestions of the High Powered Committees and the
Groups (set up earlier).
(a) Monitoring of Ongoing Hydro Projects:
The monitoring of ongoing hydro projects is being carried out
at three levels as under:
(i) Monitoring by CEA as per Electricity Act, 2003.
(ii) Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP).
(iii) Regular review meetings by Ministry of Power.
In addition, Advisory Group under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble
Ministers of Power reviews the critical issues.
(b) Monitoring of Future Hydro Projects:
(i) Task Force under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister
of Power with Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission,
Minister of Water Resources, Minister of New and
Renewable Energy, Minister of Environment and Forests and

26
Ministers of Power from Hydro rich states has been
constituted to look into all issues relating to development
of Hydro Power.
(ii) Chairperson, CEA takes regular Review Meetings of the
progress of hydro projects like preparation of DPR, status
of E&F clearance, likely date of placing of order etc.
allotted to various developers.
(c) Recommendations of Inter-Ministerial Committee
In pursuance of the decision taken in the third meeting of the
Task Force on Hydro Power Development, an Inter-ministerial
Committee was formed under the Chairmanship of Member
(Energy), Planning Commission to examine and resolve issues
impeding the rapid development of hydro electric projects. The
Committee gave the following recommendations:—
(i) The Committee recommends that hydrological data
available with CWC and Brahmaputra Board should be
passed on to the developers after signing a Secrecy
Undertaking. It is further recommended that the Committee
constituted by CWC for reviewing adequacy of
hydrological data for projects in North-Eastern Region,
should finalise its report within a period of three months.
(ii) The Committee recommends that since the issue of
creation of infrastructure has been extensively deliberated
by IMG , their recommendations including construction of
Dhola-Sadia bridge and Trans-Arunachal Highways by
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH),
should be implemented on priority.
(iii) It is recommended that a Single Window Clearance
Committee (SWCC) under the Chief Secretary of the State
may be constituted to facilitate the environment and forest
clearances. The status of clearances/processing of
proposals should be reviewed by the State Environment
and Forest Department at the level of PCCF/CF/DFO every

27
3/2/1 month, respectively. Similarly, MoEF should hold
review meetings on pending cases of environment and
forest clearances, preferably once in every three months,
at the level of Additional Secretary (MoEF).
(iv) In view of the requirement of compensatory afforestation
in view of forest land diverted for construction of
Hydropower Projects, there is an urgent need to identify
the non forest/degraded forest land. The Committee
recommends that such land banks may be identified by
the States on the lines of Arunachal Pradesh.
(v) Since high cost of Net Present Value (NPV) of forest
land is likely to affect viability of some of the hydro
projects, CEA may consider recommending a bench mark
NPV of forest land, say 10% of project cost for assessing
the viability of a project. The Committee recommends that
if the NPV of forest land is found to be substantially higher
than this bench mark, alternate ways and means for
viability gap funding should be worked out by the
Government.
(vi) To make the process of land acquisition and R&R thereof
smooth, the Committee recommends that the requiring
agency may supplement the National Resettlement and
Rehabilitation Policy by providing more incentives/facilities
including suitable public welfare measures such as
construction of schools, primary health centers, etc. to
make the locals feel that the project is for their benefit.
Some of the benefits/incentives should continue to PAFs
even after their resettlement, through out the life of the
project.
(vii) The Committee recommends that a quick response
mechanism should be developed and a monitoring
committee under the chairmanship of District Magistrate
at district level and under Chief Secretary at the State
level should be constituted to resolve law and order
problems affecting the smooth progress of the projects.

28
Moreover, States may develop an appropriate incentive
mechanism for district officials for expeditious resolution
of such problems. This mechanism need not be based
on monetary benefits and could include public recognition
of such officials by the State/Central Government.
(viii) If a State wants to convert an identified storage project
to ROR scheme, its desirability or otherwise should be
examined by a four member Technical Committee
constituted by CEA. Based on recommendations of the
Technical Committee, CEA should take a view in the
matter at the time of according concurrence to the project.
The Committee recommends accordingly.
(ix) For award of Hydro-electric Projects by State Governments
through a transparent procedure, draft Model Document
prepared by CEA should be examined by Ministry of
Power and sent to the State Governments within a period
of two months.
(x) To obviate the contractual issues due to unworkable rates,
variation in BOQ, price adjustment, risk allocation under
various force major conditions, etc., a Standard Bidding
Document (SBD) for award of the construction works
of HEPs on EPC/item-rate contract basis should be
finalised within three months and circulated to States.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendation Sl.No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that 69 units have been identified for
implementation of Renovation and Modernisation (R&M) work involving
generation of capacity of more than 15,500 MW of electricity, in the Central
Sector, 20 units are for implementation of Life Extension programme,
whereas, 49 units are for Renovation and Modernisation work. The PLF
in the Central Sector has been around 80-85%, whereas, it is much lower
in the State. The generation loss due to old technology and plant machinery
can be tackled effectively if advancement of technology is appropriately

29
introduced and implemented. The Renovation and Modernization is a cost
effective option to increase generation from the existing power stations.
The Committee feel that this aspect of power generation has not been
given due importance and recognition as it was introduced only in the
7th Plan. With the advent of the concept of UMPPs, the existing power
plants of the age of 5 years or more do not become obsolete and hence
they are to be so modernized as to catch up with the plants equipped
with the latest technologies. Hence, the entire concept of Renovation and
Modernization needs to be revisited so that it can become compatible with
the present days requirement. The reasons given for the non-achievement
of the targets under Renovation and Modernization of power plants for
11th Plan is not convincing as BHEL is not in a position to supply the
original products for power plants which it has taken upon itself by entering
into an agreement with buyers. Hence, to expect BHEL to supply
technology including equipment for Renovation and Modernization which
is definitely more advanced and complex, is nothing but most unrealistic
and amounts to keeping the Renovation and Modernization efforts in the
backburner. The organization itself has to evolve the technological
methodology to keep it updated without relying on any outside agency.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Renovation and
Modernization efforts should be reinvigorated, thoroughly examined and
properly channelized. Necessary budgetary allocation should also be made
with the target set for each of the plant identified for this exercise to
make them competitive and efficient with the realization of optimum Plant
Load Factor.
Reply of the Government
The UMPPs are implemented as green field projects based on
supercritical technology and contribute in increasing in installed power
generation capacity of the country. Renovation and Modernization (R&M)
interventions are undertaken in existing plants after the 15 years of operation
whereas the Life Extension (LE) activities are undertaken after 25 years
of operation.
The various manufacturing units of BHEL are heavily loaded towards
supply of equipments/materials to various green field projects and these

30
units do not have adequate capacity for timely supply of equipments/
materials for LE works being executed at thermal power stations of various
utilities. The requirement for R&M/LE works is a huge and in majority
of the cases for implementation of LE projects, BHEL (the Original
Equipment Manufacturer) have been executing agency for LE works and
it appears that BHEL have not been able to gear themselves towards timely
completion of LE works undertaken by them. The completion of LE works
being executed by BHEL almost gets delayed.
With a view of developing new vendors for undertaking R&M/LE
works, interactions have been done with following manufacturers/vendors
for assessment of their capacity and interest for R&M works:—
(i) M/s Dooshan Heavy Industries and Construction, Korea.
(ii) M/s ALSTOM Power Limited, U.K. (with M/s NASL).
(iii) M/s Dong Fang Electric Corporation, China.
(iv) M/s L&T.
(v) M/s Toshiba, Japan.
In fact, the manufacturers/vendors such as Dooshan (Korea),
ALSTOM Power (India), Toshiba (Japan), Dong Fang Electric Corporation
(China), NASL etc., have shown their interest to take up execution of
R&M/LE works in India. Dooshan and ALSTOM Power have also
submitted their bids for execution of World Bank aided 210 MW units
at Bandel TPS of WBPDCL.
In addition to above following actions have been taken for speedy
implementation of various R&M/LE works:—
1. In, December, 2009, a National Perspective Plan was formulated
for R&M/LE works during 11th and 12th Plan.
2. CEA has issued guidelines for R&M and LE works of thermal
power stations in December, 2009.
3. Apart from PFC/REC, external funding from World Bank, KfW
and JBIC have also been arranged to finance LE programme
of some utilities at their identified TPSs.

31
4. During meetings, the utilities implementing the LE works have
been requested to set up dedicated R&M team at plant level
as well as at Headquarters for implementation of the works.
5. The preparation of DPRs for LE works at 7 units of 210 MW
by M/s Evonik-Germany, with grant from KfW under Indo-
German Energy Forum, is in final stage (unit-3 Nasik, unit -
1, 2 and 3 of Kolaghat TPS, unit 1, 2 and 3 of Bokaro TPS).
6. The preparation of standard documents, with grant from KfW
in Phase-II activity under Indo-German Energy Forum, is in
progress.
7. Technical studies would be carried out for mitigation of barriers
to the R&M in India with grant from GEF/World Bank.
8. A Task Force, under the Chairmanship of Member (Thermal),
CEA has already been constituted for promotion of R&M works
in India with members from NTPC, DVC, MSPGCL, WBPDCL,
HPGCL, APGENCO, CERC, PFC, World Bank and KfW.
9. CEA has prepared a Base Paper for allocation of power from
unallocated quota of Central Pool to the State Power Utilities
to carry out LE works during the planned shutdown of their
thermal units. The paper has been sent to the State Utilities
for stakeholder consultations.
Further it is to mention that, R&M works are carried out by the
concerned power utilities. Power Finance Corporation Ltd. (PFC) and Rural
Electrification Corporation (REC) are providing necessary fund for R&M
of thermal power projects. Moreover, the R&M work of Muzaffarpur and
Barauni Thermal Power Plants of Bihar is being carried out under the
Special Plan for Bihar component of backward region grant fund at an
estimated cost of ` 1053 crore.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I of Report)

32
(Recommendation Sl.No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee note that Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
was introduced in April, 2005 with the objective of providing access to
electricity to all rural households. For this purpose the Ministry had set
a target of electrification of about 1.15 lakh un-electrified villages and
providing electricity connections to 2.34 crore BPL households by
2011-12. Against these targets, work related to electrification of 96,562
villages and providing electricity connection to 1.60 crore BPL households
was accomplished by March, 2011. The Ministry, for year 2011-12 have
fixed a target of electrification of 14,500 villages and providing electricity
connections to 47 lakh BPL households. Thus, the original target set under
this scheme is far from being achieved even if the target fixed for the
year 2011-12 are fully achieved. However, the Committee are happy to
note that the achievement of the Ministry for the year 2010-11 exceeds
the targets i.e. 18,306 villages were electrified against the target of 17,500
villages and connections to 58.83 lakh BPL households were provided
against the targets of 47 lakh BPL households. The Committee expected
this kind of commitment from the Government in implementation of
RGGVY right from its inception. However, the performance in initial years
was not as committed and result-oriented as it should have been. Moreover,
the Committee are unable to understand the low target set for the year
2011-12 i.e. electrification of 14,500 villages and providing connections
to 47 lakh BPL households, in view of the performance in the previous
year where the achievement was 18,306 and 58.83 lakh respectively. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should step
up the targets for the year 2011-12 so that the target envisaged by RGGVY
are fully achieved by the end of the 11th Plan.
Reply of the Government
Under RGGVY, 576 projects (in 546 districts) covering electrification
of about 1.18 lakh un/de-electrified villages and 2.46 crore BPL households
were approved and are under implementation. However, while execution
of the projects on the basis of ground situation as exists, the figures for
un/de-electrified villages and BPL households were revised to 1.10 lakh
and 2.34 crore respectively. The reduction in coverage of number of

33
villages and BPL households is mainly because most of the DPRs were
not prepared on the basis of field survey. On field survey, many of the
villages are found to be already electrified which were considered as
un-electrified in DPRs and some of the villages are either not accessible
or techno-economical feasible to be electrified through grid extension. The
target for electrification of villages for FY 2011-12 has been worked out
on the basis of reduced coverage and achievement as on March, 2011.
However the target for electrification of BPL households has been enhanced
from 47 lakh to 52 lakh for the year 2011-12.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendation Sl.No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee note that various energy conservation programmes
are being run by the Government. They feel that the energy conservation
program is a step in right direction as 'energy saved is energy generated',
therefore, it can help, to a great extent, in bridging the gap between the
growing demand of power and supply position in the Country. They further
note that a target of 10,000 MW of avoided capacity addition has been
fixed for 11th Plan period under the various energy conservation programs
run by the Ministry. Against this, 7,478 MW of avoided capacity addition
has been achieved till December, 2010. The Committee express its
satisfaction over the cumulative achievement. They, however, express their
serious concern over abysmally poor performance in respect of some of
the projects such as Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY) and Energy Conservation
Building Code (ECBC), the achievement so far has been 230 MW and
9 MW against the targets of 4,000 MW and 500 MW respectively. As
dealt with elsewhere in the Report paragraphs that the country's power
generation has so far not been able to keep pace with the rapidly growing
demands for power, it becomes imperative that besides more generation
and capacity addition of power, simultaneous concerted efforts should also
be made to conserve energy. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry, instead of getting complacent with their achievements, should
try to accelerate the pace of various energy conservation projects especially
in regard to those schemes/programmes/projects where performance has

34
not been up to the mark. Needless to emphasize the Ministry should focus
on all possible avenues to conserve energy besides advertisements for
creating awareness among general masses and incentives to participants
in their endeavour to conserve energy.
Reply of the Government
Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC)
The Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was developed by
the Government of India for new commercial buildings on 27th May, 2007.
ECBC sets minimum energy standards for new commercial buildings having
a connected load of 100kW or contract demand of 120 KVA and above.
While the Central Government has powers under the Energy Conservation
Act, 2001, the State Governments have the flexibility to modify the Code
to suit local or regional needs and notify them. Presently, the Code is
in voluntary phase of implementation. While the ECBC has been developed
by Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), its enforcement lies with the State
Governments and Urban Local Bodies through notification within their
States. Many States viz. Oddisha, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have already
amended the ECBC. Rajasthan and Oddisha have also notified the code
in their State. States such as Kerala, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat
are in the process of amending ECBC for their State.
Consequent to the notification of mandatory adoption of the code
by the States, integration of the provisions of the code in to the bye-
laws is essential. BEE has developed model building bye-laws to mandate
minimum energy standards for residential and commercial buildings/
complexes for formulation of draft National Sustainable Habitat parameters
on energy efficiency. Simultaneously, harmonization of ECBC with 'National
Building Code (NBC) 2005' has been initiated by including a chapter
"Approach to Sustainability" which would be adopted in all future
constructions in the country by including the same in the schedule of
rates of the Public Works Department/Construction agencies.
To promote adoption of ECBC in the built environment, several
enabling measures were taken up during 11th Plan period. These included
(1) empanelment of ECBC expert architects; (2) development of technical

35
reference material such as ECBC User Guide, Tip Sheets for lighting,
envelope, HVAC, simulation; (3) development of conformance/compliance
check tool (ECO nirman) to help architects/design professionals and code
compliance officials to assess conformance with code requirements;
(4) Standard ECBC Training Modules covering various aspects of the code;
and (5) Voluntary labelling programme for buildings.
In order to promote a market pull for energy efficient buildings, the
BEE has developed a Star Rating Programme for buildings which is based
on actual performance of the building , in terms of energy usage in
the building over its area expressed in kWh/sq.m./year. This Programme
rates buildings on a 1-5 star scale, with 5-Star labelled buildings being
the most energy efficient. Additionally, the 'Green Rating for Integrated
Habitat Assessment (GRIHA)' rating system promoted by the Ministry on
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) adopts both the prescriptive and
mandatory provisions for obtaining a rating. Energy Performance Index
(EPI) values developed by BEE for different categories of buildings have
been adopted under the GRIHA rating system.
Consequently all buildings rated under GRIHA would essentially be
compliant to ECBC. Till date, 118 buildings have been registered with
GRIHA. Similarly, the LEED rating system of the Indian Green Building
Council also requires that buildings meet the ECBC requirements. Till date,
194 buildings have been registered with LEED. Therefore, the present
estimated commercial space compliant to ECBC is about 10 million square
meters leading to potential avoided capacity of 440 MW.
It may also be pointed out that following the design of a building,
it takes 2-3 years, at a minimum, for construction. The building comes
into full use, and the energy savings are fully exploited only a year after
construction has been completed and occupancy has occurred.
Consequently, the savings from these buildings that comply with the ECBC
will only start occurring in about 2 years from now.
In conclusion, it may be seen that the mandatory adoption of the
code by the State Governments would eventually lead to large scale
implementation of ECBC and result in quantified savings of energy.

36
Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY)
Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY) Scheme is an initiative to decrease the
use of Incandescent Lamps (ICLs) and enhance CFL penetration in
residential Sector. Under the BLY scheme, long-life, quality CFLs are being
distributed by investors to grid-connected residential households in
exchange of an incandescent lamp (ICL) at Rs. 15 each. This overcomes
the high first cost barrier of the household sector that has prevented
penetration of CFLs in the household sector.
Electricity Distribution Companies select investors who distribute the
CFLs at Rs. 15 each in specific project areas. The energy savings and
the GHG (Green House Gas) savings are monitored and the investors earn
carbon credits due to GHG savings over the life of the CFL. The investors
sell these carbon credits in international markets to recover their cost.
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has developed and registered an
umbrella CDM (Clean Development Mechanism) project which enables the
investors in each project area to quickly register their projects as CDM
projects to enable the issuance of carbon credits by UNFCCC (United
Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change). Once the CFLs have
reached their end of life or any CFLs which have failed prematurely during
the project period, the Project investors would arrange for the collection
and disposal of CFLs as per applicable environmental norms.
The efforts by BEE for Registration of a Nationwide Umbrella CDM
Project, BLY Programme of Activities (PoA) are as under:—
• The efforts of the BEE under the BLY scheme have focused
towards building a credible public-private partnership (PPP)
wherein resources from both entities (Investors and DISCOMS)
are pooled in together to procure, distribute and monitor CFL
use in households.
• Pilot projects of BLY with metering support by BEE were
developed and registered. These projects required recording of
energy saving data for a sample size of the CFLs installed in
the project area. BEE provided smart meters to these pilot

37
projects record and maintain the energy saving data for the
entire life of the project (~5 years) which can be verified later
as and when required.
• BEE developed the Business Model of the "Bachat Lamp Yojana"
projects in such a way that it brings in private investors to
invest in the CFLs and distribute them to the households within
their specified project areas.
• BEE conducted Nationwide Stakeholder Consultation Meets with
Key institutional stakeholders like Standard making bodies, CFL
Manufacturers, Electricity regulatory bodies, Electricity Distri-
bution Companies, Implementer(s), leading NGOs active in this
field, Resident Welfare Associations, Bulb Industry Association
as well as other industry associations such as CII, FICCI and
its state equivalent, Pollution Control Board, Policy makers viz.
National and State Government representatives from the Ministry
of Power/Energy, Renewable Energy Development Agency and
Energy Efficiency designated authorities before finalising the
business model for BLY projects.
• BEE arranged for the validation of this BLY nationwide umbrella
CDM Project which is called Programme of Activities (PoA)
in July, 2009. A Designated Operational Entity (DOE) was hired
by BEE to complete the validation of BLY (PoA) and get it
registered with UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Conven-
tion for Climate Change).
• BEE, Ministry of Power, Government of India finally got the
BLY nationwide umbrella CDM Project (PoA) registered on
29th April, 2010. The Government, under the BLY, facilitates
the registration of the development, validation and registration
of BLY projects of the CFL suppliers as CDM projects. Any
CFL supplier can now develop a project for a specific
geographical region, and register it as a CDM project under
the PoA if it is completely consistent with PoA requirements.
These projects can be registered and included in the PoA as

38
and when the projects are developed. The project registration
under the PoA takes a few months only whereas the registration
of standalone projects takes 1.5 to 2 years.
Efforts made by BEE for implementation of BLY:
• BEE is acting as a Managing and Co-ordinating Entity for the
Bachat Lamp Yojana Scheme and facilitates the implementation
of such projects by assisting the States to implement these
projects and issuance of carbon credits.
• Empanelment of CFL manufacturers and Investors: The
participation under the BLY scheme is voluntary for all the key
stakeholders i.e. Project implementers, DISCOMs and the
domestic consumers. The electricity distribution companies
(DISCOMs) identify the project areas in their area of operation,
based on complete coverage, and that each area has 5 to
7 lakh bulbs that can be replaced by CFLs in households. These
DISCOMS then select the project implementers for these areas
through a competitive selection process.
• Model EOI (Expression of Interest) document for DISCOMs:
BEE has developed a standard EOI template for the ready
reference of the DISCOMs. The DISCOMs have to fill in their
consumer data (Name of the Circles, Divisions of their area
of operation) to prepare the tender document for selection of
the project implementer.
• Facilitates the registration process of the projects under the
"Bachat Lamp Yojana" PoA: BEE does the Eligibility Check of
all the BLY projects before forwarding them to the Designated
Operation Entity (DOE) for inclusion of these projects in the
registered PoA. To facilitate this process, BEE has developed
an Eligibility Checklist for the ready reference of the Project
Implementers and uploaded on BEE website.
• Liaison with the Auditors and UNFCCC for issuance of carbon
credits: BEE is doing all the communication with the DOE and

39
UNFCCC for the registration of the BLY Projects. The carbon
credits for the BLY Projects will be issued to the common
pool account of BEE and the BEE will allocate the carbon credits
of the respective projects to their project implementers.
• Provides incentives from time to time for the awareness
campaign of the BLY Projects, Surveys etc.: BEE is providing
incentive to the BLY projects those are registered before
March, 2012 to facilitate early registration of BLY projects in
the PoA. This is being provided from the budget provided in
the XIth Plan for the programme.
• Standardized the Legal Documents required under BLY: BEE
has made a special effort to hire a legal consultant for
standardizing the legal arrangements required under BLY. To
facilitate the implementation of BLY, the following standard
templates of the legal agreements have been developed and are
available on BEE's Website for the ready reference of the
Investors and the DISCOMs:—
√ Bilateral agreement between the DISCOM and Investor
√ Bilateral agreement between the BEE and Investor
√ Tripartite Agreement between BEE, Investor and the
DISCOM
• Development of online interactive Database Management
System: BEE is getting online database management system
developed for facilitating submission of BLY projects to BEE,
their registration, issuance and allocation of carbon credits to
the investors. As the database management system is currently
under development, BEE has prepared offline database for
maintaining the data related to the BLY projects.
• Awareness Workshops/Meetings for speedy implementation of
BLY: BEE is facilitating the BLY implementation in the States
by continuous engagements with the State Electricity

40
Distribution Companies/State Electricity Boards and the State
Electricity Regulatory Commissions for their capacity building
to implement BLY in their respective States. BEE is also
arranging awareness workshops in the States to interact with
the stakeholders speedy implementation of the BLY.
Status of the Bachat Lamp Yojana
(i) The CDM Executive Board has registered the BLY PoA on
29th April, 2010.
(ii) 35 Projects (1 project from Andhra Pradesh, 20 projects from
Kerala and 7 projects from Karnataka, 5 projects from Delhi,
2 projects from Goa) have already been included in the umbrella
framework of "Bachat Lamp Yojana" Programme of Activity
(PoA).
(iii) 22 projects (8 projects from Andhra Pradesh, 7 projects from
Punjab, 7 projects from Karnataka) are presently under
validation.
(iv) 50 more projects are in the preparation stage and will be
submitted to BEE for validation in near future.
(v) At present, 20 Investors are empanelled with BEE under the
"Bachat Lamp Yojana".
(vi) 20 Tripartite Agreements and 6 Bilateral Agreements have been
signed by BEE till date.
(vii) 236 lakh CFLs have already been distributed in various States
of India under the BLY.
(viii) BEE has already initiated the development of the database
management system for Bachat Lamp Yojana.
BEE has initiated the process for accreditation of the BLY procedures
under ISO 9001.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]

41
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
(Recommendation Sl.No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
The Committee are dismayed to note that the development work
related to coal blocks allotted to power utilities is not satisfactory. National
Thermal Power Corporation have been allotted 6 coal blocks but the actual
excavation of coal has not started from any of these coal blocks. The
reasons for non development of coal blocks have been assigned to
environment/forest non-clearances. The developments of many other coal
blocks are also getting delayed for want of environment and forest
clearances. Issue of environmental clearances is of vital importance and
should be resolved before a decision is taken with regard to the allotment
of a coal block. This will not only save time, efforts and money of the
allottee but will end the air of uncertainty with regard to the development
of these coal blocks after allotment. Coal India Limited and other
stakeholders should ensure that the coal blocks which they are earmarking
for allotment are free from all encumbrances including legal and
environmental and are ready for development. The Committee feel that
the Country has reached a stage where any kind of the development work
will have some kind of impact on environment. Therefore, striking a balance
between environmental and development is need of the hour. Both
environment and development are prime concern of the Country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter of granting environment
and forest clearance to coal blocks, need to solved through joint meetings
at highest level by the stake holders at the earliest. Further they also
emphasize that a permanent mechanism of joint meeting among the stake
holders should be put in place for expeditious environmental and forest
clearances.

42
Reply of the Government
At the 5th Meeting of the Group of Minister (GoM) held on
20th September, 2011 on the issue of Go/No Go, it was agreed to accept
the recommendation of the Chaturvedi Committee of Planning Commission
to do away with the Go/No concept. Ministry of Environment will revert
back to their original practice of examining the project by FAC on case
by case based on merit, including the projects rejected based on Go/No
Go approach earlier.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
(Recommendation Sl.No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note APDRP was first introduced in the year
2002-03 with the main objective of reduction in AT&C losses. The scrutiny
by the Committee has revealed that since the inception of APDRP in the
year 2002-03, Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT&C) have
been reduced from 36.64% in year 2002-03 to 28.44% in year 2008-09.
In other words the Government, in 6 years, have succeeded in reducing
the losses by only about 8%. The present losses are still very high and
nowhere near the desired level i.e. 15% as envisaged under this scheme.
The losses in the NE region as well as States such as Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh are unacceptably high. The Committee
expect that the Ministry would come up with some special provisions while
implementing this Programme in these States so that the losses can be brought
down to an acceptable level. The Committee strongly feel that there is an
urgent need for review of this programme as the purpose and objective
of the programme in bringing down the AT&C losses has not been achieved.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that this programme may be reviewed
with a view to broaden its scope, putting in place an accountable system
to prevent unnecessary delays and below par performances and yield the
desired results by achieving its main goal of reducing AT&C and commercial
losses to the level of 15% across the country.
Reply of the Government
The Accelerated Power Development Reforms Programme (APDRP)
was launched in 2002-03 as additional central assistance to the states for

43
strengthening and up gradation of sub-transmission and distribution systems
of high-density load centers like towns and industrial areas with main
objectives of reduction in AT&C and commercial losses; improve quality
and reliability of supply of power. The 10th plan APDRP scheme has already
been closed as on 31.03.2009. The Ministry of Power took up the evaluation
exercise through independent agencies such as IIM Ahemdabad,
Administrative Staff College of India, Tata Consultancy Services, The Energy
and Resources Institute (TERI) and SBI Caps. Independent evaluators
observed that there is an improvement in awareness towards commercial
aspects of the business and theft control, improvement in metering, billing
and collection efficiencies, improvement in the quality of DPR preparation
and recommended the continuation of the APDRP beyond X plan with certain
suggestions for achieving better results. The utilities and the Planning
Commission had also proposed certain modifications in the programme.
Considering this, the Ministry of Power constituted a Task Force, headed
by Shri P. Abraham, former Secretary, Government of India, to assess and
analyze the current efforts, suggestions made by various agencies and to
suggest restructuring of the programme to achieve the objectives of APDRP.
The task force had made the certain suggestions to achieve the better
outcome from the scheme on sustainable basis.
The main recommendations made by the Task Force are as follows:—
• APDRP to continue with investment and incentive component
beyond 10th Plan.
• The assistance under the programme should focus mainly on
such activities, which will help in quick reduction of AT&C
loss and improvement in customer services. AT&C loss
reduction target should be realistic depending on the current
level of each utility.
• The focus of the programme may be on following activities:
— IT based energy accounting and auditing supported by GIS
based consumer indexing.
— Spot billing, computerised billing and revenue collection.

44
— Consumers care centers schemes for reducing technical
loss.
— Reduction in theft and pilferage.
— Better operation and monitoring of network.
In view of the recommendations of task force and from the learning
the 10th Plan APDRP scheme, the scheme was restructured as Re-
structured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme
(APDRP) for XI Plan as a Central Sector Scheme on 31st July, 2008
with the sole objective to reduce AT&C loss to the extent of 15% in
the project areas on sustainable basis through establishment of Base line
data and integrated IT application for energy audit/accounting and investing
in improvement of distribution infrastructure.
It is therefore submitted that, as recommended by the Committee,
the, 10th Plan APDRP has already been reviewed and re-structured as
R-APDRP.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]

45
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
REQUIRE REITERATION
(Recommendation Sl.No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the utilization of the funds by the
Government in 1st Quarter has been abysmally low throughout the
11th Plan period. It has been 6.07%, 0.08% and 8.15% for the year
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively. It is very logical that poor
spending in 1st Quarter have the cascading effect and put pressure in
spending patterns of later Quarters. The Ministry has given various reasons
for erratic quarterly spending. The Committee find it difficult to understand
that despite the fact that expenditure pattern is monitored on a weekly/
monthly/quarterly basis by the Ministry, there is not a single year in the
entire 11th Plan when all the four quarterly spending were according to
the norms laid down by the Ministry itself. It amount to improper and
unscientific planning, financial imprudence and non-serious approach with
regard to achievement of the target. When there are hierarchical levels
for monitoring of the capacity addition programmes, then such recurrent
feature is beyond comprehension and the Committee is inclined to infer
that the entire system of monitoring the pace of work of is nothing but
a ritual exercise. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Ministry should not only recast its present monitoring system to make
it more accountable and trustworthy to ensure the uniform quarterly
spending as per the norms but also taking proper correctives to avoid
recurrence of the lapses responsible for sluggishness in the achievement.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of Standing Committee on energy is noted.
The expenditure vis-à-vis allotment are discussed in Senior Officers

46
Meeting and follow up action on directions given by the Secretary are
also renewed.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl.No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee find that there is inordinate delay in implementation
of RGGVY scheme in some of the States. The Ministry explained that
there are number of reasons for this which inter-alia include delay in
forest clearances, delay in land acquisition for 33/11 KV sub-stations,
limited number of good agencies, delay in issuance of road permit, delay
in providing authentic BPL list etc. The Ministry also submitted before
the Committee that in the execution of the scheme the role of the State
Government is crucial in the timely execution of the scheme. The
Committee have been apprised that there are delays on the part of States
in awarding sanctioned projects to utilities, allotment of land for
construction of new sub-stations, sanction of revised cost estimates of
CPUs, identification of villages for electrification, energization of villages
where the infrastructure has been created and establishment of franchisees
in the electrified villages etc. The Committee do appreciate the inherent
bottlenecks, wherein the Ministry have hardly any control. However, these
impediments cannot be allowed to impede the implementation of such an
important scheme covering most remote and neglected sections of the
Country. The Committee find that steps have been taken to set up
monitoring Committee which periodically meets to sanction projects and
review the progress of implementation and formation of district Committee
besides the review of the scheme on monthly basis by the respective Chief
Secretaries of the States. The Committee gather that at times though only
of small proportion of the village is electrified, the village itself is considered
as electrified. Further, the transformers installed are of a lower capacity
so any further connections required in future cannot be accommodated
within the installed infrastructure. They also find that sub-letting of the
contract at various levels goes on. This not only leads to avoidable delay

47
at each level but also compromises on quality of works besides scope
for pilferage of the funds earmarked for the scheme without producing
adequate results. The Committee are of the considered view that REC,
the nodal agency for RGGVY will have to play a more proactive role
in the implementation of the scheme. Further, they are of the opinion
that the process of sub-letting of the contract under the scheme should
be kept at minimum level. The Committee also recommend that the concept
of electrification of the village needs to be relooked and considered afresh
specifying the percentage of electrification of village qualifying as the
electrification of that particular village. They also emphasize that besides
monitoring of the scheme at the bureaucratic level periodically, the
involvement of elected representatives of the people will go a long way
in making the scheme a success. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the scheme of RGGVY should have strong inclusive
monitoring systems with regard to its implementation and achievement of
the target. The involvement of the elected representative of the people
at the District Level Committee should be made mandatory in order to
ensure the proper coverage of villages as well as BPL households under
the scheme besides, ensuring the proper quality of work. The Committee
would like the involvement of people's representatives at local level i.e.
Panchayats, Gramsabhas and Block Level.
Reply of the Government
Under RGGVY, the DPRs have been formulated by the implementing
agencies of the States in accordance with the RGGVY guidelines. Under
the scheme, the villages are electrified as per new definition of village
electrification as amended in year 2004-05 wherein number of households
electrified should be at least 10% of the total number of households in
the village. Further, the scheme envisage providing free electricity
connections to all BPL households in a village which in case of most
of the villages is much more than 10% of the total households in a village.
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana—Scheme for Rural
Electricity Infrastructure and Household Electrification was launched in
2005 merging the existing scheme of 'Accelerated Electrification of one
lakh villages and one crore households'. Some of the projects in the States

of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh sanctioned under the earlier scheme have been
implemented under RGGVY which did not cover all majras/tola of revenue
villages. The un-covered areas of such projects including majras/tolas
having population more than 300 are proposed to be covered in
Phase-II of RGGVY in XIth Plan.
Under RGGVY, High Voltage Distribution System (HVDS) has been
envisaged. Under HVDS, instead of one large capacity transformer more
number of smaller capacity transformers are provided to reduce the chances
of power theft and overall AT&C losses. The number and size of the
transformers depend on the consumers to be served from the transformers.
Under RGGVY, the executing agencies are sub-letting the contracts
with the prior approval of the concerned implementing agency. However,
the overall responsibility for execution of the contract within time and
accepted quality rests with the main turnkey contractor.
Besides Monitoring Committee, REC and MOP regularly review
implementation of RGGVY projects and periodic review meetings are
conducted to monitor the progress in detail and also to resolve the issues
hampering the progress. REC through its zonal and project offices located
in the State headquarters also regularly monitor execution of RGGVY
works.
There is a provision to co-opt public representatives in the District
Level Electricity Committee. Further, the implementing agencies are
required to obtain a certificate from Gram Panchayat regarding completion
of electrification works in a village which results into participation of village
level representative in the scheme.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/3/2011-Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that R-APDRP for the 11th Plan has been
approved as a Central Sector Scheme. They find that the aim of the
48

programme is to bring down Aggregate Technical and Commercial
(AT&C) losses in actual and demonstrable manner. The projects under
the scheme are to be taken up in two parts. 'Part-A' is for establishment
of base line data, IT applications for energy accounting/auditing and
IT based consumer centers whereas 'Part-B' is for the strengthening
of regular distribution centers. The size of the programme is ` 51,577
crores of which ` 10,000 cores will be spent in Part-A and ` 40,000
crores will be spend in Part-B programme. Under Part-A of the
programme 1401 towns at project cost of ` 5,177 crores for 29 States/
UTs have been sanctioned and under Part-B of the programme
775 projects amounting to ` 14,854 crores have been sanctioned in the
13 States. The Committee further note that against the sanction of
` 3,059.28 crores under 'Part-A' and ` 11,795.15 crores under
Part-B of the scheme for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 only ` 1,332.72
crores and ` 1,940.92 crores respectively were released. Budget estimate
for R-APDRP for the year 2011-12 has been kept as ` 2,034 crores.
The Committee find that the budget for the programme for the current
fiscal has been reduced. The Committee observe that the lesser allocation
for the programme clearly shows that it is not coming up on expected
lines and AT&C losses continue to remain on the higher side. The
programme has been restructured but the results are not forthcoming.
It is yet to be seen whether IT enabled programme will give the desired
results as strengthening of the distribution centers does not specify
details of the various steps that will help in the reduction of AT&C
losses. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the scheme
of R-APDRP should envisage the analysis of reasons responsible for
losses, efficacious remedial measures and a coordination mechanism
wherein States and several implementing agencies are entrusted with
earmarked role and identified responsibilities for losses reduction so as
to ensure that the programme becomes successful.
Reply of the Government
Government of India has launched Restructured Accelerated Power
Development and Reform Programme (R-APDRP) in July, 2008 as a central
sector scheme for XIth Plan aimed at turnaround of power distribution
49

sector. The scheme comprises of two parts—Part-A and Part-B.
Part-A of the scheme being dedicated to establishment of IT enabled system
for achieving reliable and verifiable baseline data system. Part-B deals with
regular Sub Transmission and Distribution system strengthening and
up-gradation projects. The Schemes sanctioned under R-APDRP are project
oriented; therefore the funding mechanism has been worked out and
approved by GoI as follows:—
For Part-A Schemes–
• Initially 100% funds as loan for Part-A shall be provided by
the Government of India through Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS). The GoI loan is being disbursed to the State Power
Utilities through Nodal Agency as follows:—
(a) Upto 30% of the project cost is being released as GoI
loan up front on approval of the Project.
(b) 60% of project cost would be disbursed in two equal
tranches (of 30% each) as GoI loan upon utilization of
the cumulative amount released and submission of duly
certified supporting documents/claims by utilities to PFC
based on progress/utilization against achievement of
identified milestones.
(c) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only after full utilization of the loan disbursed
through earlier tranches.
• The entire amount of loan for Part-A projects shall be converted
into grant once the establishment of the required Base-line data
system is achieved and verified by an independent agency
appointed by Ministry of Power.
For Part-B Schemes–
• 25% (90% for special category States) funds for Part-B projects
shall be provided through loan from the Government of India.
The balance funds for Part-B projects shall be raised from
50

financial institutions. The loan shall be disbursed to the State
Power Utilities through Nodal Agency as follows:—
Non-Special Category States:
(a) 15% of the project would be released as GoI loan up
front on approval of Project.
(b) Progressive release of 75% of the project cost as loan
from Financial Institutions (FIs)/own resources based on
progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones.
(c) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only after full utilization of GoI and FIs' loans
disbursed through earlier tranches.
Special Category States:
(a) 30% of the project cost would be released as GoI loan
up front on approval of Project.
(b) Progressive release of 10% of the project cost as loan
from Financial Institutions (FIs)/own resources based on
progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones.
(c) 50% of project cost would be disbursed as GoI loan
progressively against certified claims from Utility based
on progress/utilization against achievement of identified
milestones
(d) Balance 10% of the project cost would be disbursed as
GoI loan only against full utilization of GoI and FIs' loans
disbursed through earlier tranches.
• Upto 50% (90% for special category States) of the project cost
of Part-B projects shall be converted into grant in five equal
tranches on achieving the 15% AT&C loss in the project area
on a sustainable basis for a period of five years. In addition,
51

utility level loss reduction (AT&C losses) @ 3% per annum
for utilities with baseline loss levels exceeding 30% and @ 1.5%
for utilities with baseline loss levels less than 30% have to be
achieved.
So far under Part-A of R-APDRP, 1401 IT projects worth ` 5177
crore, 42 SCADA projects worth ` 982.45 crore and under Part-B,
907 projects worth ` 19367.43 crore sanctioned by the Government of
India and the eligible amount of first installment as described above have
been released to the State Utilities.
It is therefore submitted, before the committee, that there is not any
short fall in fund allocation for the scheme, the required funds to the
eligible utilities as per R-APDRP guidelines have already been released and
for the current financial year the funds allocation has been made based
on actual requirement.
It is expected that on successful completion of the scheme, the AT&C
losses will be reduced to the extent of 15% in the project areas. The
exact result will be known after successful completion of the scheme.
[Ministry of Power OM No. 10/3/2011–Bud., Dated 17.11.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
52

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
53
  N EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
28 December , 2011 Chairman,
7 Pausa , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2011-12) HELD ON 28TH DECEMBER, 2011
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’ P ARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Mohammad Azharuddin
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri P.C. Chacko
5. Shri Baliram Jadhav
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
9. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
10. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
11. Shri Makansingh Solanki
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Govindrao Adik
13. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
54

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and briefly apprised them of the Agenda for the sitting.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 18th
Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy for the year 2011-12 and;
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 19th
Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Power for
the year 2011-12.
4. The Committee adopted both the Reports without any
modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
55

APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 19TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 13
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 13
Total: 08
Percentage 62%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Sl. Nos. 6 and 12
Total: 02
Percentage 15%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which the replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 3, 10 and 11
Total: 03
Percentage 23%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%
56

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”