STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR RURAL
APPLICATIONS
ELEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka)
11

ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2009-2010)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR RURAL
APPLICATIONS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.08.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka)

COE No. 199
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2010 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2009-10) ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
Narration Analysis
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Budgetary Allocation and Targets .............................................. 3
III. Remote Village Electrification Programme .............................. 6
IV. Village Energy Security  Projects................................................. 12
V. Solar Photov oltaic System ........................................................... 15
VI. Solar Thermal Energy Programme ............................................ 19
VII. Biogas Programme........................................................................ 21
VIII. Small Hydro Power Programme ................................................ 23
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ............... 26
ANNEXURES
  I. 11th Plan Proposed Targets/Outlay, Approved Outlay and
Revised Projections for Rural Energy System ................... 35
 II. Programme-wise details of physical targets/achievements
and financial outlays/expenditure during first three years
of the 11th Five Year Plan (upto 31.10.2009) including the
programmes for rural areas .................................................. 36
III. State-wise estimated potential and cumulative achievement
for family type biogas plants till 31st March, 2009 and
physical target and achievement during 2009-10 (as on
31.12.2009) ................................................................................ 39
IV. Minutes of the sitting held on 27.1.2010 and 10.8.2010........ 41

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2009-2010)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Mohammad Azharuddin
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary
4. Shri P.C. Chacko
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar
8. Shri Arjun Munda
9. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
11. Shri Jagdambika Pal
12. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
13. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
14. Shri M.B. Rajesh
15. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao
16. Dr. K.S. Rao
17. Shri Ganesh Singh
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
20. Shri E.G. Sugavanam
21. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhade
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Motilal Vora
#23. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
24. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
25. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
26. Shri Shivpratap Singh
27. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
28. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav
29. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi
*31. Prof. An il Kumar Sahani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Executive Officer
# Retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2010
* Nominated w.e.f. 26.02.2010

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Eleventh Report on ‘Renewable Energy for Rural Applications’.
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 27th January, 2010. The
Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry for appearing before the Committee for evidence and furnishing
the information, desired by the Committee in connection with the issues
relating to the subject.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 10th August, 2010.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
18 August, 2010 Chairman,
27 Shravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

REPORT
PART I
NARRATION ANALYSIS
I. INTRODUCTORY
1.1 The role of new and renewable energy has been assuming
increasing significance with the growing concern for the country’s energy
security. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has a wide range
of programmes on promotion of renewable energy for rural, urban,
commercial and industrial applications through grid-interactive power
generation and off-grid/distributed renewable power projects and on
research and development as well.
1.2 Renewable energy applications have brought about significant
changes in the Indian energy scenario. Apart from electricity generation,
which has now started contributing in the national electricity mix, the
application of these technologies has benefitted millions of rural folk by
meeting their cooking and other energy requirements in an
environmentally benign way. The social and economic benefits include
reduction in drudgery among rural women and girls engaged in the
collection of fuel wood from long distances and cooking in smoky kitchens,
minimization of the risks of contracting lung and eye ailments, reduction
in deforestation, employment generation at village level and ultimately
the improvement in the standard of living and creation of opportunity
for economic activities at village level.
1.3 In 1947, only 1500 villages were electrified in India. The per
capita consumption was 14 units. The initial focus was on ‘electrification
for irrigation’ to enhance agricultural produce. As per the National
Electricity Policy, 2005, about 56 per cent of rural households have not
been electrified. The Government had started Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana in April, 2005 for achieving the National Common
Minimum Programme objective of providing access to electricity to all
Rural Households in a specified period of time. According to the Ministry
of Power, a target to electrify 1,14,500 unelectrified villages was set under
this scheme, out of which 80,430 villages (70.2%) were electrified till
31st May, 2010.

1.4 In the rural areas, where the grid connectivity is not feasible,
application of renewable energy becomes all the more important. The
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) have reportedly been
supporting programmes for the development of renewable energy systems
and devices such as biogas plants, solar home-lighting systems, biomass
gasifiers, solar cookers, other solar thermal systems and small aero-
generators/hybrid systems in rural areas of the country. The Ministry has
also been implementing remote village electrification, village energy
security test projects and decentralized biogas-based power generation
programmes.
1.5 The MNRE is providing central financial assistance ranging
from about 30% to 90% of costs of for deployment of various types of
renewable energy systems/devices in rural areas for meeting different
energy needs depending on the technology employed, location and user
category. In order to encourage and promote further upscaling of such
systems, schemes of the Ministry are being suitably modified. The Ministry
has also extended its outreach to Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) to encourage
them to finance solar home lighting systems for rural areas where grid
may not have reached or has reached but is not reliable. Other steps
include creation of publicity and awareness on the need and usefulness
of renewable energy systems/devices through electronic and print media
and organization of training programmes.
1.6 Various programmes of the Ministry are implemented in States
primarily by the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) notified by the State
Governments for renewable energy development. These Agencies
generally report to the State Energy Departments and are responsible for
formulation/verification of project proposals, actual implementation and
monitoring of the programmes and disbursement of Central Financial
Assistance (CFA) to beneficiaries. State Governments have the key
responsibility of making counterpart budget provisions for proper
functioning of the SNAs as well as for implementation of various
programmes in the States. Funds are released to SNAs under most of
the programmes and they are required to submit periodic progress reports
and a funds utilization certificate on actual implementation.
2

II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND TARGETS
1.7 The main programmes covered by the Ministry under Renewable
Energy for Rural Energy for Rural Applications are as follows:—
I. Programme for Remote Villages:—
(i) Remote Village Electrification Programme: It aims at
provision of lighting/electricity in the unelectrified remote
villages/hamlets where grid connectivity is not being
provided in the short-term under the Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana of the Ministry of Power.
Such villages/hamlets are being covered mainly with Solar
PV home lighting systems.
(ii) V illage Energy Security Test Projects: For meeting the
energy requirements of remote villages of cooking,
lighting and motive power, through locally available
renewable resources, mainly biomass, with active
community participation.
II. Programmes for All Villages:—
(iii) Biogas Programme:
• Support for setting up of Family Type biogas plants
and linking sanitary toilets with biogas plants.
(iv) Solar Thermal Systems:
• Deployment of decentralized solar thermal systems/
devices, mainly solar cookers/driers for applications
of cooking, drying farm produce.
1.8 The Programme-wise targets and achievements, fund allocation
and their utilisation during the 10th Five Year Plan in respect of major
Rural Energy Programmes furnished by the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Programme Physical Financial
Target Achievement B.E./R.E. Actual
Biogas 5.88 lakh 5.63 lakh 208.63/207.88 183.52
plants plants
Remote Village 5,000 Sanctioned =5,163 611.50/274.80 247.00
Electrificaion Completed =2,860
Programmes (No. of
villages/hamlets)
SPV Decentralised 10.83 MWp 8.164 MWp 167.50/181.70 153.22
SPV Systems/Devices
3

1.9 As per the Mid-Term Appraisal of the 11th Plan period
pertaining to renewable energy for Rural Application, the sector-wise
targets and budget allocation are as under:—
• Provision of basic electricity/lighting facility through SPV/
other RE systems and devices, including DPRS, in 10000
remote villages/hamlets with an outlay of Rs. 1550 crore.
• Village Energy Security Projects in 1000 villages/hamlets with
an outlay of Rs. 225 crore.
• Solar thermal systems aggregating 1.6 mln. Sqm. Collector
area, with an outlay of Rs. 225 crore.
• Family type Biogas Plants: 2 million m
3 with an outlay of
Rs. 250 crore.
• BOVs/Hybrids/SPV devices/other RE devices on extension
basis with outlay of Rs. 250 crore.
1.10 On being asked about the revised plan/programmes in rural
programme and achievement (both Physical and financial) of the 11th
Plan, the Ministry in a note informed:—
“The Revised Allocation under rural programmes during the 11th
Plan Period as per Mid-Term Appraisal are as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Programme Revised Allocation
Biogas 450
Remote Village Electrification Programme 600
Decentralised SPV Systems/Devices 400
The physical and financial achievement during the first 3 years
(upto 31st Jan 2010) of the 11th Five Year Plan under these
progamme are as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Programme Physical Financial
Target Achievement B.E. Actual
(upto 31.1.2010)
Biogas 3.78 lakh plants 2.54 lakh plants 162.00 171.51
Remote Village 5,000 Sanctioned=3,382 303.00 272.50
Electrification villages
Programme (No. of Completed=2,378
villages/Hamlets) villages
Decentralised SPV On project to 1.46 MWp 150.25 147.80
System/Devices project bases
4

1.11 The details of the Proposed Targets/Outlay, Approved Outlay
and Revised Projections for rural energy system for 11th Plan as per the
Mid-term Appraisal of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy are
shown at Annexure-I.
1.12 Details of programme-wise physical targets/achievements and
financial outlays/expenditure pertaining to grid-interactive, off-grid/
distributed power and decentralized renewable energy system/
programmes which include rural energy programmes, during the first
three years of the 11th Five year Plan are also shown at Annexure-II.
5

III. REMOTE VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME
1.13 The Remote Village Electrification Programme aims at
providing basic lighting/electricity facilities through renewable energy
systems in those unelectrified remote census villages and hamlets where
grid connectivity will not be provided in near future under Rajiv Gandhi
Grammeen Vidyutikaran Yojana.
1.14 According to the MNRE, the main renewable energy options
for lighting/electrification in remote villages are:—
• Small hydro power plants;
• Biomass gasification systems in conjunction with 100%
producer gas engines or with dual-fuel engines using non-
edible vegetable oils;
• Non-edible vegetable oil based engines;
• Biogas engines;
• Solar photovoltaic power plants and
• SPV homelighting systems.
1.15 The Ministry have further stated that in many situations,
particularly in very small and very remote villages, no other renewable
energy option except SPV homelighting systems may prove to be feasible.
The Rural Electrification Policy has now laid down that in “villages/
habitations where grid connectivity would not be feasible or not cost
effective, off-grid solutions based on stand-alone systems may be taken
up for supply of electricity. Where these also are not feasible and if only
alternative is to use isolated lighting technologies like solar photovoltaic,
these may be adopted. However, such remote villages may not be
designated as electrified.”
1.16 On being asked about the number of villages/hamlets
electrified/illuminated under the various programmes/schemes of the
Remote Village Electrification Programme, the Ministry in a note stated
as under:—
“The decision to use a particular renewable energy technology out
of technically possible ones, is taken by the state implementing
agency after considering the resource availability, ease of operation,
cost economics and long term sustainability. The details of projects
6

taken up so far with small hydro, biomass gasification, SPV Power
plants and SPV homelighting systems are as follows:—
Technology Used No. of villages/
Hamlets Sanctioned
Micro Hydro 230
Biomass Gasification 37
Solar Power Plant 410
Solar Homelighting Systems 9424
Total No. of covered villages and hamlets 10014
Completed 6419
 Under Implementation 3123"
1.17 Enquired as to whether the Ministry have allotted budget
separtately under each programme, the Committee have been informed
that technology-wise budget is not allocated under Remote Village
Electrification Programme.
1.18 The Committee pointed out that against the target of
1500 villages and hamlets in 2008-09, only 325 villages and hamlets could
be electrified and during 2009-10, electrification of only 700 villages and
hamlets could be completed (till 31st October, 2009) against the target
of 1500 villages and hamlets. On being asked about the reasons for less
achievement so far during 11th Plan period and the corrective measures
being undertaken by the Ministry to achieve the target set for the current
plan period, the Ministry in a written reply stated:—
“The Remote Village Electrification Programme of the Ministry is
intended to provide basic comfort of electricity/lighting to only
those villages and hamlets which are not being taken up for grid
electrification under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana.
Hence, the targets set for sanction of financial support become at
the best notional in light of the initial indications received from
the States for the no. of villages they may be required to cover.
Before 2008-09, REC had endorsed more than 6000 villages and
hamlets for coverage through renewable energy sources, out of
which around 4000 had been covered by that time. Concerned States
were accordingly asked to submit proposals for the remaining
villages. However, due to lack of respective State Government’s
approvals, the implementing agencies could not submit the
proposals. In general, all eligible proposals received from States for
7

coverage of remote villages/hamlets under the Programme are
sanctioned financial support.
Similarly, the implementation of the ongoing projects also got
delayed, mainly due to lack of matching share from the respective
State Governments. Some of the State Governments, for example
Assam, have still not provided their contribution of funds to the
implementing agencies which is affecting the planning and causing
undue delays in completion of projects. The Ministry continues to
follow up with the respective States to persuade them to expedite
the implementation.
During the 11th Plan, support for 3382 villages and hamlets has
been sanctioned as on 28-2-2010 which includes 754 villages and
hamlets provided support during 2009-10. Further, 2378 villages/
hamlets have been completed during this period (including from
those sanctioned during the 10th Plan). Efforts are being made
with States to get more proposals after identification of villages,
so that the 11th Plan targets could be achieved.”
1.19 In view of the fact that the villages and hamlets which are
not being taken up under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY) of Ministry of Power are to be covered under Remote Village
Electrification Programme (RVEP) of Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, the Committee desired to know whether any MoU/agreement
has been signed by the two Ministries in this regard. The Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy informed that the two Ministries have not
signed any MoU in this connection.
1.20 On being asked about the coordination mechanism of the
Government in context of RGGVY and RVEP, the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy informed:—
“The Ministry has set up a Coordination Committee under the
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
with representation from Ministry of Power, Rural Electrification
Corporation, Planning Commission and Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
The Committee meets frequently to sort out issues related to
coordination between the two Programmes. Further, Ministry takes
up only those villages and hamlets which have been endorsed by
REC for non-inclusion under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana. This prevents duplication of support from the Central
Government. The dual mechanism has so far proved to be effective
in proper coordination between the two programmes.”
8

1.21 As regard the constraints being faced in implementation of
the RVE Programme, the Ministry in a note elaborated as under:—
“1. Change in plans by the State Governments for coverage of
villages through grid extension rather than covering them
through renewable energy sources, after identification of
remote villages and hamlets by REC. In absence of firm state
plans for coverage of all unelectrified villages, it becomes
difficult to chalk out the strategy and also estimate the
quantum of effort. Ministry of Power has also been asking
the States to finalize village electrification plans for all the
unelectrified villages. However, the progress in this regard
is slow.
2. Lack of provision for State financial contribution, which places
undue burden on the beneficiaries, who generally belong to
very poor category. Although the States undertake to provide
at least half of the balance funds, at the time of implementation
these are not made available to the implementing agencies.
Thus, all the balance costs have to be borne by beneficiaries
which places undue burden on them.
3. Disturbed conditions in the remote villages, particularly in
certain pockets of Assam and other North Eastern States,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, etc.
4. Logistic problems due to extremely remote location of the
villages and hamlets.
5. Lack of adequate organizational and financial resources with
the State implementing agencies. The Ministry has been
advising the States to strengthen the implementing agencies
so that the projects could be implemented smoothly and
expeditiously. However, in most States, the agencies are
extremely understaffed and they do not even have basic
infrastructural facilities to service large number of villages
in remote areas. Non-Plan/Plan provisions for maintenance
and support, particularly after implementation, are very
essential. Yet, such provisions have not been made. Although
the Ministry provides a substantial service charge to the
implementing agencies, in addition to CFA, in many cases
the implementing agencies cannot freely incur expenditure
out of these funds.
6. Lack of coordination at the State level between the
implementing agencies of RGGVY and those of RVE. Due to
this, some amount of overlapping has been observed between
9

the two schemes. Moreover, this also delays the process of
identification of villages to be taken up under the Remote
Village Electrification Programme.”
1.22 The Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy also
apprised the Committee about the implementation of RVEP and
coordination of the Ministry with State Governments, during the evidence
held on 27th January, 2010. The Secretary said:—
“Schemes related to renewable energy are implemented in two ways,
We have to make a policy framework as to whether this will be
implemented by the private sector or by the State Government. We
have pointed out that the State Government have not paid adequate
attention to the implementation of the said scheme and perhaps
it is a major constraint in the way of implementation we would
like you to ask the State Government to make arrangements for
implementation in their respective States and we will also make
all out efforts in this direction as with the passage of time everyone
feels that renewable energy is required to be promoted. That’s why
the States should streamline their system of implementation.”
1.23 On being asked about the efforts being made/proposed to be
made by the Ministry to remove the constraints, the Committee were
informed:—
“The Ministry has been playing a very proactive role for resolution
of the above listed constraints. Regular meetings with all the
concerned departments/agencies are held to remove the bottlenecks
in smooth implementation. Such meetings have been held in the
recent past at the levels of Chief Ministers of the States, Chief
Secretaries, Principal Secretaries, Chairman, State Electricity Boards,
Heads of implementing agencies, etc. As an example, for Assam,
which is implementing the largest component of the Programme,
as many as 7 meetings have been held, including two at the level
of Chief Ministers, to expedite the implementation. Frequent
consultations are also held with suppliers, local NGOs,
representatives of beneficiaries, etc. As a result of the sustained
efforts over last 1 and ½ years, the Ministry is hopeful that all
projects sanctioned before 2008-09, will be completed by March,
2010. Detailed action plans have been drawn up with the
implementing agencies for this purpose.”
1.24 The Ministry are implementing a project on Electrification/
illumination of all villages in the border districts of Arunachal Pradesh,
when asked whether there is any proposal for such projects for the
10

remaining North-Eastern States which are lying along the sensitive border
areas, the Committee have been informed:—
“ A meeting of all the NE States was organised in the Planning
Commission, at the instance of MNRE, on 26th June, 2009 to discuss
implementation of SHP, RVE and other programmes. The States
were requested to identify villages, including villages located near
international borders, to be taken up for electrification/illumination
through solar or micro hydel. Further, Secretary MNRE had a
meeting with the Planning Commission and Secretary, DoNER on
5th February, 2010 to discuss implementation and mobilisation of
State funds for RVE and small/micro hydel projects in NE States.
It may be mentioned that the Ministry is already supporting
electrification/illumination of remote villages, including border
villages, in the NE States, identified by the concerned Power
Departments, which are not covered under RGGVY programme.
The Ministry is also supporting small hydro projects in all NE
States.”
11

IV. VILLAGE ENERGY SECURITY PROJECTS (VESP)
1.25 Since the 10th Five Year Plan period, a limited number of Test
Projects on village Energy Security are being taken up in very remote
villages and hamlets that are unlikely to be electrified through
conventional means. The Village Energy Security Test Projects (VESP)
aim at meeting the total energy requirement such as cooking, lighting
and motive power of villages, through locally available renewable energy
resources, particularly biomass with active participation of the local
communities, including women. According to the MNRE, the projects are
environment-friendly and create avenues for local employment, thus
improving the quality of life and leading to overall sustainable
development. Test projects on village energy security are being taken up
to demonstrate the techno-economic parameters, provide operational
experience, mobilize local communities and firm up the institutional
arrangements.
1.26 The activities envisaged under these projects are
(a) identification of village/hamlet; (b) Preparation of a village Energy Plan,
including assessment of resources, energy services required and
configuration of energy production systems; (c) Formation of a Village
Energy Committee; (d) Creation of Village Energy Fund; (e) Plantations/
installation of energy production systems; (f) Operation and maintenance;
and (g) Capacity building and training.
1.27 The energy production systems comprise improved chulhas;
biogas plants based on dung/oil cakes or leafy biomass; biomass
gasifiers coupled with 100% producer gas engines; and, biofuel based
engines run on 100% Straight Vegetable Oils (SVO) to meet the lighting
and motive power needs. Energy plantations are an integral part of these
projects.
1.28 The test projects were being undertaken by the Gram
Panchayats and facilitated by implementing agencies such as District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs), Forest Departments and NGOs.
Guidelines of VESP were revised in April, 2008 and State Nodal Agencies
(SNAs) have also been included as implementing agencies.
1.29 As per the Annual Report of the MNRE (2009-10), 90 per cent
of the project cost of the projects is met through a Central grant. The
balance 10 per cent towards the project cost is to be mobilized by the
Community/implementing agency/State Nodal Agency.
12

1.30 The State-wise break-up of VESPs sanctioned and
commissioned, as furnished by the MNRE is as below:—
Sl. No. Name of States Implementing Agency No. of test No. of
projects  commiss-
under ioned
implemen- projects
tation
1. Assam State Forest Department 14 4
2. Chhattisgarh State Forest Department/ 15 15
CREDA(14) and NGO(1)
3. Gujarat NGO 2 2
4. Jharkhand NGO 3 —
5. Madhya Pradesh State Forest Department 9 8
6. Maharashtra NGO 10 3
7. Orissa State Forest Department(4) 15 12
and NGO(11)
8. Tamil Nadu State Forest Department 4 4
9. Uttarakhand UTT ARAKHAND 4 4
Biofuel Board
10. West Bengal State Forest 4 2
Department/WBREDA
 Total 80 54
1.31 The Physical achievement as on 30th June, 2009 is as under:—
Year Physical Achievement
2007-08 -
2008-09 17
2009-10 - (upto 30.06.2009)
1.32 The MNRE have further informed that out of 54 projects
commissioned, 27 projects are at various stages of implementation. The
actual expenditure on these projects as on 30th June,2009 has been as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE/RE Actual
2007-08 8.00/5.00 1.33
2008-09 15.00/7.00 5.39
2009-10 10.00/6.00 0.27 (upto 30.06.2009
13

1.33 The Ministry have stated that initially they have proposed to
cover 1000 villages under Village Energy Security Test Projects with a
total outlay of Rs. 225 crores during 11th Plan through locally available
renewable resources, particularly biomass, which was subsequently revised
to 200 Test Projects by Standing Finance Committee (of MNRE) in its
meeting held on 13th March, 2008.
1.34 On being asked to explain the reasons for less achievement
under Village Energy Security Projects, the Ministry in a note stated:—
“It has not been possible to achieve the physical target of new
Village Energy Security Test Projects due to non-receipt of viable
proposals from SNAs and other implementing agencies as per the
revised guidelines. Some of the barriers/challenges are:—
(i) Identification/selection of appropriate remote and easily
accessible village.
(ii) A dequate community mobilization and social engineering by
implementing agencies.
(iii) Mobilization of 10% share in capital cost of the projects.
(iv) Requirement of trained personnel for operation and
maintenance.
(v) Fixing and regular collection of user charges by Village Energy
Committee.
(vi) Convergence of other rural development schemes in the area
for livelihood/income generating activities.
(vii) Regu lar performance monitoring and feedback.
1.35 When asked about its action plan for achieving the target
during the remaining period of 11th Plan, the Committee have been
informed:—
“During Mid-Term Appraisal of 11th Plan in September, 2009, it
was decided to concentrate on consolidating the projects already
taken up for implementation and take up new villages only under
the RVE Programme. Accordingly, during the remaining period of
11th Plan, only consolidation of VESPs activities will be undertaken.”
14

V . SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (SPV) SYSTEM
1.36 Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) Technology enables direct conversion
of sunlight into electricity. It has been reported that the daily solar radiation
in India varies from 4KWh to 7KWh per sq.m. in different parts of the
country and there are about 250-300 sunny days in a year in most of the
areas. As abundant solar radiation is available in almost entire country,
SPV systems can be used anywhere in the country. The SPV technology
is used in both Grid-interactive and decentralized manner.
1.37 The MNRE have been providing Central Finance Assistance
(CFA) for demonstration and utilization of SPV Systems such as solar
home lighting systems, solar street lights, stand alone PV power plants,
solar lanterns, solar pumps and other systems in rural areas of the country.
1.38 The MNRE also informed that the projects are being
implemented in project mode through various implementing agencies
including the Central and State Government organizations, State Nodal
Agencies, NGOs, Public Sector Undertakings, Akshya Urja Shops, etc.
1.39 The overall targets and achievements and expenditure pattern
during the first two years of the 11th Plan for various SPV systems, as
furnished by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy are given below:—
System 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach.
Solar Lanterns (Nos.) 97,200 92,267 — 41,397 —
Solar Home Lighting 68,250 52,262 — 50,904 —
Systems (Nos.)
Solar Street Lighting 9,570 8,462 15831 7,391 —
Systems (Nos.)
SPV Water Pumping — 42 — 56 —
Systems
Standalone Power — — 3221.75 — —
Plants (kWp)
Total (MWp) 4.21 3.56 4.4 2.59 20 MW
Expenditure Pattern
(Rs. in crores)
Year BE RE Actual
2007-08  52.50 60.75 55.35
2008-09 87.25 67.35 62.45
2009-10 (up to 30.6.2009) 98.00 - 7.00
Project
mode
only
15

This includes expenditure on deployment of off-grid systems SPV
Systems and of decentralized SPV systems in Urban areas also.
1.40 Asked about the availability of grid-interactive SPV power in
rural areas, the Ministry in a written reply stated:—
“By February, 2010, two SPV power projects of about 1.0 MWp
capacity each have been installed one by West Bengal Green
Energy Development Corporation Limited, Kolkata at Jamuria
village in Asansol district of West Bengal and another by a
private developer at Awhan village in Amritsar district of Punjab.
The Karnataka Power Corporation Limited has also set up
two grid-connected SPV power plants of 3 MWp capacity each
in the State. Electricity from these projects is being fed into the
local grid.”
1.41 When asked to furnish details of the project-mode
implementation of the Decentralised SPV system during the year
2009-10, the Ministry in a written reply informed:—
“Under the 2009-10 SPV Programme, projects for 34,800 solar
lanterns were sanctioned in West Bengal (14,000 Nos for “ Aila”
affected families in Sunderbans), Tripura (20,000 Nos.) and Sikkim
(800 Nos.).
Projects for installation of a total of 42,741 solar home lighting
systems were sanctioned for Arunachal Pradesh (3,079 Nos.), Assam
(71 Nos.), Gujarat (3,058 Nos.), Haryana (5,635 Nos.), Manipur
(365 Nos.), Rajasthan (10,000 Nos.), Sikkim (750 Nos.) and West Bengal
(19,783 Nos.). These systems are to be installed in unelectrified
households/ villages, SC/ST and Minority populated villages, salt
workers colonies, etc.
Projects for a total of 7,486 solar street lighting systems were
sactioned for installation in Assam (68 Nos.), Haryana (2,277 Nos.),
Maharashtra (100 Nos.), Manipur 438 No.), Orissa (80 Nos.),
Pudducherry (100 Nos.), Punjab (1,017 Nos.), Rajasthan (120 Nos.),
Sikkim (30 Nos.), Uttar Pradesh (2,361 Nos.) and Uttarakhand
(895 Nos.). These systems are to be installed in unelectrified villages,
police stations, SC/ST and minority populated villages, etc.
Stand Alone/Roof Top Power Plants of 4,120 KWp aggregate SPV
capacity were sanctioned for installation in Andhra Pradesh
(630KWp), Chhattisgarh (1,410 KWp), Haryana (267 KWp) Karnataka
16

(156 KWp), Madhya Pradesh (165 KWp), Orissa (10 KWp), Rajasthan
(568 KWp), Sikkim (1KWp), Tamil Nadu (10.5 KWP), Tripura
(1 KWp), Uttar Pradesh (711 KWp), Uttarakhand (100 KWp) and
The Energy and Resource Institute (TERI), New Delhi (90 KWp).
These solar power plants would provide electricity to hospitals,
educational institutions, housing colonies, ashrams, tribal hostels,
police stations, para military force camps, bus stations, commercial
establishments and for charging solar lanterns.
The aggregate SPV capacity of the above Off-grid systems and power
plants, sanctioned during the 2009-10, is about 6.50 MWp.”
1.42 The head-wise details of the SPV systems sanctioned during
the year 2009-10, as supplied by the Ministry are given below:—
Solar Lanterns 14,000
Solar home lighting systems 20148
Street lighting systems 20148
Stand-alone solar power plant 627 kWp
1.43 The Committee desired to know about the status of
implementation of the sanctioned projects during 2009-10, the Ministry
in a note stated:—
“Most of the SPV Projects sanctioned during 2009-10 are still under
implementation, as the implementation period for these projects is
in the range of 6 months to 1 year.
Some of the projects sanctioned during 2009-10 have already been
installed. These include, distribution of 14,000 LED based solar
lanterns among the “ Aila” affected people in Sunderbans, West
Bengal; 14,000 solar home lighting systems in West Bengal; 8,000
solar home lighting systems in Rajasthan; 100 street lighting systems
in Maharashtra; 450 street lighting systems in Uttar Pradesh;
90 street lighting systems in Rajasthan and 500 street lighting systems
in Uttarakhand. Moreover, 2 power plants of 5 KWp aggregate
capacity in Andhra Pradesh and 10.5 KWp in Tamil Nadu,
171 kWp capacity in tribal hostels and ashrams in Chhattisgarh
have been installed during the current year under the scheme for
installation of solar lighting systems through loans from Regional
Rural Banks (RRBs), 39,119  solar lighting systems have been
installed in different States.
17

The SPV system installations, reported by the implementing agencies
during 2009-10 upto 28.02.2010, out of the projects sanctioned during
previous years, is given below:—
Solar Lanterns 68,999 nos.
Home Lighting Systems 33,767 nos.
Street Lighting Systems 8,680 nos.
SPV Pump 106 nos.
Power Plant 105.13 KWp
The aggregate SPV capacity of all the above Off-grid systems and
power plants, installed during the year is about 3.06 MWp.
SPV systems are expensive and they need expenditure on operation
and maintenance mainly on the replacement of batteries after
4-5 years.”
1.44 To a query as to whether the Ministry have initiated any efforts
to make the operation and maintenance affordable to users in rural areas
who generally belong to very poor category, the Committee have been
informed:—
“The manufacturers/suppliers provide two years warranty and
comprehensive maintenance contracts for next 3 years for the
systems under the programme. Mainly the batteries and other
components would need replacements for the systems beyond this
period, which is expected to be met by the beneficiaries.”
1.45 Further, regarding maintenance of installed panels, the
Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewabel Energy, during the evidence
deposed before the Committee as under:—
“We have installed solar panels for remote village electrification.
It is the responsibility of the people of those areas to maintain the
facility which we have provided for them. You should not expect
that any team from the Central Government will come to maintain
these facilities. So, we have to create a perception among the people
that we have already provided this facility and now they should
take responsibility for maintenance of that facility.”
18

VI. SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY PROGRAMME
1.46 The solar thermal systems/activities of the Ministry for rural,
urban, industrial and commercial applications include solar cookers, solar
dryers, solar water heating systems, solar air heating/steam generating
systems, green building and solar cities. Solar thermal demonstration
programme of the Ministry aims at promoting solar thermal technologies
to meet cooking energy needs with a view to demonstrate their
effectiveness and potential in reducing dependence on traditional biomass
and fossil fuels. As part of their demonstration scheme for North Eastern
States including Sikkim, Islands and Jammu and Kashmir, the Ministry
has implemented solar water heating systems.
1.47 Solar cooking is one of the important applications of solar
thermal energy catering to energy requirements of the people for cooking
in rural and urban areas. A scheme on promotion of both box type and
dish solar cookers is under implementation by the Ministry and they
have initiated an efforts to develop niche areas of applications including
in mid day meal programme for schools, Aanganwaris, defense and
paramilitary forces etc. It has been informed that under the scheme CFA
of Rs. 1500/- is available to the users on procurement of dish solar cooker
and for box cookers, promotional incentive of Rs. 100/- to 200/- on each
cooker is available to implementing agencies for sale of cookers in their
States. The Scheme also provides financial support to the manufacturers
of solar cookers for obtaining BIS approval. The Ministry reported a total
of around 6,39,000 box solar cookers and 10,200 dish solar cookers have
been deployed so far in the country.
1.48 In response to a query as to whether the Ministry have any
proposal/programme for distribution of solar cookers in the rural areas
for domestic use, the Committee have been informed:—
“The Ministry are implementing a scheme on solar cookers for
domestic use. Two types of solar cookers, namely, the dish solar
cooker and box type solar cookers are being provided to the users.
The incentives to the users and the State nodal agencies being
provided by the Ministry are as follows:—
Type of Solar Cooker Support to Users Service Charges to
SNAs for Implemen-
tation and Monitoring
Dish Solar Cooker 30% of total cost Rs. 200/- per cooker
(Diameter 1.4 m, limited to Rs. 1500/-per
 minimum) cooker
Box Type Solar Cooker  Nil Rs. 50-200/- per cooker
19

However, sale of solar cookers is mainly reported in urban/semi-
urban areas.”
1.49 Regarding the utility of solar dryers, the Ministry in a note
stated:—
“Small capacity solar dryers for drying of food products are useful
in rural areas and are being promoted through NGOs, women’s
self help groups etc. These dryers have been employed for drying
of mango pulp, fruit bars, turmeric, fish, etc. in various parts of
the country. These are manufactured by a couple of manufacturers
and are being supported by the Ministry by providing financial
assistance up to 50% of the cost. Over 100 such units of capacity
ranging up to 50 kg/batch are working in the country, mainly in
Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram, Lakshadweep, Uttarakhand, Ladakh
Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.”
1.50 On being asked the availability of solar dryers at affordable
cost for rural users, its price, manufacturer and its promotional
programme, the Committee have been informed:—
“The cost of a small solar dryer of approximately 1 sqm area is
around Rs. 12,000–Rs. 15,000. There are presently six known
manufacturers of such dryers in the country. The Ministry is
implementing a demonstration programme on Solar Dryer in rural
areas for drying food products for preservation. Financial support
of upto 50% of the cost of the dryers is available under this
demonstration programme.”
20

VII. BIOGAS PROGRAMME
1.51 Biogas production is a clean low carbon technology for efficient
management and conversion of organic wastes into clean renewable biogas
and organic fertilizer source. Biogas is generated by anaerobic
decomposition of various types of organic materials such as cattle dung
and agro/forestry and sanitary wastes in Bio-Gas-Fertilizer Plants (BGFPs).
Biogas can be used for cooking, heating and lighting, space cooling and
refrigeration and in dual-fuel on 100% gas engines for motive power and
when attached with alternators for generation of electricity. In addition
to generation of biogas, these plants also provide high quality organic
fertilizer for sustaining soil-fertility. Based on the availability of cattle
dung, a potential of 12 million biogas plants exists in the country which
can generate an estimated 17.340 million cubic meter of biogas. During
the 11th Plan, the Ministry has envisaged to install 1.4 million cubic
meter of biogas generation capacity in the country.
1.52 National Biogas and Manure Mangement Programme
(NBMMP) is being implemented in the country since 1981-82 for
promotion of biogas plants based on cattle dung and other organic wastes.
In addition, the Ministry has started a scheme ‘Biogas based Distributed/
Grid Power Generation Programme’ (BGPG programme) from 2005-06
with a view to promote biogas based power generation, especially in the
small capacity range, based on the availability of large quantity of animal
wastes and wastes from forestry, rural based industries (agro/ food
processing), kitchen wastes, etc. During the year 2008-09, ‘Demonstration
of Integrated Technology Package on Biogas Generation Purification and
Bottling’ was also taken up as a part of R&D and technology
demonstration. The NBMMP mainly caters to setting up of family type
biogas plants for meeting the cooking energy needs in rural areas of the
country.
1.53 A total physical target of 2 mln. cum capacity plants at an
outlay of Rs. 250 crore (subsidy component) was proposed in the 11th
plan. The achievements and expenditure so far are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Financial Physical Financial Physical Financial Physical
RE/Actual (lakh nos.) RE/Actual (nos.) BE/Actual (nos.)
Tar/Ach. Tar/Ach. Tar/Ach. as
on 31.07.09
56/55.90 1/0.89 57/56.99 1.24/1.08 63/23.70 1.50/.003
21

1.54 State-wise estimated potential and cumulative achievement
for family type biogas plants till 31st March, 2009 and physical target
and achievement during 2009-10 (as on 31.12.2009) as furnished by the
MNRE, is shown at Annexure-III
1.55 The Committee pointed out that biogas programme has huge
potential in rural areas but the increasing cost of construction of biogas
plants has been the limiting factor for its adoption. When asked as to
whether there was any proposal to encourage larger participation of NGOs,
Private entrepreneurs and panchayats, the Ministry in a note stated:—
“Under the provisions of the Biogas Programme, State Government
Departments and other Implementing Agencies can take up
installation of biogas plants through NGOs and private
entrepreneurs but these organizations would function within the
overall responsibility and coordination of the State Governments/
Agencies. There is also provision for involvement of panchayats for
promotional role in the installation of biogas plants.”
22

VIII. SMALL HYDRO POWER PROGRAMME
1.56 The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have been vested
with the responsibility of developing Small Hydro Power (SHP) projects
up to 25 MW station capacity. The estimated potential for power generation
in the country from such plants is over 15,000 MW. Most of the potential
is stated to be in the Himalayan States as river-based projects and other
States on irrigation canals. It has been reported that the SHP Programme
is now essentially private investment driven and that projects are normally
economically viable and private sector is showing lot of interest in
investing in SHP Projects.
1.57 To promote development of SHP Projects, the Government
continued to provide fiscal and financial incentives to attract private
investment in commercial SHP Projects apart from supporting State
Government to set up micro/mini/small hydro projects. The Ministry have
also launched a new scheme to provide financial support to SHP projects,
both in public and private sector including support for renovation and
modernization of old SHP Projects. The Committee have also been
informed that higher level of support is provided to the projects in the
North Eastern States, Sikkim, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh
and Uttarakhand. The Ministry are also providing financial support for
the development of water mills and micro hydel projects upto 100 KW.
It has also been informed that out of the 5718 potential SHP sites so far
identified in the country, about 50% lies in Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttarakhand. The Ministry are also
providing financial support to the States for identification of new potential
sites and preparation of a perspective plan for the States for development
of small hydro projects.
1.58 The Committee desired to know about the capacity harnessed
against the available potential in different States, projects completed and
electricity generated in 11th Five Year Plan so far and the Ministry’s plan
of action for the remaining years of the 11th Plan. The Ministry in a
written reply informed:—
“The estimated potential for power generation in the country from
small hydro projects (up 25 MW) is about 15,000 MW. So far, 690
SHP projects of 2520 MW have been set up and 306 projects of
about 970 MW are in various stages of implementation. Focused
attention is given towards systematically harnessing the potential
and addressing State specific constraints and improving policy
environment to attract private sector investments. The Ministry is
implementing a project on ‘Electrification/illumination of all villages
in the border districts of Arunachal Pradesh’.
23

At present, a capacity addition of about 250 MW per year is being
achieved from SHP projects and about 70% is coming through
private sector. 23 States have so far announced their policies to
invite private sector to set up SHP projects. These states have allotted
sites of over 4600 MW to the private sector. So far, 177 private
sector SHP projects with an aggregate capacity of 956.48 MW have
been set up. In order to accelerate the pace of small hydro
development, both public and private sector participation for
commercial projects and decentralized micro hydel for remote
village electrification are being encouraged. The aim of the SHP
programme is to double the current growth rate and take it from
250 MW per year to 500 MW per year. During the 11th Plan, a
target of 1400 MW has been fixed against which 534 MW have been
achieved.”
1.59 The Ministry further added:—
“The Prime Minister during his visit to Arunachal Pradesh on
31st January – 1st February 2008 had announced a package of
Rs. 550 crore to provide electricity/illumination through solar power
as well as small hydro power projects to all the villages along the
state border. Accordingly, a plan was drawn to electrify/illuminate
1483 un-electrified villages of all border districts of Arunachal
Pradesh. A project for electrification/illumination of the 1058 villages
is being implemented at a total cost of Rs. 275.58 crore. The project
will be completed in three years. Already 520 villages have been
illuminated by SPV systems and 20 small/ micro hydel projects
completed.”
1.60 On being asked about the efforts of the Ministry in coordinating
with State Governments for implementation of Small Hydro Projects, the
Ministry in a note stated:—
“The Ministry is giving focused attention towards monitoring of
ongoing projects to expedite implementation and remove
bottlenecks, specifically the issue of time taken in giving clearances
by various State Government Departments. In this regard, the
Ministry is regularly interacting with the States and the private
developers. During last one year, Secretary MNRE had series of
meetings with the States and visited Himachal Pradesh, Jammu
and Kashmir, Chattisgarh, Karnataka and Uttarakhand to review
the matter. The Minister (NRE) had a meeting with Chief Minister
of Himachal Pradesh on 24th August,2009, where the issue of giving
clearances to SHP projects in a time bound manner was discussed
in detail. A meeting was taken by Secretary, MNRE to review the
24

status of SHP projects implemented by private developers with the
State Government officials and SHP developers from Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Chattisgarh and Uttarakhand on
12th January 2010.”
25

PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
In Committee’s view the rural electrification should be a very
important part of the overall electricity policy of the Government in
the context of improving the quality of living and for economic
empowerment of the rural populations. In the wake of the ever-
increasing energy requirement of the country, renewable energy sources
like solar, wind, small hydro and bio power have a vital role to play
in supplementing conventional power generation and meeting basic
energy needs, especially in the rural and remote areas. The Committee
also note that as per the National Electricity Policy, 2005, 56% village
households had no access to electricity. Even under the ambitious Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana, the Government have been able
to achieve only 70 per cent of their target (upto 31st May, 2010) wherein
reportedly about 1,14,500 villages have been electrified. Therefore, still
in many remote villages where grid connectivity has not been provided
on feasibility and viability considerations, the application of new and
renewable energy sources/systems assumes paramount importance. In
view of the importance of the rural application of new and renewable
energy, the Committee selected the subject for detailed examination.
The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been set
out in succeeding paragraphs.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND TARGETS
2.2 The Committee note that the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy had proposed a plan outlay of Rs. 2,500 crore for its different
rural energy systems/programmes for the 11th Five Year Plan. 9,000
villages with an outlay of Rs. 650 crore were to be electrified under
Remote Village Electrification (RVE) Programme, 1,000 Villages with
an outlay of Rs. 225 crore under Village Energy Security (VES) projects,
10,000 villages (both RVE and VESP) for cooking/motive power
(non-electrical RE systems) with an estimate of Rs. 900 crore,
2 mln cum. under biogas plants for cooking applications with an outlay
of Rs. 250 crore, 1 million square metre collector area with an estimate
of Rs. 150 crore under the scheme Flat Plate Collectors for Hot water,
Rs. 250 crore were earmarked under the scheme Decentralized SPV
systems/devices without any physical targets. Rs. 50 crore were proposed
26

for solar cookers/driers and 25 crore for concentrating solar cookers.
However, an amount of Rs. 1000 crore was approved as budget outlay
for the 11th Plan period without allocating the amount headwise to
different programmes. As many as 4 programmes out of 8 were neither
allocated any fund nor any targets were fixed with regard to their
implementation. As far as the achievement of target (both physical and
financial) during the first three years of the 11th Plan is concerned,
a lot need to be done as only 2378 villages from out of the target of
5000 could be electrified under RVE till 31st January, 2010 with an
expenditure of Rs. 272.50 crore. Similarly, the target under biogas was
fixed to 3.78 lakh plants for the first three years of the 11th Plan out
of which only 2.54 lakh plants could be completed with an expenditure
of 171.51 crore against BE of 162 crore. No target has been fixed under
Decentralized SPV system and 1.46 MWp could be achieved by
spending Rs. 147.80 crore. The Committee’s examination has revealed
glaring disparity between the target set and achieved under different
programmes being run by the Ministry. The sidelining of four important
programmes by not initiating any action regarding their implementation
itself speaks about the poor and improper planning and mixing up of
the priority areas. Rural electrification and its associated benefits should
be the priority consideration of the Government. With a view to facilitate
rural electrification expeditiously without being dependent on regular
known sources of energy, non-conventional and renewable sources have
been identified to meet the situation. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that a careful, practicable and implementable strategy
ensuring maximum utilization of these sources should be devised to
achieve the target within the stipulated budgetary outlays.
(Para No. 2.2, Recommendation Sl. No. 1)
2.3 The Committee note that the achievement of targets is far
from satisfactory in all programmes being run by the Ministry under
RVE. Even 50% of the villages earmarked under the target for first
three years have not been electrified and budget allocation of about
90% have been eaten up. Under biogas, only 2.54 lakh have been
established against the target of 3.78 lakh plants while the expenditure
on the same has overshot of the budgetary estimate. This is nothing
but ill conceived planning, poor implementation, lack of coordination
and will to implement the programme and achieve the target. Despite
this, there has been an increase of 45% in the budgetary allocation of
the Ministry for the rural renewable energy programmes during the
Mid-Term Appraisal. This itself speaks about the importance being
attached to the Rural Electricity Programmes by the Government.
However, extreme incoherence prevails in overall expenditure under
various programmes being implemented, targets set and achieved under
27

each of the programmes and direction with regard to efforts for
attainment of the targets. With this attitude, it will be practically
impossible to do something meaningful within the stipulated
timeframe. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that while
acknowledging the importance of the programme, a meticulous
planning fixing inter-se priority of the various programmes should be
done to make the programmes economically viable and practically
implementable. Budgetary estimates should also be assessed in such
a fashion to avoid the unnecessary locking of precious finances.
Thereafter, focused efforts should be made to achieve the targets fixed
under each of the programme/schemes of this arena to make the life
better for the citizens living in countryside.
(Para No. 2.3, Recommendation Sl. No. 2)
REMOTE VILLAGE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME
2.4 The Committee note that the Remote Village Electrification
Programme (REVP) is being implemented by the Government to provide
lighting/electricity in those remote unelectrified villages and hamlets
which are not going to be covered under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) by using renewable energy options like
small hydro plants, biomass, solar energy, etc. The Committee have
been given to understand that the decision to use a particular technology
is taken by the state implementing agencies after examining the
technical feasibility and resource availability. Under the scheme, the
Ministry provide Central Financial Assistance (CFA) upto 90 per cent
of the costs of installation of various renewable energy devices/systems.
The Committee find that only 1280, 325 and 700 villages and hamlets
were electrified in 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto 31st October, 2009)
against the targets of 2000, 1500 and 1500 villages respectively during
three years. Also, the amount spent upto 30th September 2009 was only
Rs. 27 crore against BE of Rs. 80 crore for the year 2009-10. While
acknowledging all the positive intentions and the fruitful contents of
the programme, the Committee are not satisfied with the pace of
implementation. The poor achievements so far during the current
11th Plan period not only form the basis of the Committee’s observation
but also raise doubt over the accomplishment of the piled up unattained
targets in the remaining period. The main constraints put forward by
the Ministry are change in plans by the State Governments for coverage
of villages through grid extension, lack of provision of state financial
contribution, logistic problems due to extremely remote location of the
villages and hamlets, lack of adequate organizational and financial
resources with the state implementing agencies and lack of coordination
between the implementing agencies of RGGVY and those of RVE. The
28

Committee feel that the obstacles highlighted by the Ministry are
neither unforeseen nor insurmountable and the implementation of the
programme cannot be left to suffer on account of these routine
administrative and functional bottlenecks. Since RVEP is exclusively
an MNRE Programme being funded by their budget, the administrative
Ministry is duty bound to ensure that the issues are addressed from
all angles and a practical and pragmatic solution is worked out in
coordination will all concerned in order to meet the set targets in a
time bound manner. The Committee take note of the fact that the
Ministry has set up a Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, MNRE with representation from the Ministry of Power,
REC, Planning Commission and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. This
Committee will help in formulating plans, provision of budgets,
synchronization of MNRE programmes with that of Ministry of Power,
but some mechanism is required to put up at local level. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that apart from the high level Coordination
Committee at Central level, local Committees at State levels or regional
levels well versed with the local problems and their solutions should
be established to ensure hassle-free implementation of schemes at
ground level so that the plans/programmes of the Ministry are converted
into the reality and the population living in remote and far off areas
improve their living and economic conditions.
(Para No. 2.4, Recommendation Sl. No. 3)
VILLAGE ENERGY SECURITY TEST PROJECTS (VESP)
2.5 The Committee note that the Village Energy Security Test
Projects (VESP) was started during 10th Five Year Plan to meet the
total energy requirements of cooking, lighting and motive power of
remote villages, through locally available renewable energy resources,
particularly biomass, with active community participation. The initial
proposal under VES Projects was to cover 1000 villages with a total
outlay of Rs. 225 crores during 11th Plan. Subsequently, the target was
reduced to 200 Test projects. The Committee are surprised to find that
only test projects have been commissioned so far and as on 30th June, 2009
only 17 villages could be covered with financial expenditure of
Rs. 6.99 crore under the projects. With such a poor performance so far
during the current plan on both physical and financial fronts, the
Committee are constrained to point out that the implementation of
these projects has been extremely tardy and much below the plan
targets. Moreover, the reasons advanced by the Ministry for this state
of affairs like the challenges being faced in identification of villages,
community mobilization, managing trained personnel and local share
of capital cost and in performance monitoring are superficial and not
29

convincing. It appears that the problems enumerated by the Ministry
are meant to cover up their own failure in foreseeing the difficulty in
remote areas and coming up with pragmatic remedial measures. The
Committee understand the conditions and resource availability vary
from area to area particularly in remote villages and feel that the
Ministry should have worked out concrete and comprehensive plan of
action in advance in coordination with the local Government,
implementing agencies and local panchayats area-wise in a proactive
manner and should have strived to convert the objective and spirit
behind the well thought out scheme of the Government into reality
in order to lit the life of the most needy people. That this was not done
is nothing but regrettable. The decision to concentrate on consolidating
the projects already taken up for implementation and to take up new
villages only under the RVE Programme is also a disappointing
manifestation of the non-performance of the Government. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should critically
review their own performance, identify the shortcomings project-wise,
work out action plan for rest of the projects accordingly with well
coordinated and practical approach, keep strict vigil on the progress
so as to accomplish the remaining targets in a time bound manner.
(Para No. 2.5, Recommendation Sl. No. 4)
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
2.6 Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) Technology is used to convert
sunlight into electricity. As abundant solar radiation is available in the
entire country, the Committee take it as the most useful and futuristic
technology and thus reducing our dependence on fossil fuel and
encouraging the use of renewable energy. Launching the new solar
mission by the Government shows that the Government is not only
aware of the importance and usefulness of the SPV technology in India
but also has taken the bold and much needed initiative to convert an
ambitious target of 20,000 MW grid solar power, 2000 MW off-grid
capacity including 20 million solar lighting systems by 2022 into reality.
The Committee trust that the Government must have analysed the
daunting task ahead in implementation of solar energy projects and
accomplishing the ambitious targets and are geered up to work with
requisite force, zeal, meticulous planning and tight monitoring. The
Committee find that the performance of the Government so far with
regard to SPV programmes has not been encouraging both in setting
the targets and making efforts in achieving the same. During the
11th Five Year Plan itself, BE/RE was Rs. 52.50/60.75 crore and actual
expenditure was Rs. 55.35 crore in 2007-08. While in the year 2008-09,
it was Rs. 87.25/67.35 crore and actual expenditure was Rs. 62.45 crore.
30

The target during the year 2007-08 was 4.21 MWp and 2008-09 4.4 MWp
while the achievement was 3.56 MWp and 2.59 MWp respectively for
these two years under various SPV Systems. This itself speaks volumes
about the performance and planning of the Ministry. Above all, the
Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry have not fixed any
system-wise physical targets during 2009-10 showing project mode of
implementation and have spent a poor sum of Rs. 7 crore during the
first quarter of 2009-10 against the BE of Rs. 98 crore for the year. Also
the Committee do not find any notable performance in sanctions as
well as actual implementation of different solar energy programmes
like solar home lighting systems, street lighting systems, solar lanterns
and stand alone solar power plants in various States and observe that
a lot of work has to be done in many States like in Uttar Pradesh
where only 450 street lighting systems have been installed whereas the
sanctioned number was as many as 2,361 in 2009-10. Another disquieting
feature about this project is that the aggregate SPV capacity under
off-grid systems and power plants installed during 2009-10 is reported
to be about 3.06 MW while those sanctioned during the year is about
6.50 MWp. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry fix targets even in project mode and start a special drive to
complete the backlogs and also to take up new projects for speedy
implementation in time-bound manner with special attention to rural
SPV programmes where the people are more needy as compared to
their urban counterparts.
(Para No. 2.6, Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
2.7 The Committee have been informed that the installed SPV
systems need expenditure on operation and maintenance mainly on
the replacement of batteries after 4-5 years. It has also been stated that
the manufacturers/suppliers provide two years warranty and
comprehensive maintenance contracts for next three years for the
systems under programme. It is understood that the need for actual
maintenance of the SPV installations and replacement of batteries arises
after 4 to 5 years of installation of the system, which incidentally
happens to be the closing period of the maintenance contract. The
Committee feel that the beneficiaries, even if they are willing to
maintain the system, may find it difficult to get the genuine batteries
and other parts and proper service at reasonable rates. Moreover, the
statement that ‘it is the responsibility of the people of those areas to
maintain the facility’ appears to be too harsh and rigid especially to
the common rural people who are not even aware of the general
technical know-how of the SPV installations. The investment made by
the Government goes in vain if the installations are not made use of
for want of proper and timely maintenance. The Committee, therefore,
31

recommend that the Ministry, instead of simply bothering about their
target achievement statistics, should come forward with some prudent
and pragmatic solution so that the efforts and money invested by them
serve the purpose and there is optimum utilization of the SPV
installations by the beneficiaries. One such solution is to ensure the
availability of services of the same company for maintenance who can
provide best available quality of batteries and proper service at
subsidized rates. Also Cooperation of Panchayats, Self Help Groups
and NGO’s can be sought for helping in running the systems. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
(Para No. 2.7, Recommendation Sl. No. 6)
SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY
2.8 The Committee note that solar cooker and solar dryers are
one of the important appliances of solar thermal energy in rural areas.
The Committee find that small capacity solar dryers are used for drying
of food products in rural areas and are being promoted through NGOs,
Women Self Help Groups etc. The Committee feel that applications
of solar cooker in the rural areas will improve the health condition of
the villagers and that of solar dryers will generate employment
opportunities ultimately improving the economic activities at village
level. The solar cooking should also be promoted in group activities
in rural areas like schools for mid-day meals and at anganwaries, etc.
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives of the Ministry for
providing financial assistance to the manufacturers and users,
recommend that the systems should be made available to the rural
users at affordable price. Further, the Committee desire that
demonstration and promotional programmes of the systems should be
increased in the rural areas.
(Para No. 2.8, Recommendation Sl. No. 7)
BIOGAS PROGRAMME
2.9 The Committee note that under the biogas programme, the
Ministry aim at the deployment of family type biogas plants of average
2 cum per day capacity for biogas generation from cattle manure as
major feedstock, mainly for cooking application in rural areas. The
Committee find that against the vast estimated potential of 1,23,39,300
family type biogas plants, the cumulative achievement as on March, 2009
is 41,33,710 which is merely 33.5 per cent. This implies that a lot of
work is yet to be done in this important area of renewable energy for
rural application. Further analysis of data reveals that the plants so far
32

installed in some of the States viz. Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Jammu and
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Tripura and Uttar Pradesh are comparatively low vis-à-vis their available
potential for such installations. The Committee are surprised to note
that the targets set for many of these States for the year 2009-10 are
highly low. For example, targets for Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir,
Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are 300, 100, 50, 50 and 4000
respectively during the year 2009-10. Even the performance during the
said year upto first three quarters has been 51,732 plants against the
total target of 1,50,000 plants, showing that almost two-third of the
target was left for fulfillment in the last quarter, which is just impossible
to be achieved by the Ministry. The Committee would like to stress
that besides generating electricity, biogas plants also provide high
quality organic fertilizer which are essential for sustaining soil fertility.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
should reenergize themselves and take initiative to ensure utmost
utilization of available opportunities particularly in high potential
States so as the usage of family type biogas is encouraged in the rural
areas where raw materials are abundantly available. As the cost of
construction of biogas plants has been the limiting factor for its
adoption, the Committee recommend that efforts should be made to
rationalize the cost and promote the larger participation of NGOs,
private entrepreneurs and local communities in this area.
(Para No. 2.9, Recommendation Sl. No. 8)
SMALL HYDRO POWER
2.10 The Committee note that as against the estimated potential
of about 15000 MW for Small Hydro Projects, the capacity of the
installed project is only about 2500 MW in various States. Besides
projects of more than 900 MW are at various stages of implementation.
As such a huge Small Hydro potential is still lying untapped in the
country. Since most of the potential is in Himalayan States being river-
based projects extending upto North-Eastern region, the Committee
feel that the Small Hydro Power Programme is the most suited option
after Solar Photovoltaic in illuminating remote villages. The Committee
are happy to note that the Ministry are encouraging both public and
private participation for commercial projects and decentralized micro
hydel projects for remote village electrification. The Ministry have taken
a step further in granting due importance to this programme by stating
that the aim of the SHP programme is to double the current growth
rate and take it from 250 MW per year to 500 MW per year. At the
same time, the Committee are not satisfied with the actual performance
of the Ministry at the ground level achieving only 534 MW during first
33

three years of 11th Five Year Plan against the overall target of
1400 MW. The Ministry have no other option but to accelerate the pace of
implementation by evolving proper coordination mechanism with the
State Governments to overcome the bottlenecks. The Committee also
find that the target for the 11th Plan under SHP has been reduced to
1000 MW during Mid-Term Appraisal without reducing the financial
allocation of Rs. 700 crore. Moreover, the Prime Minister has approved
a special package of Rs. 550 crore to provide electricity/illumination
to all the villages along the state border of Arunachal Pradesh through
solar as well as small hydro power projects. Considering the available
funds for installation of Small Hydro Projects, the Committee expect
the Ministry to show the required will power and zeal to intensify the
momentum of implementation of the pending projects by taking
necessary initiative and steps to undertake new projects as well. At
the same time, the Committee recommend that small hydel power
projects should be given top priority by the Government to ensure that
the identified potential of 15,000 MW for small hydro projects in the
country could be tapped by the 12th Plan period. The Committee also
recommend that identification and evaluation of new potential sites
should also be undertaken in order to take the most needed benefit
to the deprived masses in remotest rural areas of the country.
(Para No. 2.10, Recommendation Sl. No. 9)
N
EW DELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV,
18 August, 2010 Chairman,
27 Shravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.
34

ANNEXURE I
(Vide Para No. 1.11 of the Report)
11TH PLAN – PROPOSED TARGETS/OUTLAY, APPROVED OUTLAY
AND REVISED PROJECTIONS FOR RURAL ENERGY SYSTEM
(Rs. in crore)
Programme 11th Plan
Approved
Physical Proposed Outlay Physical Financial
targets  outlay (40%)
FT Biogas Plants 2 mln. 250 1.4 mln. 450
for cooking  cum
applications
Remote Village 9,000 650 10,000 600
Electrification villages villages
(RVE)
VES Projects 1,000 225 0 0
villages
Common All 10,000 900 0 0
component for villages
cooking/motive under RVE
power (Non- and VESP
electrical RE
systems)
Flat plate 1.0 mln. M2 150 0 0
collectors for hot collector
water area
Solar Cookers/ 0.5 mln. M2 50 0 0
Dryers Collector
area
Concentrating 0.1 mln. M2 25 0
Solar Cookers collector area
Decentralized SPV — 250* 20 MW 400
systems/devices
Total 2,500 1,000 1,450
*Reflected in 11th Plan proposals under I&PE – Extension of SPV and other RE systems.
Also includes deployment of SPV systems in Urban Areas.
11th Plan Proposed
Targets/Outlay
Revised Projections
for 11th Plan
35

ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para No. 1.12 of the Report)
Programme-wise details of physical targets/achievements and financial outlays/expenditure during the 11th Five Year
Plan [during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto 31.10.2009)] including the programmes for rural areas
Sl. Programme Allocation          2007-08 Allocation         2008-09 Allocation         2009-10
No. (CFA)/Actual Target Ach. (CFA)/ Target Ach.  (CFA)/ Target Ach.
Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure (31.10.09)
(Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
GRID INTERACTIVE AND OFF-GRID/DISTRIBUTED POWER
(Capacities in MW )
1. Wind Powe r 110.00/87.92 1500.00 1663.50 150.00/116.20 2000.00 1485.50 220.00/114.24 2500.00 649.00
2. Small Hydro 200.00 204.75 250.00 248.93 300.00 90.11
3. Bio Power 275.00 81.00 300.00 97.50 405.00 113.50
4. Bagasse Cogeneration 185.00 247.90 192.00
5. Waste to Power—Urban 2.00 - 5.00 - 8.41
              —Indstl. 10.00 11.72 8.00 3.66 15.00
6. Solar Power - - 14.00 - 4.00 1.10
Total 2577.00 2083.49 3224.00 1054.12
36

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
OFF-GRID/DISTRIBUTED POWER (MWeq.)
7. Waste to Power—Urban 3.00 3.00 5.00
              —Indstl. 5.00 4.00 7.00 7.36 10.00 3.91
8. Non-bag. Cogen. 20.00 49.20 30.00 75.77 50.00 10.60
9. Gasifiers     —Rural 1.00 1.02 1.00 1.03 3.00 0.06
              —Indstl. 10.00 11.62 10.00 13.20 10.00 2.85
10. Aero-Gens/Hybrid 0.15 0.11 0.30 0.11 0.30 -
systems
11. SPV Plants + Street - 0.33 - 1.00 5.00 -
Lights
12. Water Mills (WMs)/ - 0.37 - - 0.70 17.50  1.75
Micro/mini-hydel (144 nos. (339 nos. (19 nos.
plants WMs)  WMs)  WMs)
Total 39.15 69.65 53.30 99.17 95.80 19.17
DECENTRALISED RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
13. Remote V illage 280.00/211.51 2000 1992 186.00/167.54 1500  636 230.00/84.05 1500 270
Electrification (Nos. Sanctio- Sanctio- (up to  sanctio-
of Villages+ Hamlets) ned/1280 ned/325 31.10.09)   ned/700
comple- comple- comple-
ted   ted ted
14. Family type Biogas 1.00 0.89 1.24 1.08 1.50 0.16
Plants (No. in lakh)
37

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
15. SPV Home Light 63,250 57,382 * 65,904 * 2,815
Systems (Nos.)
16. SPV Street Lights 7,000 3,120 16,769 7,391 * -
(Nos.)
17. SPV Lanterns (Nos.) 94,000 46958 * 56,397 * 58,064
18. SPV Pumps (Nos.) 100 42 * 56 * -
19. Solar Water Heating- 0.60 0.45 0.60 0.56 0.60 0.22
collector area
(Million sq. meter)
20. Solar Cookers (Nos.) 20,000 20,165 20,000 20,590 20,000 NA
21. Wind Pumps (Nos.) 140 80 100 NA Nil -
MW = Megawatt; kW = kilowatt, kWp = kilowatt peak; sq.m. = square meter; NA: Report Not Available.
* Practice of assigning targets discontinued. CFA sanctioned based on specific proposals to be submitted in project mode.
38

ANNEXURE III
(Vide para No. 1.54 of the Report)
State-wise estimated potential and cumulative achievement for family
type biogas plants till 31st March, 2009 and physical target and
achievement during 2009-10 (as on 31.12.09)
States/Union Territories Estimated Cumulative
potential Physical
(Plants inNo.)achievements
as on Target Achievement
31/03/2009 (upto
(Plants inNo.) 31.12.2009)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Andhra Pradesh 1065000 444239 16500 8260
Arunachal Pradesh 7500 2795 200 23
Assam 307000 71142 10000 3045
Bihar 733000 125688 300 -
Goa 8000 3862 50 16
Gujarat 554000 401394 10000 3579
Haryana 300000 52661 1500 684
Himachal Pradesh 125000 45471 150 17
Jammu and Kashmir 128000 2334 100 18
Karnataka 680000 408436 20000 2805
Kerala 150000 122378 6000 1824
Madhya Pradesh 1491000 280466 16000 7083
Maharashtra 897000 769292 8000 4118*
Manipur 38000 2128 50 -
Meghalaya 24000 5836 400 222
Mizoram 5000 3770 100 -
Nagaland 6700 3548 350 195
Orissa 605000 234522 5000 871
Punjab 411000 98039 10000 3666
Rajasthan 915000 67172 50 -
Target and
Achievements during
2009-10 (Plants in Nos.)
39

Sikkim 7300 6778 200 148
Tamil Nadu 615000 214776 1500 257
Tripura 28000 2746 100 25
Uttar Pradesh 1938000 419017 4000 499
West Bengal 695000 301762 15000 3998*
A&N Islands 2200 137 - -
Chandigarh 1400 97 0 -
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 2000 169 0 -
Delhi 12900 679 - -
Puducherry 4300 573 5 -
Chhattisgarh 400000 28617 5000 1959*
Jharkhand 100000 3903 500 505
Uttarakhand 83000 9283 900 307
KVIC and others - - 18000 7608
Total 12339300 4133710 150000 51732
*Figures are being firmed up
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
40

ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SI TTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2009-10)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th January, 2010 from
1130 hrs to 1330 hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar
3. Shri Arjun Munda
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
8. Shri M.B. Rajesh
9. Dr. K.S. Rao
10. Shri Ganesh Singh
11. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
12. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhade
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
15. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
16. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
17. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik
18. Shri Mohammad Shafi
41

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
1. Shri Deepak Gupta — Secretary
2. Ms. Gauri Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D. Majumdar — CMD, IREDA
4. Dr. B. Bandopadhayay — Scientist ‘G’
5. Dr. N.P. Singh — Scientist ‘G’
6. Shri Sudhir Mohan — Scientist ‘G’
7. Dr. B.M.S. Bist — Scientist ‘G’
8. Dr. A.R. Shukla — Scientist ‘G’
9. Dr. S. Gomathinayagam — Scientist ‘G’
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy to the sitting of the Committee and mentioned that the sitting
has been convened to hear the views of the Ministry on the subject
“Renewable Energy for Rural Applications”.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy made a brief power-point presentation on Remote
Village Electrification and Biogas Programmes in rural areas.
4. The Committee discussed with the representatives of the Ministry
on the following important points relating to the subject:—
(i) Remote Village Electrification Programme.
(ii) Bi ogas/Biomass Programme.
(iii) Solar Energy Programme.
(iv) Coordination between the Government/State Governments
and various other Agencies in implementing the Programmes.
(v) Maintenance arrangement of installed projects.
5. The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to
the subject and the representatives responded to the same. The Committee
directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies to
the queries which could not be responded to by them.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the
Committee has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
42

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2009-10)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th August, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’ Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. K.S. Rao— In the Chair
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
3. Shri Ram Sundar Das
4. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
6. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
7. Shri M.B. Rajesh
8. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
9. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhade
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Motilal Vora
11. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
12. Shri Govindrao Adik
13. Shri Mohammad Shafi
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani
43

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Additional Director
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Deputy Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Dr. K.S.
Rao, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for the sitting in
accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft
Reports on
(i) ‘ Availability of Gas and Coal for Power Sector’; and
(ii) ‘Renewable Energy for Rural Applications’.
4. The Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Reports with
slight changes.
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Report taking into consideration the consequential changes arising out
of factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministries and also to
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
44