FORTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF POWER
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Power for the year 2013-14]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2013
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on  13.12.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 ( Saka)


C.O.E. No. 244
Price : Rs. 63.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2013-14) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 14
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 36
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration........................................................................ 44
CHAPTER V Observation/Recommendation in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ............................................................................ 53
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held
on 11th December, 2013 ............................................................ 54
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
35th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Energy ............................................................... 56
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2013-14)
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
8. Dr. Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan
10. Shri A. Raja
11. Shri Gutha Sukhender Reddy
12. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
13. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
16. Shri Radha Mohan Singh
17. Shri Jagadanand Singh
18. Smt. Pratibha Singh
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla
20. Shri Bhishma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri V .P . Singh Badnore
23. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty
(iii)

(iv)
24. Shri Y.S. Chowdary
25. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
26. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari
27. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
28. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahani
29. Shri Birender Singh
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this 40th Report on the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in 35th Report of the Standing
Committee on Energy (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Power for the year 2013-14’.
2. The 35th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd April,
2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 2013. Replies of the
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 22nd July, 2013.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11th December, 2013.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 35th Report of the Committee is
given at Appendix II .
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Power for the year 2013-14.
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
23rd April, 2013 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 25th April,
2013. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from
the Government. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15 and 16
Total-11
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Serial Nos. 7 and 8
Total-02
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Serial Nos. 5, 13 and 14
Total–03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
-Nil-
Total-00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations that require reiteration
or merit comments.
A. 12th Five Year Plan – Funding
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
6. The Committee had noted that fund requirement for the power
sector (conventional sources) for the 12th Five Year Plan would be
R  15,01,666 crore, whereas, R  3,18,573 crore would be required for
Renewable Energy. Thus a total fund requirement of R  18,20,239 crore
had been projected for the Power Sector. In regard to the making
arrangements of the funds of this magnitude, the Committee had
further noted that the total Plan Outlay earmarked for the Power Sector
for the 12th Plan is R  4,40,814 crore comprising R  54,297 crore of GBS
and R  3,86,517 crore of IEBR. For the arrangement of remaining fund,
the Ministry had stated that they have taken steps to create an enabling
environment to promote investment in infrastructure, specifically private
investment through 100% foreign direct investment permitted in power
projects, tax-free bonds to finance infrastructure projects, enhanced
ceiling on External Commercial Borrowings under the automatic route
and tax concessions and tax holidays. They had further informed that
various benefits have been granted to Power Sector in Union Budget
of 2013-14. The Committee while appreciating this believe that these
are the steps in right directions and will go a long way in ensuring
adequate availability of the required funds. However, the Committee,
considering the quantum of required amount, were a bit apprehensive
about the adequacy and efficacy of the measure taken for creating
congenial environment for the desired level of investments for ensuring
the availability of required funds for the sector. The Committee,
therefore, had recommended that the Government should ensure that
the power projects coming up in the 12th Plan are not held up/
delayed or abandoned due to paucity of funds. For this they expected
the Ministry of Power to persuade the Ministry of Finance for the
grant of more concessions for the Power Sector during annual
Government budget presentation/approval process.

3
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Noted for compliance.”
8. The Committee are not happy with the one liner reply sent
by the Ministry. It is desired that the Ministry shun furnishing vague
reply such as ‘noted for compliance’. The Committee expect that
action taken replies of the Government are specific and
comprehensive. Also the action taken reply should reflect the specific
efforts made to implement the recommendation or at least mentions
the roadmap/strategy of the Ministry to implement the same. The
Committee desire that the Ministry, henceforth, should follow this
norm for furnishing action taken reply.
B. Annual Plan Outlay—Spending Pattern
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
9. The Committee while scrutinizing the Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) for the year 2012-13 had noted that against the Budgetary
Estimation (BE) of 
R  9,642.00 crore, which was revised to R  4,708.00
crore, the actual utilization was R  2,535.60 crore only . The poor financial
performance of the Ministry was not limited to one or two programmes
but was across the board. In regard RGGVY, against the BE of R  4,900
crore the actual utilization was meager R  967.94 crore. Against the BE
of R  3,114.00 crore for the R-APDRP , the actual spending was only
R  1,234.49 crore. The poor financial performance continued to other
important programmes of the Ministry such as Central Power Research
Institute (CPRI), Energy Conservation and Bureau of Energy Efficiency
also where against the BE of 
R  265.00 crore, R  200.00 crore and
R 200.00 crore the actual utilization was R  40.36 crore, R 37.00 crore
and R  44.10 crore respectively. The financial figures for the year 2012-13
poorly reflects on working of the central power sector. Though, the
Ministry had assigned various reasons for under-utilization of funds
allocated, the Committee were not fully convinced. The Committee
appreciated that there may be some under utilization of allocated fund
due to unforeseen circumstance which may impede the progress of
one or two programmes but poor performance in all segments indicates
to overall poor management and lackadaisical approach of the Ministry.
They considered it unfortunate that at the time when instead of slow
and incremental growth, rapid and multiple development of the power
sector is required, the Ministry had not been able to even fully utilize
the funds leaving behind various crucial projects in lurch. However,
the Committee were pleased to note that despite the poor financial

4
performance by the Ministry during the year 2012-13, the Planning
Commission had not resorted to any cut in the demand of the Ministry
for the year 2013-14. Further, despite repeated recommendations of the
Committee regarding proper quarterly utilization of funds, the figures
furnished by the Ministry shows no improvement at all. The spendings
for the first three quarters for the year 2012-13 had been 2.79%, 14.85%
and 2.59% respectively. The Committee have time and again stressed
that the poor spending in first quarter of the financial year has
cascading effects on the later quarters. The Committee, therefore, had
strongly recommended that the Ministry should sincerely put
indefatigable efforts to fully utilize the allocated funds according to
the norms laid down by the Ministry of Finance.
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“During the first quarter of FY 2013-14 the expenditure is
Rs. 1,761.70 crore against allocation of Rs. 9,642.00 crore i.e. 18.27%
of the allocation as against Rs. 269.01 crore i.e. 2.79% in the first
quarter of the last year.”
11. The Committee, observing the poor spending by the Ministry
during the first quarter of the financial years, have been stressing
the issue of uneven quarterly expenditure. The Committee are glad
to note that the expenditure during the first quarter of 2013-14 was
18.27%. The Committee note that after many years, it is the first
occasion when the Ministry has been able to spend the allocated
fund in the first quarter of the financial year according to the
guidelines. The Committee expect that this performance would
become a norm rather an exception. Also, in view of the good
performance during the first quarter, it would also be important to
see how the Ministry fair in utilization of their allocated fund for
the entire year. Due to the cascading effect, the Committee expect
that the spending for the entire year would commensurate the
expenditure performance of the first quarter.
C. Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
12. The Committee had noted a vital aspect related to RGGVY of
providing ‘free electricity connection’ to BPL families. During their
Study Tour in January, 2013 to Mumbai, it had come out while
connection to BPL families was without any charges, they had to make
regular payment of electricity consumption. Due to non-payment
capacity of BPL families, the energized connections remain operational

5
for few months and thereafter disconnected for non-payment of bills.
The Committee were not very sure that the Ministry or Central
Electricity Authority maintain data of such cases. In this connection,
the Committee were glad to hear from the representatives of
Government of Maharashtra that the State Government provide free
electricity to BPL for the first five years of electricity connection during
which the BPL families are expected to improve/sustain their paying
capacity. The Committee felt that to stop de-electrification of villages/
BPL families, this Scheme run by Maharashtra Government should
become a model for all the States. The Committee, therefore, desired
the Ministry to become a nodal agency to guide the State Governments
in formulation/implementation of such a scheme for implementation
across the country.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Under RGGVY, capital subsidy is provided for creation of rural
electricity infrastructure for electrification of rural households
including cost of providing electricity connection to BPL households.
Supply of electricity is the responsibility of concerned State/
Discoms. Therefore, respective States/Discoms may adopt
appropriate scheme for supplying electricity to BPL households.”
14. The Committee with an intention to ensure the
implementation of the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
in letter and spirit had recommended the Ministry to examine and
persuade/facilitate State Governments to implement the provision of
providing free electricity to BPL families for initial five years under
RGGVY as adopted by the State Government of Maharashtra. The
Committee being aware of the ground reality that many of the BPL
families in a short span, due to their inability to pay electricity
bills, lose their free electricity connection provided under the Yojana.
The Committee are of the firm belief that the true spirit of the
Yojana to illuminate the households/villages is not limited to just
erection of poles and wirings. With this perception, the Committee
expected the Ministry to become a guiding factor for the States to
encourage/persuade them through various policies interventions
including financial grants to adopt the provision of providing free
electricity to BPL families for certain period of time till their paying
capacity improves. Contrary to the expectations of the Committee,
the action taken reply of the Ministry is an attempt to deflect the
issue by stating that supply of the electricity is the responsibility of
concern State/Discoms. It was expected from the Ministry that they
would issue some advisory/guidelines/orders to persuade the State/

6
Discoms to consider/adopt the said provision of free electricity under
the Yojana. In view of this the Committee reiterate their
recommendation and expect the Ministry to take swift steps to
implement the recommendation of the Committee.
D. Demand vis-à-vis Availability of Electricity
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
15. The Committee were pained to note that there is great disparity
in terms of per capita consumption of electricity in different States of
the country. Dadra & Nagar Haveli have the highest per capita
electricity i.e. 11,863.64 kWh, whereas, Bihar is having the lowest i.e.
122.11 kWh. There were many States viz. Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,
Assam etc. where per capita consumption of electricity was way below
the national average of 778.71 kWh. The Committee were very much
aware of the fact that the electricity is under List III viz. a concurrent
subject under seventh Schedule of the Constitution which means both,
the Centre and the States, have to share the onus to ensure adequate
electricity availability for every citizen of the country. Primarily, the
States are required to set up power plants corresponding to their needs
for the electricity and available resources with them. However, they
try to set up plants based on availability of funds. Whereas, the duty
of the Central Government is to ensure the holistic and inclusive growth
of the Power Sector by providing assistance, physical and financial, to
the States who are lagging behind in the race of development due to
one or the other reason. Though, the Government claims that they are
focussing on planning the generation and the transmission system in
the country on the concept of optimization of utilization of resources
on all-India basis rather on regional self-sufficiency , the Committee
found that the Central Government has failed in ensuring equitable
availability of electricity, which is base of social and economical
activities and lead to overall growth of the State. Often, the less per
capita consumption in certain States become a reason for setting less
generating units in that State, which is not only misleading but also
an injustice to the people of such States. The less per capita
consumption does not necessarily indicate to the less demand but it
could be due to less availability of electricity. The Committee believed
that this kind of disparity in States in terms of per capita availability
and consumption of electricity is not in the interest of integrated and
inclusive growth of the country. The Committee, therefore, had strongly
recommended that the Central Government should ensure more
equitable availability of electricity across the country by providing every
assistance to the lagging States for setting up more generating units
and allocating more electricity from the central pool and by transmitting
it to deficit regions from surplus regions.

7
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Electricity being a concurrent subject, responsibility for its supply
and distribution lies with the concerned State Government/Power
Utilities in the State. Government of India supplements the efforts
of the State Governments by establishing power plants in the
central sector through Central Public Sector Undertakings.
Government is committed to inclusive growth of the power sector
in the country. The pace of generation capacity addition in the
country has increased considerably. Generation capacity addition
achieved during 11th Five Year Plan was 54,964 MW which is
about 2.5 times the capacity addition achieved during the
10th Plan period. Generation capacity addition achieved during
the year 2012-13 was 20,622.8 MW which is the highest ever
capacity addition in a single year. Capacity addition of 88,537 MW
has been planned from conventional sources for the 12th Five Year
Plan. With this level of capacity addition demand for power on an
all-India basis is likely to be met by the terminal year of 12th Five
Year Plan (2016-17).
Funds for setting up of power plants are generally arranged by
the project developer. In addition to setting up power plants, States
may meet their power requirement through purchase of power
through competitive bidding to meet their requirement, based on
their anticipated demand supply scenario.
Power from Central Generating Stations to beneficiary States/
Union Territories is allocated in accordance with laid down formula
for allocation of power which is being treated as guidelines from
April, 2000. As per the guidelines, allocation of power is made to
the States/UTs in two parts, namely firm allocation of 85% and
15% for allocation by the Government for meeting the urgent/
overall requirement. The firm allocation includes allocation of 12%
free power to the affected States and 1% for local area development
in case of Hydro Power Stations and 10% (not free) power to the
home State in case of thermal and Nuclear Power Stations. The
balance 72% in the case of hydro plants and balance 75% in the
case of Thermal/Nuclear Power Plants. Power is distributed
amongst the States/UTs of the region in accordance with the pattern
of central plan assistance and energy consumption during the
previous five years, both factors having equal weightage. Central
plan assistance is determined in accordance with the Gadgil
formula, in which population of the States is also taken into
consideration.”

8
17. The Committee in their Report had observed a huge disparity
in terms of per capita consumption of electricity in different States
which can be detrimental for integrity and inclusive growth of the
country. They, therefore, had recommended the Central Government
to ensure more equitable availability of electricity across the country
by providing every assistance to the lagging States for setting up
more generating units and allocating more electricity from the central
pool. The Ministry in their action taken reply has inter alia stated
that electricity being a concurrent subject, responsibility for its supply
and distribution lies with the concerned State Government/Power
Utilities in the State. They have further stated that Government of
India supplements the efforts of the State Governments by
establishing power plants in the central sector through Central Public
Sector Undertakings which is precisely the crux of the
recommendation of the Committee. However, the reply of the
Ministry is devoid of specific efforts/strategy of the Central
Government to mitigate the disparity and the Ministry seems to be
happy to go with the prevailing position mechanically. In the process
they have tried to shirk their responsibility by stating that in addition
to setting up power plants, States may meet their power requirement
through purchase of power through competitive bidding to meet
their requirement. They have further mentioned in their reply that
generation capacity addition achieved during 11th Five Year Plan
was 54,964 MW. Also capacity addition of 88,537 MW has been
planned from conventional sources for the 12th Five Year Plan. The
Committee feel that the Ministry has not understood their real
apprehension of removing the unacceptable disparity of electricity
availability for which mere augmentation of the capacity addition
per se is not a solution. The Committee are surprised that the
Ministry has tried to justify the status quo by stating that power
from central generating stations to beneficiary States/Union Territories
is allocated in accordance with laid down formula for allocation of
power which is being treated as guidelines from April, 2000. The
Ministry has failed to understand that the huge disparity in regard
to availability of the electricity in the country is there despite the
present allocation system, which indicates its ineffectiveness in
addressing the problem. The Committee expected the Ministry to
review the present system in wake of their recommendation and
made some concrete steps or at least apprise their strategy to provide
an effective solution to the issue raised by the Committee. Rather,
they have chosen to defend the present state of affairs. The
Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation
and desire that the Ministry to examine and implement their
recommendation sincerely and expeditiously.

9
E. Coal for Farakka and Kahalgaon Power Stations
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
18. The Committee had taken note of the news that two thermal
power plants of NTPC in Bihar namely Farakka and Kahalgaon had
been forced to shut down due to non-availability of coal forcing the
crores of the people of that region to remain in dark. It had been
reported that NTPC for long have complained about the poor quality
of coal being supplied which was not paid heed by the CIL, forcing
NTPC to stop the payment. In return CIL had stopped the supply of
coal to these two power plants. The Committee observed that there is
coal stocking norms for power stations of different categories based
on their distance from the coal mines which is 15 days for pit head
power stations, 20 days for stations located up to 500 km, 25 days up
to 500-1000 km and 30 days for beyond 1000 km. While scrutinizing
the matter, the Committee had found that these plants were in super
critical/critical categories for long time not maintaining normative coal
stock which is necessary for averting any undesirable emergent situation
in case of short supply of coal. The reason for not maintaining the
normative coal stocks at these power plants had been assigned to
short supply of coal from CIL. The Committee felt that the matter had
been handled in very casual and dreadful manner forcing the people
of the region to go without power, bringing the agricultural, commercial
and other essential services to halt. The Committee in first instance
found NTPC at fault for not taking necessary and effective measure to
ensure adequate coal stocks at these two power plants which were
under the supercritical/critical category having coal stocks for less than
4/7 days. Had the NTPC maintained the normative coal stocks at
these two power plants, their shut down in wake of no supply of coal
from CIL could have been delayed till the resolution of the issue
averting the blackout. Secondly, the Committee felt that CIL, before
resorting to stop the supply of coal to these power plants should have
given the thought about the repercussions of their action. The
Committee strongly believed that the step of discontinuing supply to
supercritical power stations over the issues that could have easily been
resolved through dialogues and better coordination between the two
organizations, who are also service providers of this Country, is in no
way a prudent decision. The Committee while deprecating, both the
organizations for their coordination failure which resulted in
inconvenience to the crores of people of the country, had strongly
recommended that the issue of quality of coal should be resolved at
earliest by the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Coal.
Simultaneously, they had also recommended that utmost efforts should

10
be made to ensure in maintenance of adequate coal stocks not only at
Farakka and Kahalgaon Power Stations which are having the lowest
PLF due to lack of coal but at other power stations as well. The
Committee also desired to be apprised of the coal stocking status at
these power stations. They had further emphasized that such occurrences
do not happen in future failing which the responsible officers of both
the organizations be held accountable for exemplary punishment.
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The present installed capacity of NTPC at Farakka (West Bengal) &
Kahalgaon (Bihar) is 2100 MW & 2340 MW respectively . The total
power allocation to the state of Bihar from these stations is
960 MW. These stations are perennially not getting required
quantity of coal due to delay in development of following linked
mines by ECL:
• Rajmahal Expansion (10.5 to 17.0 MTPA)
• Hurra-C (3.0 MTPA)
• Chuperbita (4.0 MTPA)
Farakka and Kahalgaon power stations have total coal requirement
of 31.4 MMT at 90% PLF. Against the coal linkage of 27.0 MMT,
the coal allocation is 17.69 MMT (FSA:15.0 MMT + MoU:
2.69 MMT) which is sufficient only for around 51% PLF.
During FY 2012-13, the domestic coal supply was only 20.5 MMT,
which was sufficient for only 59% PLF. NTPC has imported
2.1 MMT of coal and achieved PLF of 63 % at Farakka and 72%
at Kahalgaon. The present coal stock at both the stations is for
less than 1 day’s consumption. In case NTPC blends more imported
coal, beneficiaries are not willing to buy power because of higher
cost.
In addition to coal supply issues, these power stations were
conceived as pit head stations having their own captive Merry-
Go-Round (MGR) system. Coal was expected to be primarily
transported to these stations through MGR system from linked
mines, however due to less supply of coal from linked mines at
present, substantial amount of coal is required to be transported
through Indian Railway network which has a congestion problem
especially at Andal-Sainthia sector. Railways have not been able to
construct new lines in this section. Therefore, bringing large
quantity of coal from outside the MGR system through Railway
system has become very difficult for these two stations.

11
In order to partly mitigate logistic constraints, NTPC has signed
tripartite agreement for 7 years with Inland Waterways Authority
of India (IWAI) and Jindal ITF for transportation of 3.0 MTPA of
imported coal from Haldia to Farakka through Ganges which is
expected to commence in first quarter of 2013-14.
Issues related to Quality of Coal
The Ministry of Coal has introduced GCV based system of grading
of coal w.e.f. 1st January, 2012. Coal India adopted the GCV based
pricing without following the normal International practices
requiring:—
(a) Crushing the coal below 50 mm size
(b) Washing of coal to remove ash and other impurities
(c) Introduction and ensuring operation of auto-mechanical
samplers (AMS)
(d) Making Bomb Calorimeters available at loading points for
analysis of coal
Since the infrastructure at (c) and (d) is also not available in some
of the mines of CIL, especially with ECL, payment is made on the
basis of GCV measured at the laboratory of NTPC which has all
the necessary instruments.
There is a huge difference between the GCV of coal as claimed by
ECL and the GCV of coal as received from ECL. For resolving this
issue, a Committee consisting of CEA, CIMFR, representative of
NTPC and representative of Coal India Ltd. has been constituted
and their independent assessment is under process. As per the
third amendment in Tariff Regulation, 2009-14 brought by CERC
on 31.12.2012, GCV details of coal received at the generating
stations need to be provided to the beneficiaries and displayed on
the website. Quote from third amendment in Tariff Regulation,
2009-14 issued by CERC:
“Provided that generating company shall provide to the
beneficiaries of the generating station the details of parameters of
GCV and price of fuel  i.e. domestic coal, imported coal, e-auction
coal, lignite, natural gas, RLNG, liquid fuel etc., as per the form
15 of the Part-I of Appendix I to these regulations: Provided further
that the details of blending ratio of the imported coal with domestic
coal, proportion of e-auction coal and the weighted average GCV

12
of the fuels as received shall also be provided separately , along
with the bills of the respective month:
Provided further that copies of the bills and details of parameters
of GCV and price of fuel  i.e. domestic coal, imported coal,
e-auction coal, lignite, natural gas, RLNG, liquid fuel etc., details
of blending ratio of the imported coal with domestic coal,
proportion of e-auction coal shall also be displayed on the website
of the generating company. The details should be available on its
website on monthly basis for a period of three months.”
The payment for coal supply to all CIL subsidiaries, including
ECL is now being done as per the GCV of coal as received and
posted on the website and not on the GCV claimed by coal
producer. This has also resulted in significant lowering of tariff for
power supply by NTPC to Bihar as well as other beneficiaries.
In the meantime, ECL decided to regulate supply of coal
unilaterally. NTPC had no option but to shut down some of its
units due to non-availability of coal. During the period of 20
suspension of coal supplies by ECL, from 1st April to 5th April
2013, Farakka and Kahalgaon stations have suffered generation loss
of 214 Million units.
When this was brought to the notice of Coal India and the Ministry
of Coal, corrective action has been taken and loading of coal has
partially re-started. NTPC/Ministry of Power, therefore, has no role
to play in this whole episode which ultimately resulted in cutting
down the supply of power to both Bihar and West Bengal, the
main beneficiaries of Farakka and Kahalgaon stations and the only
party responsible is ECL.”
20. The Committee in their Report had taken note of the fact
that due to tussle between NTPC and Coal India Ltd. (CIL) over
issue of coal quality, two thermal power plants of NTPC viz. Farakka
and Kahalgaon were shut down due to non-supply of coal by the
CIL. The Committee also observed that these power plants were not
maintaining normative coal stocks and were in super critical
category—having coal stocks of less than 4 days. Being aggrieved
with the situation, the Committee had recommended resolving the
coal quality issue at earliest and also desired to be apprised of the
latest coal stocks of the two power stations. The Ministry in their
reply has though elaborated the issue of coal quality, but is silent
regarding the conclusive resolution of the issue. The Committee,
therefore, infer that the issue of coal quality has not yet been resolved

13
by the NTPC and CIL. In regard to the latest coal stocking, the
Ministry has stated that the present coal stock at both the stations
is for less than 1 day’s consumption. Therefore, it is obvious that
the situation in regard to coal stocking at these power plants has
not been improved. The Committee are also unable to understand
as to why Farraka and Kahalgaon plants were not developed as pit-
head stations as originally conceived because this would have
resolved the fuel issue to a larger extent. The Ministry has further
stated that in order to partly mitigate logistic constraints, NTPC has
signed 21 tripartite agreement for 7 years with Inland Waterways
Authority of India (IWAI) and Jindal ITF for transportation of
3.0 MTPA of imported coal from Haldia to Farakka through Ganges
which is expected to commence in first quarter of 2013-14. However,
even this arrangement has miserably failed to reflect a positive impact
on the coal stocking of the two power plants. The Committee are
aghast to note that there is no improvement at all in the situation
despite the strong recommendation of the Committee. The Committee
are also surprised at the non-seriousness of the Ministry which have
not bothered to intervene in this important issue. This reflects poorly
on the effectiveness of the Ministry in regard to resolution of the
issues so important to the people and the Nation. The Committee
desire that this issue should be raised at highest level of the
concerned Ministries to arrive at a common point so that the people
of the nation do not suffer due to mishandling of the situation by
two Public Sector Undertakings. The Committee, therefore, would
like to reiterate their recommendation.

14
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.2)
12th Five Year Plan
The Committee in their previous year’s Report on Demands for
Grants, considering the slippages of projects of 33,415 MW from the
11th Five Year Plan to 12th Plan, had expressed their displeasure over
the moderate generation capacity addition target set for the 12th Plan
in general and for Central Sector in particular. The Committee are
glad to note that the generation capacity addition for the 12th Five
Year Plan has been enhanced to 88,537 MW from the earlier proposal
of 75,785 MW. Now, the share of Central, State and Private Sector in
the said capacity addition is 26,182 MW, 15,530 MW and 46,825 MW
against the earlier proposal of 19,858 MW, 13,796 MW and 42,131 MW
respectively. In regard to the achievement for the first year of the
12th Plan i.e. 2013-14, the Ministry have informed that a generation
capacity addition to the tune of 20,622.8 MW has been achieved against
the target of 17,956.3 MW. The Committee have also been assured by
the Ministry to add 20,000 MW each year for the rest of the 12th Plan.
The Committee are satisfied with the commendable achievement of
the Ministry in terms of the generation capacity addition for the year
bygone and are appreciative of the Ministry’s resolve to add
20,000 MW of capacity annually for the rest of the plan period. The
Committee would like the Ministry not to lower their guards in their
efforts in ensuring the timely completion of the projects set for
completion in the 12th Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government that instead of becoming complacent they should put
relentlessly sincere efforts for full attainment of the generation capacity
addition targets set for the 12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
A Generation capacity addition of 20,622.8 MW has been achieved
against the target of 17,956.3 MW during the first year of 12th Plan i.e.
2012-13. Government is making all out efforts to achieve the capacity
addition target of 88,537 MW during 12th Five Year Plan. The steps
being taken by the Government in this regard are as follows:
1. Rigorous monitoring of capacity addition of the on-going
generation projects.

15
2. Review meetings are taken by the Ministry of Power
regularly with CEA, equipment manufacturers, State
Utilities/CPSUs/Project developers etc. to identify the
bottlenecks in capacity addition and resolve the issues.
3. As the requirement of capacity addition is increasing to meet
growing demand, domestic manufacturing capacity of main
plant equipment has been enhanced with the formation of
several joint ventures in the country.
4. A Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) has been set up
by the Ministry of Power to independently follow up and
monitor the progress of the hydro/thermal projects.
5. Ministry of Coal has been requested to direct the coal
companies to increase the coal production so as to meet the
demand of power plants. In addition, Utilities have been
advised to import coal to meet the shortfall.
6. Initiatives are being taken to augment the gas supply for
gas based power plants.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that fund requirement for the power sector
(conventional sources) for the 12th Five Year Plan will be 
R  15,01,666
crore, whereas, R  3,18,573 crore will be required for Renewable Energy.
Thus a total fund requirement of R 18,20,239 crore has been projected
for the Power Sector. In regard to the making arrangements of the
funds of this magnitude, the Committee further note that the total
Plan Outlay earmarked for the Power Sector for the 12th Plan is
R  4,40,814 crore comprising R  54,297 crore of GBS and R  3,86,517 crore
of IEBR. For the arrangement of remaining fund, the Ministry has
stated that they have taken steps to create an enabling environment to
promote investment in infrastructure, specifically private investment
through 100% foreign direct investment permitted in power projects,
tax-free bonds to finance infrastructure projects, enhanced ceiling on
External Commercial Borrowings under the automatic route and tax
concessions and tax holidays. They have further informed that various
benefits have been granted to Power Sector in Union Budget of
2013-14. The Committee while appreciating this believe that these are
the steps in right directions and will go a long way in ensuring
adequate availability of the required funds. However, the Committee,

16
considering the quantum of required amount, are a bit apprehensive
about the adequacy and efficacy of the measure taken for creating
congenial environment for the desired level of investments for ensuring
the availability of required funds for the sector. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should ensure that the
power projects coming up in the 12th Plan are not held up/ delayed
or abandoned due to paucity of funds. For this they expect the Ministry
of Power to persuade the Ministry of Finance for the grant of more
concessions for the Power Sector during annual Government budget
presentation/approval process.
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.4)
Annual Plan Outlay
The Committee while scrutinizing the Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) for the year 2012-13 note that against the Budgetary Estimation
(BE) of 
R  9,642.00 crore, which was revised to R  4,708.00 crore, the
actual utilization was R  2,535.60 crore only. The poor financial
performance of the Ministry is not limited to one or two programmes
but is across the board. In regard RGGVY, against the BE of R  4,900
crore the actual utilization was meager R  967.94 crore. Against the BE
of R  3,114.00 crore for the R-APDRP , the actual spending was only
R  1,234.49 crore. The poor financial performance continued to other
important programmes of the Ministry such as Central Power Research
Institute (CPRI), Energy Conservation and Bureau of Energy Efficiency
also where against the BE of R  265.00 crore, R  200.00 crore and
R 200.00 crore the actual utilization was R  40.36 crore, R  37.00 crore
and R  44.10 crore respectively. The financial figures for the year
2012-13 poorly reflects on working of the central power sector. Though,
the Ministry have assigned various reasons for under-utilization of
funds allocated, the Committee are not fully convinced. The Committee
do appreciate that there may be some under utilization of allocated
funds due to unforeseen circumstances which may impede the progress

17
of one or two programmes but poor performance in all segments
indicates to overall poor management and lackadaisical approach of
the Ministry. It is very unfortunate that at the time when instead of
slow and incremental growth, rapid and multiple development of the
power sector is required, the Ministry has not been able to even fully
utilize the funds leaving behind various crucial projects in lurch.
However, the Committee are pleased to note that despite the poor
financial performance by the Ministry during the year 2012-13, the
Planning Commission has not resorted to any cut in the demand of
the Ministry for the year 2013-14. Further, despite repeated
recommendations of the Committee regarding proper quarterly
utilization of funds, the figures furnished by the Ministry shows no
improvement at all. The spendings for the first three quarters for the
year 2012-13 have been 2.79%, 14.85% and 2.59% respectively. The
Committee have time and again stressed that the poor spending in
first quarter of the financial year has cascading effects on the later
quarters. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Ministry should sincerely put indefatigable efforts to fully utilize the
allocated funds according to the norms laid down by the Ministry of
Finance.
Reply of the Government
During the first quarter of FY 2013-14 the expenditure is Rs. 1761.70
crore against allocation of Rs. 9642.00 crore i.e. 18.27% of the allocation
as against Rs 269.01 crore i.e. 2.79% in the first quarter of the last year.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.6)
Another vital aspect related to the programme is the concept of
‘free electricity connection’ to BPL families. During their Study Tour in
January, 2013 to Mumbai, it came out while connection to BPL families
is without any charges, they have to make regular payment of electricity
consumption. Due to non-payment capacity of BPL families, the
energized connections remain operational for few months and thereafter
disconnected for non-payment of bills. The Committee are not very
sure that the Ministry or Central Electricity Authority maintain data of
such cases. In this connection, the Committee were glad to hear from
the representatives of Government of Maharashtra that the State
Government provide free electricity to BPL for the first five years of
electricity connection during which the BPL families are expected to
improve/sustain their paying capacity. The Committee feel that to stop

18
de-electrification of villages/BPL families, this Scheme run by
Maharashtra Government should become a model for all the States.
The Ministry should become a nodal agency to guide the State
Governments in formulation/implementation of such a scheme for
implementation across the country.
Reply of the Government
Under RGGVY, capital subsidy is provided for creation of rural
electricity infrastructure for electrification of rural households including
cost of providing electricity connection to BPL households. Supply of
electricity is the responsibility of concerned State/Discoms. Therefore,
respective States/Discoms may adopt appropriate scheme for supplying
electricity to BPL households.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.9)
National Electricity Fund
The Committee note that under National Electricity Fund (NEF)
interest subsidy is provided on loans taken by State Power Utilities/
DISCOMs from financial institutions and banks. Guidelines for
operationalisation of National Electricity Fund were received in the
year 2012. Under the Scheme both private and public sector companies
are eligible for subsidy subject to the fulfillment of the conditions. The
objective of NEF is to incentivize the investment in distribution sector
to improve the infrastructure and to expedite the reform process therein.
All distribution sector infrastructure capital projects are eligible for
interest subsidy under NEF Scheme provided that the proposed works
have not been funded through the R-APDRP or RGGVY Schemes. The
projects for which any other grant/subsidy from the Government of
India has already been received/allocated will not be eligible under
this Scheme. The Committee have been apprised that NEF would
provide interest subsidy aggregating 
R  8,466 crore spread over 14 years
for distribution projects sanctioned by the Steering Committee during
FY 2012-13 and 2013-14 for loan amounting to R  25,000 crore. The
outlay of R  8,466 crore would cover payment of interest subsidy to
the borrowers, service charges to the nodal agency , payments to

19
independent evaluators and other incidental expenses. However, the
process for availing interest subsidy under the Scheme has been made
quite cumbersome and it is yet to be ascertained whether the scheme
will be of any assistance to the users as interest subsidy will be
extended upto 2025-26 and 2026-27 for the projects sanctioned during
2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. The Committee find that the objective
of this Scheme is also akin to R-APDRP and new scheme for financial
assistance to DISCOMs as the goal of all these schemes is to usher in
effective reforms in the area of distribution and transmission in the
power sector. The multiplicity of the Schemes for the sole purpose of
power reforms may be useful from micro-perspective, but they add to
the confusion besides creating multiple operational set-ups without
corresponding results. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that a holistic view should be taken about these problems plaguing
the sector and lean and efficacious steps should be taken to cure the
malady instead of burdening it with multiple schemes.
Reply of the Government
CCEA approved scheme of National Electricity Fund (NEF) on
13.12.2011. National Electricity Fund (Interest Subsidy Scheme) has been
set up to provide interest subsidy aggregating to Rs. 8466 crore for a
period of 14 years on loans disbursed to the Distribution Companies
(DISCOMS) – both in public and private sector, to improve the
distribution network for areas not covered by Rajiv Gandhi
GraminVidyutikaranYojana (RGGVY) and Restructured Accelerated
Power Development and Reforms Programme (R-APDRP) project areas.
The preconditions for eligibility are linked to certain reform measures
taken by the States and the amount of interest subsidy is linked to the
progress achieved in reforms linked parameters. Rural Electrification
Corporation has been designated as the nodal agency for National
electricity Fund (NEF). REC as Nodal Agency has conducted
sensitization workshop for State/Private DISCOMS and other
stakeholders to create awareness and to clarify issues in compliance of
guidelines, if any.
In order to evacuate and distribute the power generated as a result
of the ambitious capacity addition programme, commensurate
investment is required in transmission and distribution sector. The
DISCOMS, which handle the distribution sector, are in financial stress
due to various reasons. The national average Aggregate Technical and
Commercial (AT&C) loss during 2009-10 was 27.15%, ranging from
7.77% to 70.45% for different DISCOMS. The Thirteenth Finance
Commission had reported that the projected aggregate losses of State

20
T&D Utilities at 2008 tariffs would be at Rs. 1,16,089 crore by 2014-15.
Thus the Central Government intervention is required for revamping
and restructuring the distribution sector.
The investments in distribution sector are already being undertaken
under the RGGVY and R-APDRP schemes. R-APDRP covers towns
with population of more than 30,000 (10,000 in case of Special Category
States). RGGVY primarily addresses the issue of providing access of
electricity to un-electrified or partially electrified villages. The scope of
works and amount of investment in these schemes is not adequate to
meet the entire requirement of the distribution sector. There is no
scheme to cover towns with population of less than 30,000 (10,000 in
case of special category States); for reduction of AT&C losses in rural
areas; for augmentation of distribution networks necessitated by
capacity addition; for system strengthening and upgradation; and for
encouraging States to undertake agricultural and domestic feeder
separation in rural areas. While it is important to channelise investments
in distribution sector, it is also equally important to link these
investments to reforms, as the viability of the entire power sector
depends on the viability of the distribution utilities. Accordingly, the
proposed scheme links interest subsidy with reforms.
There would thus be two categories of States for working out the
interest subsidy—Special category and focused states, and States other
than special category and focused states. The precondition of eligibility
are operationalisation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission
(SERC), formulation of business plan for turn around of utilities in a
time bound manner, reorganization of State Electricity Boards (SEB),
release of subsidy, submission of audited annual accounts and timely
filing of tariff petition. Any pre-condition of eligibility can be relaxed/
modified to overcome any difficulty in operating this Scheme, with
the specific approval of Steering Committee, to be chaired by Secretary
(Power).
Each power utility eligible for subsidy on interest would be
assigned marks based on reforms measures i.e. reduction in AT&C
losses; reduction in gap (Average Cost of Supply (ACS)—Average
revenue on subsidy received basis); return on equity and multi year
tariff (MYT). Based on the consolidated score achieved on these
parameters, the utilities would be categorized and eligible for interest
subsidy ranging from 3% to 5% in States other than Special category
and focused states and 5% to 7% in Special Category and focused
states. Any utility scoring less than 35%, would not be eligible for any
interest subsidy after 31 March 2013. This would be monitored on

21
annual basis and interest subsidy will be calculated accordingly. The
baseline parameters would be verified by independent evaluators and
interest subsidy on loan proposals would be approved by the Steering
Committee, on the recommendations of the Nodal agency. The
conditions of unbundling and timely submission of annual accounts
related to Special Category and focussed States would be aligned with
other States after 3 years.
Financial implications of the National Electricity Fund would be
interest subsidy aggregating to Rs. 8466 crore spread over 14 years for
loan disbursement amounting to Rs. 25,000 crore for distribution
schemes sanctioned during the 2 years viz., 2012-13 and 2013-14. The
outlay of Rs. 8466 crore would cover payment of interest subsidy to
the borrowers, service charges to the nodal agency , payments to
independent evaluators and other incidental expenses. This is a pilot
scheme of NEF and depending on outcomes, can be augmented and
up scaled.
The implementation of the scheme would result in reduction of
AT&C losses, reduction of gap between Average Cost of Supply and
average revenue on subsidy received basis, improving return on equity
and issue of notification of multiyear tariff along with investment in
distribution sector. This scheme will facilitate Central Government
intervention, and act as a catalyst for revamping and restructuring the
state sector distribution scheme.
The Steering Committee in its third meeting held on 19.02.2013,
has approved proposals worth Rs. 10953 Crs.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.10)
Financial Assistance to Discoms
The Committee note that a scheme for financial restructuring of
the State DISCOMs has been prepared keeping in view the fragile
financial health of utilities, coupled with serious systemic deficiencies
in the working of State Discoms. The scheme contains immediate/
continuing and short term measures required to be taken in a time-
bound manner by the Discoms and State Governments. These measures
include Financial Restructuring, Tariff Setting & Revenue Realization,
Subsidy, Metering, Audit & Account and Monitoring. The Scheme for
Financial Restructurings of State Owned Discoms was notified by

22
Ministry of Power after CCEA’s approval. The Scheme is available to
all State Owned Discoms having accumulated losses and facing
difficulty in financing operational losses. An outlay of R  1,500 crore
has been kept for the year 2013-14. Guidelines about the programmes
have been issued. Five States, as of now, have given their proposals
under the programme. Their financial restructuring plans have been
worked out and are at different stages of approval. Three other States
have also given their consent. They are under examination by the
Government of India. The financial restructuring programme mentions
a number of mandatory conditions to be fulfilled by the State
distribution companies before they will be eligible for grants to be
given by the Government of India. One of the conditions is reduction
in AT&C losses. Under the Scheme the different distribution companies
will be eligible to receive Central Government grants only on the basis
of their achievements in the reduction of AT&C losses. The Committee
note that that the financial conditions of the State DISCOMs are in
doldrums because of various reasons including high AT&C losses. The
RAPDRP also aims at reducing AT&C losses through its own
mechanism. The aim of financial support to DISCOMs, thus,
supplements the efforts under R-APDRP . The Committee would await
outcome of plans approved for the States in first lot. Whether any
time limit has been set under the Scheme is also not known. The
Committee would like to recommend that with a view to improve the
financial conditions of the State DISCOMs, it should be ensured that
there is no inadequacy of funds, the results achieved by the States
under the Scheme should be sustainable and every effort should be
made with regard to the stability of the objective achieved under the
Scheme failing which State should either be debarred for central
assistance or money spent be recovered if possible. The Committee
expect the Government to ensure implementation of result oriented
projects in a time bound manner in coordination with concerned States/
DISCOMs and taking cue from the experience of RGGVY, R-APDRP
Programmes etc. The Committee would keenly await the outcome of
the new scheme at the end of the year.
Reply of the Government
The scheme for Financial Restructuring of Discoms has been
approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in a
meeting held on 24.09.2012. The scheme was notified by Ministry of
Power vide OM dated 05.10.2012. Scheme was effective from the date
of issue of order and upto 31.12.2012 unless extended by the GOI. The
scheme is applicable to all State owned Discoms having accumulated
losses and facing difficulty in financing operational losses. Scheme

23
inter-alia provides for restructuring of the Short Term Liabilities (STL)
of the Discoms outstanding as on 31.03.2012, by takeover of 50% of
the Short Term Liabilities of the State owned Discoms corresponding
to the accumulated losses of the Discoms as on 31.03.2012, by the
State Government and rescheduling of the balance 50% by the banks
with a moratorium on Principal repayment. State Government would
provide full support to the Discoms for payment of interest and
repayment of principal on bonds till the issue of Spl Securities by the
State Government. Thereafter interest and principal on Spl securities
would be served by the State Government. Status of various activities
required to be carried out under FRP are as under—
1. Guidelines for Transitional Finance Mechanism: Ministry
of Power has issued, Guidelines for Transitional Finance
Mechanism in relation to Financial Restructuring of State
Discoms on 2nd April 2013.
2. Guidelines for securities to be issued under FRP by State
Governments & Discoms: Ministry of Power has also issued,
Guidelines for pricing of bonds, to be issued by Discoms
and special securities to be issued by State Government on
2nd April 2013.
3. Extension of scheme period: Seven States were selected as
focus states for FRP . However due to efforts of Ministry of
Power, now, many States other than focus states are also
showing their willingness to take the benefit of the scheme.
FRP proposals needs to be submitted by the Discoms under
coordination with State Government, State electricity
regulatory commission etc. As the States are facing difficulty
in submitting the FRP proposals within the deadlines
(i.e. 31st March 2013), the scheme has been extended up to
31st July 2013.
4. Extending ambit/scope of the schemes: The original FRP
scheme is focussed on distribution utilities (unbundled)
owned by State Governments. Therefore number of State
Electricity Boards, not yet unbundled will not be able to be
the beneficiary of scheme. Ministry of Power had proposed
to extend the benefit of scheme to Bihar, Kerala and
Jharkhand.
5. Drafting of legislation: The draft legislation bill on ‘State
Electricity Distribution’ etc., Responsibility Bill has been sent
for vetting of Ministry of Law & Justice & Ministry of
Finance (DEA & DFS).

24
6. Terms of reference for third party parameter: Under the
scheme of FRP , CEA is entrusted with the responsibility of
preparation of Terms of Reference for third party verification
parameter. Ministry is coordinating with CEA to finalize
these terms; and are likely to be notified shortly.
7. Coordination with States: Ministry is coordinating with the
participating States to accelerate the progress of various
compliance and smooth operation for successful
implementation of FRP . Regular meetings with DFS, DEA
and States are held.
8. Finalization of FRP: Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan
are likely to finalize FRP , issue bonds and restructure eligible
STL with Bankers. Tamil Nadu issued bonds.
The scheme has been extended up to 31st July 2013 and therefore,
the States are still finalizing their FRP . The fund movement will start
only after finalizing of FRP by the States. Since, the scheme is under
implementation, the outcome of the scheme may be reported only
after the implementation period is over.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.11)
Energy Conservation
The Committee have been apprised that with the implementation
of the Ministry of Power and BEE scheme, the Government have been
able to achieve energy saving of 10,836 MW. The Committee are,
however, not very sure of the methodology in calculating exact energy
savings. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to
review the assessing methods so as to ensure that accurate assessment
is made of energy saving and large funds made available for energy
conservation schemes gives value of the money. Needless to emphasize
the assessing agencies should adopt best practices being followed by
advanced countries in this area.
Reply of the Government
The Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has initiated a number of
energy efficiency schemes in different sectors of the economy during
the 11th Plan period. Subsequently to quantify the impact of energy
efficiency measures undertaken by BEE, detailed energy saving
methodology was evolved. The savings accrued due to various schemes
of BEE is then vetted by a Committee of Experts. The scheme-wise

25
energy savings are then also verified by a third party organization
National Productivity Council (NPC), New Delhi. The verification is
based on the secondary data and stakeholder interaction for respective
schemes.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that 28 million CFL have been distributed
projects under Bachat Lamp Yojana Scheme during 11th Plan period
upto December, 2012. They also note that an avoided generation
capacity of 324.3 MW has been achieved by the CFL distribution till
December, 2011. The Committee had earlier recommended to the
Ministry to examine the feasibility of promoting installation of CFL/
LED Lamps/bulbs as one of the measures of energy conservations,
ecocompatibility in view of the global warming and its cost
effectiveness. The Ministry has now submitted before the Committee
that they are proposing to provide LED instead of CFL under RGGVY
scheme. The Ministry has stated that 2 crore BPL families would be
provided free connections with LED bulbs also. It was also informed
that attempts are being made to involve some of the big and bulk
buyers like Railways to promote the use of LED bulbs. The Ministry
also informed that if there is huge demand for LED bulbs, then the
cost of LED will come down. The Committee are happy to note the
initiatives taken by the Ministry to use LED under RGGVY scheme in
the 12th Plan and also pursuing big and bulk buyers to use LED
lamps/bulbs. This would significantly reduce the consumption of
electricity while reducing the cost of LEDs also. They recommend the
Ministry to expedite implementation of this proposal and should make
vigorous efforts to pursue large users such as Ministry of Defence
(regarding border lightings) and all other Government offices to replace
the conventional bulbs since this would lead to enormous energy
conservation. The Committee also emphasise the need to create
awareness, through visual and print media even in vernacular
languages, among general masses. BEE should enhance their publication
for use of energy efficient equipments and appliances, LED etc.
Reply of the Government
1. Distribution of LED lamps under RGGVY
The Ministry of Power has proposed to provide free connections
with LED lamps to the BPL families under RGGVY scheme. The EFC
memo for the RGGVY scheme is already approved and the Cabinet
approval for the same is under process.

26
Facilitation from BEE will be provided in the following areas:
• BEE will assist the RGGVY team in finalizing standards for
LED bulbs for speedy implementation of the scheme.
• BEE will provide technical assistance in formulating the
guidelines and processes for bulk procurement of the LED
bulbs and other areas in the implementation of the scheme.
• BEE will provide assistance in monitoring and verification
of the energy savings in project areas (villages) by
implementation of this scheme.
• An approximate of 2 crore LEDs are estimated to be
distributed under this scheme.
In this connection, BEE had conducted a preliminary discussion
with Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) on 7th May, 2013 to finalize
the road map for the implementation of the above scheme. It is
mutually decided to hold a consultation meeting with the LED
manufacturers, Testing Labs, Lighting Associations and other stake
holders to finalize the standards of LED lamps and also to assess the
market scenario for the LED lamps. BEE has also put up the EFC
Memorandum for the implementation of Bachat Lamp Yojana (BLY) to
MoP for 12th five year plan which covers facilitation from BEE for the
implementation of LED component under RGGVY scheme. The
approval of the proposed EFC is under process.
2. Promotion of LED through Bulk Buyers (Ministry of Railways/
Ministry of Defence):
BEE has sent letters to bulk buyers like the PSUs, Municipalities,
Corporations, Banks, CPWD, Defence, Railways etc. for large scale
adoption of LEDs as lighting appliance in the year 2012. Through this
letter, it was requested that agencies adopt the standards brought by
the Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) to enable public procurement.
With the letter, two lists-one of LED lamp and luminaire manufacturers,
and the other of testing laboratories were also sent to facilitate such
adoption. Along with the letter, a template tendering document was
also sent to help tendering process.
3. Energy Conservation in Government Offices:
The Government of India provides assistance to Central and State
Government buildings for carrying out Investment Grade Energy Audits
(IGEA) to identify energy saving potential in existing facilities. These

27
reports capture various energy efficiency measures based on economic
analysis of the energy efficiency measures that bring about energy
savings due to reduced energy consumption. Among the various
identified areas, lighting and HVAC account for substantial savings.
Many Government buildings have carried out energy audits under
this initiative.
4. Awareness & Media
In order to gear up the propagation of the energy conservation
and efficiency in every nook and corner for the country, the services
of media were embarked upon and it successfully showed its impact
with the nation watching BEE’s advertisement on the channels, getting
inspiring messages and information through National Dailies.
BEE releases the media campaign to achieve maximum reach to
the targeted audience. The combination of Media like Print, TV , Cinema,
Radio, and Outdoor were taken in the campaign. The campaign was
focussed on BEE Labeling Programme for use of energy efficient
equipment and appliances. A campaign will also be prepared for
promotion of LED. Brochures and Leaflets may also be printed for
LED and other equipment.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee take note of the news that two thermal power
plants of NTPC in Bihar namely Farakka and Kahalgaon had been
forced to shut down due to non-availability of coal forcing the crores
of the people of that region to remain in dark. It has been reported
that NTPC for long have complained about the poor quality of coal
being supplied which was not paid heed by the CIL, forcing NTPC to
stop the payment. In return CIL stopped the supply of coal to these
two power plants. The Committee observe that there is coal stocking
norms for power stations of different categories based on their distance
from the coal mines which is 15 days for pit head power stations,
20 days for stations located up to 500 km., 25 days up to 500-1000
km. and 30 days for beyond 1000 km. While scrutinizing the matter,
the Committee found that these plants were in super critical/critical
categories for long time not maintaining normative coal stock which is
necessary for averting any undesirable emergent situation in case of
short supply of coal. The reason for not maintaining the normative
coal stocks at these power plants have been assigned to short supply

28
of coal from CIL. The Committee feel that the matter has been handled
in very casual and dreadful manner forcing the people of the region
to go without power, bringing the agricultural, commercial and other
essential services to halt. The Committee in first instance find NTPC
at fault for not taking necessary and effective measure to ensure
adequate coal stocks at these two power plants which were under the
supercritical/critical category having coal stocks for less than 4/7 days.
Had the NTPC maintained the normative coal stocks at these two
power plants, their shut down in wake of no supply of coal from CIL
could have been delayed till the resolution of the issue averting the
blackout. Secondly, the Committee feel that CIL, before resorting to
stop the supply of coal to these power plants should have given the
thought about the repercussions of their action. The Committee strongly
believe that the step of discontinuing supply to supercritical power
stations over the issues that could have easily been resolved through
dialogues and better coordination between the two organizations, who
are also service providers of this country, is in no way a prudent
decision. The Committee while deprecating, both the organizations for
their coordination failure which resulted in inconvenience to the crores
of people of the country, strongly recommend that the issue of quality
of coal should be resolved at earliest by the Ministry of Power and
the Ministry of Coal. Simultaneously, they also recommend that utmost
efforts should be made to ensure in maintenance of adequate coal
stocks not only at Farakka and Kahalgaon Power Stations which are
having the lowest PLF due to lack of coal but at other power stations
as well. The Committee would like to be apprised of the coal stocking
status at these power stations. The Committee would also like to
emphasize that such occurrences do not happen in future failing which
the responsible officers of both the organizations be held accountable
for exemplary punishment.
Reply of the Government
The present installed capacity of NTPC at Farakka (West Bengal)
& (Bihar) is 2100 MW & 2340 MW respectively. The total power
allocation to the State of Bihar from these stations is 960 MW. These
stations are perennially not getting required quantity of coal due to
delay in development of following linked mines by ECL:
• Rajmahal Expansion (10.5 to 17.0 MTPA)
• Hurra-C (3.0 MTPA)
• Chuperbita (4.0 MTPA)

29
Farakka and Kahalgaon power stations have total coal requirement
of 31.4 MMT at 90% PLF. Against the coal linkage of 27.0 MMT, the
coal allocation is 17.69 MMT (FSA:15.0 MMT + MoU: 2.69 MMT) which
is sufficient only for around 51% PLF.
During FY 2012-13, the domestic coal supply was only 20.5 MMT,
which was sufficient for only 59% PLF. NTPC has imported 2.1 MMT
of coal and achieved PLF of 63% at Farakka and 72% at Kahalgaon.
The present coal stock at both the stations is for less than 1 day’s
consumption. In case NTPC blends more imported coal, beneficiaries
are not willing to buy power because of higher cost.
In addition to coal supply issues, these power stations were
conceived as pit head stations having their own captive Merry-Go-
Round (MGR) system. Coal was expected to be primarily transported
to these stations through MGR system from linked mines, however
due to less supply of coal from linked mines at present, substantial
amount of coal is required to be transported through Indian Railway
network which has a congestion problem especially at Andal-Sainthia
sector. Railways have not been able to construct new lines in this
section. Therefore, bringing large quantity of coal from outside the
MGR system through Railway system has become very difficult for
these two stations.
In order to partly mitigate logistic constraints, NTPC has signed
tripartite agreement for 7 years with Inland Waterways Authority of
India (IWAI) and Jindal ITF for transportation of 3.0 MTPA of imported
coal from Haldia to Farakka through Ganges which is expected to
commence in first quarter of 2013-14.
Issues related to Quality of Coal
The Ministry of Coal has introduced GCV based system of grading
of coal w.e.f. 1st January, 2012. Coal India adopted the GCV based
pricing without following the normal International practices requiring:—
(a) Crushing the coal below 50 mm size
(b) Washing of coal to remove ash and other impurities
(c) Introduction and ensuring operation of auto-mechanical
samplers (AMS)
(d) Making Bomb Calorimeters available at loading points for
analysis of coal

30
Since the infrastructure at (c) and (d) is also not available in some
of the mines of CIL, especially with ECL, payment is made on the
basis of GCV measured at the laboratory of NTPC which has all the
necessary instruments.
There is a huge difference between the GCV of coal as claimed by
ECL and the GCV of coal as received from ECL. For resolving this
issue, a Committee consisting of CEA, CIMFR, representative of NTPC
and representative of Coal India Ltd. has been constituted and their
independent assessment is under process. As per the third amendment
in Tariff Regulation, 2009-14 brought by CERC on 31.12.2012, GCV
details of coal received at the generating stations need to be provided
to the beneficiaries and displayed on the website. Quote from third
amendment in Tariff Regulation, 2009-14 issued by CERC:
“Provided that generating company shall provide to the
beneficiaries of the generating station the details of parameters of
GCV and price of fuel  i.e. domestic coal, imported coal, e-auction
coal, lignite, natural gas, RLNG, liquid fuel etc., as per the form
15 of the Part-I of Appendix I to these regulations:
Provided further that the details of blending ratio of the imported
coal with domestic coal, proportion of e-auction coal and the
weighted average GCV of the fuels as received shall also be
provided separately, along with the bills of the respective month:
Provided further that copies of the bills and details of parameters
of GCV and price of fuel i.e. domestic coal, imported coal,
e-auction coal, lignite, natural gas, RLNG, liquid fuel etc., details
of blending ratio of the imported coal with domestic coal,
proportion of e-auction coal shall also be displayed on the website
of the generating company. The details should be available on its
website on monthly basis for a period of three months”.
The payment for coal supply to all CIL subsidiaries, including
ECL is now being done as per the GCV of coal as received and posted
on the website and not on the GCV claimed by coal producer. This
has also resulted in significant lowering of tariff for power supply by
NTPC to Bihar as well as other beneficiaries.
In the meantime, ECL decided to regulate supply of coal
unilaterally. NTPC had no option but to shut down some of its units
due to non-availability of coal. During the period of suspension of
coal supplies by ECL, from 1st April to 5th April 2013, Farakka and
Kahalgaon stations have suffered generation loss of 214 Million units.

31
When this was brought to the notice of Coal India and the Ministry
of Coal, corrective action has been taken and loading of coal has
partially re-started. NTPC/Ministry of Power, therefore, has no role to
play in this whole episode which ultimately resulted in cutting down
the supply of power to both Bihar and West Bengal, the main
beneficiaries of Farakka and Kahalgaon stations and the only party
responsible is ECL.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.16)
Private Sector Participation in Power Sector
The Committee note that the capacity addition achieved by the
Private Sector in the 11th Plan stood at 23,011 MW which is 153% of
their target of 15,043 MW and 42% of the total generation capacity
addition achieved during the period i.e. 54,964 MW. It is evident that
the Private Sector came to rescue the Power Sector when the Central
and State Sector badly failed to achieve their generation capacity
addition targets during the 11th Plan. Even in the proposed capacity
addition target for 12th Plan, they have got the lion’s share. Out of
the total 88,537 MW proposed during the period, 46,825 MW will
come from Private Sector. The energy deficit situation and ever growing
demands for power in the country make it imperative to facilitate the
Private Sector for ensuring their continuous participation in the Sector.
Though, in the 11th Plan the Private Sector exceeded their target despite
the presence of several obstacles, their share in 12th Plan targets
warrants that the issues, already surfaced as well anticipated, which
possibly can hinder the growth of this Sector should be dealt with
urgency and diligence. The issues that the Private Sector is presently
facing includes, the inadequate availability of coal and gas, difficulty
in obtaining environmental clearances, constraints in the domestic
power equipment manufacturing facility, etc. besides need for huge
capital investment. The Committee believe that the issues are not of
insurmountable nature and could be redressed through proper, effective
and timely interventions of the Government. As the role of private
players in power sector of the country has become indispensable, it
becomes necessary that the Government facilitates them in overcoming
the hurdles and issues that are impeding the progress of the Sector.

32
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
extend all possible assistance to the private sector in overcoming their
problems with regard to their target achievement mission.
Reply of the Government
Government has taken/is taking a number of steps to encourage
power project developers including private developers. Some of these
steps are:
• All the power projects under execution are being regularly
monitored to assess their progress, to identify the bottlenecks
in capacity addition, if any, and resolve the issues.
• In view of the increasing requirement of capacity addition
to meet the demand, the capacity building of main plant
equipment has been carried out in the country with the
formation of several Joint Ventures for manufacture of main
plant equipments in the country. M/s. BHEL has already
augmented its manufacturing capacity. Apart from BHEL,
several Joint Ventures for manufacture of supercritical boilers
and turbine generators have been set up/are being set up
in the country.
• Ministry of Coal has been requested to impress upon the
coal companies to increase the coal production so as to
meet the demand of power plants. In addition, Utilities have
been advised to import coal to meet the shortfall.
• Initiatives being taken to augment the gas supply for gas
based power plants.
• Up to 100% FDI allowed in respect of projects relating to
electricity generation, transmission and distribution, other
than atomic reactor power plants.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that the private sector’s participation in the
hydro power sector is not as encouraging as in thermal power sector.
Private Sector, whose physical achievement in thermal power had been
exceptionally well, could achieve only 1,292 MW of hydro power
generation capacity addition against the moderate target of 3,491 MW
for the 11th Five Year Plan. Considering the targets for capacity addition

33
in hydro sector planned for 12th Plan, the Committee believe that the
focus will be on thermal power generation leaving the hydro sector
marginalized in coming years also. Though the development of thermal
generation projects take comparatively shorter time in commissioning
and involves lesser complications, yet the Committee believe that the
issues of constraints in fuel supply, pollution and the high cost of
electricity production etc. neutralize the advantages in long run and
thus underlying the importance of the hydro sector. Due to initial
problems and complication in grant of various clearances, forest
clearances, problems in land acquisition, reallocation and resettlement,
difficult geographical conditions etc. in establishing a hydro power
project, flow of private investment in this Sector is constrained. The
Committee are of the view that these problems faced initially in,
development of the hydro projects better be handled by the
Government and therefore, need their timely intervention, physical as
well as financial. Once the projects are commissioned, the hydro power
projects are the source of clean and cheap energy which does not
require any fuel for their sustenance. When UMPP concept for thermal
power under which various clearances and fuel linkages etc. are sorted
out by the Ministry of Power why such a policy cannot be evolved
for hydrosector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should take serious and sincere initiative to streamline
the process of establishing hydro projects by better coordination among
the various Central and State Government agencies for attracting private
investment in a big way paving the way for rapid development of the
Sector.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India has accorded high priority to the
development of the hydro potential in the country. Since the combined
effort of Central and State Sector developers was not enough, the new
Hydro Policy, 2008 was notified on 31.3.2008 to attract the private
developers as well by providing level playing field to them for
development of hydro-electric projects in the country. The following
provisions have been made in Hydro Power Policy, 2008 to encourage
private sector to setup hydro power projects in India:—
•P rovides level playing field to private developers—tariff to
be determined by the regulator under section 62 of Electricity
Act, 2003—as is being done for PSUs upto Dec., 2015.
• Enables all developers to recover their additional costs
through merchant sale of upto a maximum of 40% of the
saleable energy. 5% reduction for a delay of every six
months—Balance long term PPAs.

34
The status of development of hydro potential in the country as on
31.05.2013 is as follows:
Sl.No. Status Nos. Capacity (MW)
1. Schemes under Operation 184 39623
2. Schemes under Construction 47 13320
3. DPRs Concurred by CEA (yet to 36 20837
be taken up for construction)
4. Schemes for which DPRs have 23 11836
been prepared and are under
Examination
5. DPRs returned by CEA 29 10605
6. Schemes under Survey & 87 18564
Investigation
406 114785
From the above figures, it can be seen that about 79% of the
hydro potential of the country i.e. 145320 MW (above 25 MW) has
either been developed or is under various stages of development. It
would also be seen that a large number of projects are under survey
and investigation stage, which are mostly with the private developers.
Most of these projects have been allotted in the last few years. It is
known that development of H.E. Projects is an intricate and long drawn
process, spanning over 3-5 years. Long time is required for Survey &
Investigation, preparation of DPR, obtaining of statutory and non-
statutory clearances including environment/forest clearances and
approval of R&R Plan, concurrence by CEA, investment decision and
financial closure. Once the projects achieve financial closure,
implementation takes another 5-8 years. Thus, hydro projects usually
have long gestation period. Therefore, the projects under development
including private sector projects are likely to come up during the
13th Plan and beyond.
The issue of introducing UMPP Model in Hydro Sector on the
similar lines of thermal sector was deliberated upon in the First Meeting
of the Task Force held on 12.12.2007 on Hydro Power Development
held under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power. It was
agreed upon that the respective State Governments be asked to identify
the potential sites for setting up of Mega Hydel Projects and propose
implementation through an SPV on the lines of Thermal Ultra Mega

35
Power Projects (UMPPs). Accordingly, the Ministry requested hydro-
rich States on 31.01.2008 to identify the potential hydro sites of installed
capacity of 500 MW and above and consider its implementation on
the lines of UMPP . However, it may be stated that no State Government
has shown interest in this regard.
To accelerate the pace of development of hydro power in the
country, the Ministry of Power has taken further steps during the last
six months. A Sub-Group on Hydro, consisting of the private developers
and think tanks from the Government as well as the Industry has
been constituted under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Power. As
per the recommendations of the Sub-Group, certain policy-interventions
are being given priority by the Ministry. In addition, the issue of
clearances by the Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) has been
accorded top priority by resolving them at the level of the Minister of
Power and the Minister of MoEF. Many issues have been resolved
recently at the Minister’s/Ministry level. Regular monitoring and follow
up actions are being carried out to expedite early MoEF clearances. In
order to tap up major hydel potential in the North-East, especially
Arunachal Pradesh a special Committee of Secretary (CoS) under
Cabinet Secretary has been constituted to resolve various issues. During
the recent meetings on 26.02.2013 and 11.04.2013, the said CoS reviewed
the development of infrastructure including road and communication
etc. in the N.E. States. Meeting has also been held in the PMO on
power sector in N.E. States with a stress on development of hydro
power in the country. The issue of infrastructure especially roads in
Arunachal Pradesh has been recently flagged to Ministry of DONER
for taking it before an EGoM specifically constituted for development
of the North-East.
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]

36
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.7)
R-APDRP
The Committee note that the objective of R-APDRP is to bring
down AT&C losses in the country to the level of 15%. The programme
with a provision of R  51,577 crore, has four Part namely, A, B, C and
D. Part-A is the projects for establishment of baseline data and IT
applications for energy accounting/auditing & IT based consumer
service centres, whereas, Part-B is regular distribution strengthening
projects. Part-C of the programme is an enabling component for the
implementation of APDRP , while under Part-D of the programme there
is provision for incentive for utility staff in towns where AT&C loss
levels are brought below 15%. The Committee further note that at the
time of inception of Restructured-APDRP  i.e. year 2008-09 the AT&CT
losses in the country was at 27.37% which have slightly come down
to 26.15% in the year 2010-11. The Committee are aware that the
originally APDRP was started in the year 2002-03. It is evident from
the facts given above that despite several years and spending crores
of rupees, the tangible results yielded by the programme leaves much
to be desired. IT enabled data base line is yet to take any definite
shape and strengthening of distribution utilities are interlinked to it.
In the year 2012-13, the outlay at BE stage was 
R  3,114 crore which
was reduced to R  1,500 crore at RE stage. The outlay for the year
2013-14 has been pegged at R  575 crore which itself is a testimony of
the failure of the programme. The Ministry has assigned the slow
progress of R-APDRP to the complexity of this programme. In regard
to slow implementation of Part-A of the scheme, the Ministry inter alia
has stated that none of the States could complete the projects within
the stipulated time of 3 years from the date of sanction and even the
best utilities have taken almost 4 years. The Committee feel if best of
the utilities are finding it difficult to implement the programme within
stipulated timeframe, it would be even tougher for the not so efficient
utilities. The Committee feel that some mechanism will have to be
evolved wherein all the stakeholders should be told to draw their
own strategies for containing AT&C losses in definitive way and specific

37
time-frame. The scheme should also be implemented in a graded
manner instead of extending it to more cities to make it successful.
The Committee, considering the technicality of the programme,
recommend that the Government should work on developing 4-5 cities
from each of the regions of the Country as a role model for this
programme so that the rest of the cities/utilities can be guided
accordingly, ascertaining the method to be adopted by them which are
tested and proven.
Reply of the Government
The objective of R-APDRP Part-A(IT) is establishment of IT-enabled
system for attaining baseline data of revenue and energy without
human intervention. R-APDRP Part-A(IT) schemes have been sanctioned
for 1401 towns in the country progressively from February 2009. As
on 30th April 2013, 262 of these have already been declared 'Go Live'
by State utilities implying that accurate, reliable & verifiable baseline
data system has already been established under R-APDRP Part-A(IT)
in these towns. Third Party Independent Evaluation Agencies (TPIEA)
are in process of evaluating baseline AT&C losses in sanctioned towns
(Baseline AT&C losses established so far in 1022 towns). The reduction
in AT&C losses shall be measured for five years through IT system
established under Part-A(IT) of the scheme with first year starting one
year after establishment of said IT system.
Out of the 20 data centers envisaged to be commissioned under
the programme, 15 have already been commissioned by State utilities.
Under Part-B of R-APDRP , work has started in 895 towns out of
which 10 towns have already been completed.
As such, R-APDRP scheme is being implemented effectively and
appreciable results should be visible in near future.
• Issue: In the year 2012-13, the outlay at BE stage was
Rs. 3,114 crore which was reduced to Rs. 1500 crore at RE
stage. The outlay for the year 2013-14 has been pegged at
Rs. 575 crore which itself is a testimony of the failure of
the programme.
The Committee feel if best of the utilities are finding it
difficult to implement the programme within stipulated
time-frame, it would be even tougher for the not so
efficient utilities.
Comments: Funding under R-APDRP to State power
utilities is made for implementation of Part-A (IT), Part-A
(SCADA) & Part-B projects.

38
Funding under Part-A (IT) & SCADA
As per R-APDRP Guidelines, initially 30% of scheme cost
sanctioned under Part-A (IT) & Part-A (SCADA) is provided
as advance & balance after utilization of same. These projects
are implemented on turnkey basis and the release of funds
is linked to progress of implementation and milestones
achieved. Initial advance has been provided to utilities &
balance payments are to be made as described above. Loan
of Rs. 5243 crore has been sanctioned for establishment of
Part-A (IT) system in 1401 towns and Rs. 2043 crore has
been disbursed. The disbursed amount is about Rs. 470 crore
in excess of 30% of loan of Rs. 5243 croreim plying that
apart from initial 30% advance, first & second tranche
payments [of 30% each] have also been released to some
fast moving utilities of 9 States. Since payments to IT
implementing agencies are back loaded [40% on completion]
and that even best of utilities are finding it difficult to
complete Part-A (IT) projects in even four years. The balance
payments in majority of cases under the head are likely to
be released in FY 15 i.e. about five years from sanction. As
such, fund requirement for FY13 & FY14 for Part-A (IT) is
less.
Similarly , under Part-A (SCADA), loan of Rs. 1470 crore has
been sanctioned for establishment of SCADA systems in 65
towns under R-APDRP & disbursed Rs. 412 crore. This
amounts to about 30% of sanctioned amount. These projects
are in initial stage & hence no disbursement is envisaged in
FY 14.
Funding under Part-B
The GoI funding for Part-B projects is 25% [90% for special
category States] with initial advance as 15% [30% for special
category States]. Initial advance has been provided to most
of utilities & balance GoI funds can be released only on
project completion. Hence, further fund utilization under
Part-B is related to project completion. Part-B Schemes worth
Rs. 27119 crore have been sanctioned in 1134 towns & an
amount of Rs. 4265 crore have been disbursed. This amounts
to slightly over 15% of cost of schemes sanctioned i.e. initial
advance of 15% has been provided to all utilities & balance
10% is to be provided on project completion.

39
Hence, reason of lower budget requirement for FY 13 & FY
14 is not due to non-performance of the programme, but
back loaded payments under Part-A (IT) & SCADA and
such projects require at least five years for completion. As
such, a period of five years for R-APDRP project completion
has been proposed.
• Issue: The Committee feel that some mechanism will have
to be evolved wherein all the stakeholders should be told
to draw their own strategies for containing AT&C losses
in definitive way and specific time-frame.
Comments: Part-B of R-APDRP scheme provides impetus
for AT&C loss reduction to below 15% in R-APDRP towns
on sustainable basis. Under the scheme, 25% of scheme cost
[90% for special category] is provided as loan under
Part-B projects and upto 50% of scheme cost [90% for special
category States] is convertible into grant depending on extent
of maintaining AT&C loss level at 15% for five years.
Part- B DPRs under the scheme are formulated by State
power utilities based on their own strategies & requirements.
R-APDRP Scheme also has provision for incentivizing utility
staff in town where AT&C losses have reduced. The scheme
also requires annual reduction of utility level AT&C losses
by 3%, if existing AT&C losses greater than 30% and by
1.5% per annum, if existing AT&C losses are less than 30%.
Hence, R-APDRP scheme formulated by MoP enables State
power utilities to draw their own strategies for AT&C loss
reduction under Part-B and facilitates loan conversion to
grant & incentivization of utility staff on AT&C loss
reduction. Hence, the mechanism already exists in the
scheme for formulation of strategies by utilities for AT&C
loss reduction.
•I ssue: The scheme should also be implemented in a graded
manner instead of extending it to more cities to make it
successful. The Committee, considering the technicality of
the programme, recommend that the Government should
work on developing 4-5 cities from each of the regions of
the country as a role model for this programme so that
the rest of the cities/utilities can be guided accordingly,
ascertaining the method to be adopted by them which are
tested and proven.

40
Comments: The Part-A(IT) scheme has been sanctioned
progressively for 1401 towns since Feb., 2009 across 29 States
of the country and is being implemented in all of them.
Of these 1401 towns, work has already been completed in
over 264 towns & baseline data of revenue & energy is
being collected through IT system established under the
scheme. It reiterated that initially system is established in a
pilot town in every State and then replicated to other towns.
Considering above, it is not necessary for graded
implementation of the scheme at this stage.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.8)
The Committee further note that Power Finance Corporation (PFC)
has been mandated to maintain data for AT&C losses. A perusal of
the data of the last 3 years shows that it lacks authenticity and it
needs to be vetted by the Ministry. For instance for the State of
Jharkhand for years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 AT&C losses have
been shown as 54.16%, 10.21% and 46.79% respectively. Similar very
high variations are visible in the data shown for several States like
Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. AT&C losses are increasing in about dozen
States prominently in Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura, J&K, Uttar Pradesh etc. The Committee are unable
to comprehend as to whether the data can vary on year to year basis
to such extent that one year is very less and next year it jumps as it
is shown in case of Jharkhand. The Committee would like the Ministry
to monitor such vital aspect and a statement of State-wise AT&C losses
should be given in the Annual Report of the Ministry on annual basis.
This assumes higher significance when AT&C losses becomes the basis
for approval of projects under national pogrammes like R-APDRP , NEF
and a new scheme for financial assistance to DISCOMs.
Reply of the Government
PFC publishes the ‘Report on Performance of State Power Utilities’.
The Report covers State Power Utilities (SEBs/unbundled utilities/
Power Departments) in all the States as well as Union Territory of
Puducherry and private distribution companies created as a result of
reform measures (DISCOMs in Delhi & Odisha). The Report is compiled
on the basis of data given in the annual accounts (audited/provisional)

41
of SEBs/unbundled utilities (including DISCOMS of Delhi & Odisha)
and Annual Resource Plans submitted to the Planning Commission by
State Power Departments and utilities not preparing annual accounts.
The AT&C losses for the utilities selling directly to consumers form
a part of the Report. The methodology adopted by PFC for calculation
of AT&C losses had been finalized in consultation with CEA, and is
enclosed as Annexure-I. The information required for calculation of
AT&C losses is sourced from the Annual Accounts/Resource Plans
(RPs). The information not available in Annual Accounts/RPs for
calculation of AT&C losses is obtained from the utilities. The Report
covering the Performance of State Power Utilities for the financial years
2008-09 to 2010-11 was published in September 2012.
The AT&C losses can vary on year-to-year basis due to the reasons
e.g. change in percentage of units billed vis-à-vis units input in the
system, change in collection efficiency etc.
The AT&C losses for the State of Jharkhand were calculated as per
the methodology indicated above. AT&C losses for Jharkhand reduced
from 54.16% in the year 2008-09 to 10.21% in the year 2009-10 due to
the reason that Collection Efficiency increased from 76.88% in the year
2008-09 to 137.27% in the year 2009-10. The Collection Efficiency during
the year 2009-10 is calculated as 137.27% due to the reason that the
debtors for sale of power reduced significantly by Rs. 565 crore from
Rs. 3902 crore as on 31st March 2009 to Rs. 3337 crore as on
31st March, 2010.
• Issue: This assumes higher significance when AT&C losses
becomes the basis for approval of projects under national
programmes like R-APDRP , NEF and a new scheme for financial
assistance to DISCOMs.
Comments: Under R-APDRP , Utility Level Annual AT&C Losses
shall be evaluated by Third Party Independent Evaluating Agencies-
Energy Accounting [appointed by MoP/PFC] for a period of five years
with first year starting in the year after completion of Part-A (IT)
project. Projects are yet to be completed in any State.
It is to inform that funding under Part-A of R-APDRP is for all
eligible towns based on population criteria (not on AT&C loss criteria).
Towns with population >30,000 as per 2001 Census are eligible for
funding under Part-A (IT) and those with >4,00,000 population as per
2001 Census & energy input greater than 350MU are eligible for
funding under Part-A (SCADA).

42
Annexure-1
Proposed Methodology for calculation of AT&C losses (%) for
utilities selling directly to consumers
A Input Energy (Mkwh)* Energy Generated — Auxiliary
Consumption+Energy Purchased
(Gross) — Energy Traded/Inter State
sales
BT ransmission Losses (Mkwh)
C Net Input Energy (Mkwh) (A-B)
D Energy sold (Mkwh) (i) Energy sold to all categories of
consumers including trading in
Energy/Inter State Sales
(ii) Energy traded/Inter State Sale
E Adjusted Energy sold Energy sold to all categories of
(Mkwh) consumers excluding Energy traded/
Inter State sales D (i–ii)
F Revenue from Sale of (i) Revenue from sale of Energy to
Energy (Rs. cr.) all categories of consumers
(excluding subsidy) including
trading/Inter State sales.
(ii) Revenue from Trading of
Energy/Inter State sale
G Adjusted Revenue from Revenue from sale of Energy
Sale of Energy (Rs./cr.) excluding revenue from trading of
energy/Inter State Sale F (i-ii)
H Opening Debtors For Sale (i) Opening debtors for sale of
of Energy (Rs./cr.) Energy (without deducting
provision for doubtful debtors).
I Closing Debtors For Sale (i) Closing debtors for sale of
of Energy (Rs./cr.) Energy (without deducting
provision for doubtful debts).
(ii) Any amount written off directly
from (i)
J Adjusted Closing Debtors I (i+ii)
for Sale of Energy (Rs./cr.)
K Collection Efficiency (%) (H+G-J)/G*100

43
L Units Realized (Mkwh) E*K/100
M Units Unrealized (Mkwh) C-L
NA T&C Losses (%) M/C*100
Note: (i) *DISCOMs are required to give input energy at the point of purchase including
transmission losses.
(ii) Provision for unbilled energy and debtors for trading of power have not been
adjusted for calculation of collection efficiency since provision for unbilled
revenue is cyclical in nature and figures of debtors are verifiable from annual
accounts.
Figures in above table wherever available should tally with the
annual accounts.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]

44
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.5)
RGGVY
The Committee note that RGGVY is a Scheme aiming at rural
electrification infrastructure through Creation of Rural Electricity
Distribution Backbone (REDB) with one 33/11 kV (or 66/11kV)
substation in every block where it does not exist, creation of Village
Electricity Infrastructure (VEI) for electrification of all un-electrified
villages/habitations and provision of distribution transformer(s) of
appropriate capacity in every village/habitation, Decentralised
Distributed Generation (DDG) and Supply System from conventional
sources for Villages/Habitations where grid supply is not cost effective
and where the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources would
not be providing electricity through their programme(s). Under this
scheme 90 per cent capital subsidy is being provided towards the
overall cost of the project and Balance 10% will be loan assistance on
soft terms by REC. During 10th and 11th Plan, 648 projects in
579 districts covering 1,12,795 un-electrified census villages; 3,96,336
partially electrified census villages and 274.98 Lakh BPL households
with total project cost of 
R  42,413.46 crore (Revised Cost) have been
sanctioned. In regard to achievements made under the scheme so far,
it was stated that as on 31st January, 2013 electrification in 1,06,474
un-electrified villages, intensive electrification in 2,87,827 partially-
electrified villages has been completed and free electricity connection
to R  205.15 Lakhs BPL households released. It was stated by the
Ministry that the remaining ongoing work are expected to be completed
by the end of 2014-15. The 12th Plan outlay under the Scheme has
been earmarked as R  23,397 crore whereas, for the year 2013-14, the
allocation is R  4500 crore. The Committee find that the Ministry is
committed to complete the unfinished work by 2014-15 whereas,
allocation has been made for the entire 12th Plan period which will
last till March, 2017. This reflects the ‘not very sure’ belief with regard
to the completion of remaining task under the scheme which was
initially targeted to be completed during the 11th Plan itself. For the

45
year 2012-13 only 2292 villages could be electrified against the target
of 6,000 un-electrified villages while only 12.29 lakh BPL families could
be provided electricity connection against the target of 35 lakh BPL
connections. Consequently the financial performance during the year
(2012-13) has been disappointing as only 
R  525 crore (as on 31.01.2013)
could be spent against the outlay of R  4,900 crore. In regard to reasons
poor utilization of funds, it was stated that an amount of Rs. 2,500.00
crore (approx.) subsidy is lying as unspent with the Implementing
agencies as of 31.12.2012, delay in award of Phase-II projects involving
an amount of Rs. 1800 crore as Ist instalment planned for release in
2012-13, non-submission of closure proposals by Implementing agencies
for X Plan projects, non-release of final 10% due to non-fulfilment of
conditionalities including franchisee deployment conditionality, slow
progress of works particularly in the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, MP and J&K, downward revision in project cost
(approx. amount Rs. 500.00 crore) for 11th Plan projects due to inclusion
of State taxes while awarding but not payable under RGGVY . Besides,
the Committee were apprised that the bulk of remaining villages were
difficult and inaccessible areas. On the question of minimum hours of
power supply under this Scheme, it has been stated that States have
committed for a daily supply of 6-8 hours of electricity in the RGGVY
network. As regards projection of the requirements of electricity at the
time of the full achievement of the targets, the Committee have been
apprised that it would be of the order of 4,919 MW. The Committee,
in the past also, have pointed out the drawbacks in the implementation
of the Scheme which include sub-contracting, low capacity transformers,
non-maintenance of transformers, poor quality of work, definition of
electrified villages under the scheme etc. The Committee are of the
view that even after 8 years after the introduction of the Scheme, (The
scheme was originally scheduled to be completed within 5 years) these
identified lacunae still plague the scheme and its effective
implementation. Despite diverse factors being the component of the
Scheme the lacunae in the scheme needs to be addressed at the earliest
in coordination with the State Governments to make the scheme a
successful one. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
the Government should become sensitive to the aspirations of the
people, by improving its implementation by taking effective measures
with a view to bring sub-contracting under the scheme to the minimum,
involving the elected representatives in the implementation of the
scheme, making provision of adequate capacity transformers ensuring
the installed infrastructures and strengthening monitoring mechanism
by keeping provisions of enhancing the random checking mechanism
to ensure the success of the Scheme.

46
Reply of the Government
Under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), so
far, 648 projects (235 projects under X Plan, 341 projects under XI Plan
and 72 projects under Phase-II of RGGVY) in 579 districts have been
sanctioned, covering 1,12,795 un-electrified villages, 3,96,336 partially
electrified villages and release of free electricity connections to
2,74,98,652 BPL households with total revised project cost of
Rs. 42,547.41 crore. As on 30th April, 2013, the electrification works in
1,07,226 un-electrified villages, intensive electrification in 2,91,695
partially electrified villages has been completed and free electricity
connection to 2,08,17,176 BPL households have been released under
the scheme. The electrification works for the project sanctioned during
X and XI Plan are expected to be completed by the end of financial
year 2013-14. The stipulated period of projects sanctioned under
Phase-II of RGGVY during 2011-12, is 24 months from the date of
award of the contract by the implementing agencies.
During 2012-13, the electrification works in 2,587 villages have been
completed against the target of 6,000 un-electrified villages and free
electricity connections to 12,96,541 lakh BPL families have been released
against the target of 35 lakh BPL connections. The reasons for lesser
achievements in electrification of un-electrified villages and release of
free electricity connections to BPL households during 2012-13, are as
under:
Un-electrified villages
(i) Out of 1,10,886 UE villages covered under RGGVY during
X Plan and under Phase-I of XI Plan, cumulatively 1,07,083
(97%) have been achieved leaving a balance of 3803 villages.
And during FY 2012-13, against the target of 6000 villages,
2587 (43%) villages have been achieved.
(ii) In the balance 3803 villages, 86% are falling in Bihar,
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Assam,
Meghalaya, Manipur, and Orissa. Further, 2606 (69%) villages
are facing following constraints in electrification as below:
(a) Forest clearance: 299 villages (Assam-31, Odisha-137,
Rajasthan-104, Chhattisgarh-5, Bihar-19, Other States-3)
(b) River crossing: 16 villages in Assam
(c) Right of way issues: 137 villages in Meghalaya
(d) River erosion:  25 villages in Assam

47
(e) Absence of backward linkage: 61 villages in Manipur
(f) Remote/inaccessible: 479 villages (Assam-67, Odisha-117,
Jharkand-212, Other States-83)
(g) Inefficiency of T urnkey Contractor: 418 villages
(Rajasthan-68, Bihar-350)
(h) Naxal problems: 459 villages (Odisha-74, Jharkhand-35,
Chhattisgarh-350)
(i) Termination of contract: 116 villages (Assam-78,
Rajasthan-30)
(j) Litigation: 183 villages in Manipur
(k) Difficult terrain: 207 in Arunachal Pradesh
(l) Miscellaneous: 189 villages due to CBI investigation in
Jharkhand
(iii) Out of the 2606 villages involving various constraints, 1062
villages are non-doable. Further, in the 3803 villages barring
2606, progress of works in the remaining 1197 villages is
slow.
BPL connections
(i) Out of 229.39 Lakh BPL HHs sanctioned under RGGVY
during X Plan and under Phase-I of XI Plan, 207.21 Lakh
(90%) have been achieved leaving a balance of 22.1 Lakhs.
During the FY 2012-13, against the revised target of
34.99 Lakhs, 12.96 (37%) BPL HHs have been achieved.
(ii) In the 22.1 Lakhs balance BPL HHs, 96% are falling in
West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Arunanchal
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam and Orissa.
(iii) Many of the originally covered BPL Connections have been
left out due to dropping of habitations with population less
than 100.
(iv) Some of the BPL HHs got electrified by State Discoms
through their own programmes and some of BPL HH
families not willing to avail connections.
Reasons for lower expenditure are as under:
(i) Most of the projects under X Plan and sizeable number of
projects in XI Plan are completed and their last instalment

48
of 10% was to be released against the closure proposals.
Due to certain conditionalities, particularly, deployment of
franchisees in rural area for revenue sustainability closure
could not be completed by the respective Discoms. Therefore,
the final instalment for these projects could not be released.
Government of India is now actively considering to relax
the condition of deployment of franchisees, after which the
closure proposals and release of final instalment may get
speeded up.
(ii) A major part of the Budget Estimate for the year 2012-13
was to be spent towards release of first instalment of
72 projects sanctioned under Phase-II of RGGVY worth
Rs. 8110.03 crore. Majority of these projects have been
sanctioned in UP and Bihar where tendering process is in
different stages and except for three projects in UP , all other
projects in UP and Bihar could not be awarded till date.
Accordingly release of first instalment towards these projects
could be not possible.
Action/Comments on the recommendations of the Committee:
(i) It has been proposed that the sub-contracting may be
allowed at one level only and that too with the prior
approval of the Implementing Agencies, under XII Plan.
Overall responsibility of quality and timely execution of the
work shall still be the responsibility of the Implementing
Agency, through main Turnkey Contractors.
(ii) Monitoring works of RGGVY have also been entrusted to
District Vigilance Committee headed by concerned MP by
expanding the scope of District Vigilance Monitoring Committee
by Ministry of Rural Development. Besides Ministry of
Power has also proposed formation of District Electricity
Committee under RGGVY during XII Plan to be headed by
concerned MPs and also including Zila Panchayat Presidents,
MLAs and other elected representatives and few nominated
members from public.
(iii) Transformers with adequate capacity are to be provided in
Phase-II and XII Plan projects under RGGVY for all BPL
households and also considering the requirements of APL
households. For this purpose a realistic assessment of
250 Watts for BPL and 500 Watts for APL households have
been proposed.

49
(iv) Strict monitoring mechanism is already in place with Inter-
Ministerial Monitoring Committee of Ministry of Power and
Monitoring Committee headed by Chief Secretary of the
respective States besides District Vigilance Monitoring
Committee, District Level Electricity Committee Regular
review meeting by REC are also held as part of monitoring
process.
Under RGGVY, Three Tier quality monitoring Mechanism, provision
of random checking has already been made. Under Tier-I, TPIA is
required to carry out 50% verification, under Tier-II, REC appointed
Quality Monitors to carry out 10% verification and under Tier-III, MoP
appointed Quality Monitors are to carry out 1% 50 verification.
In addition, Ministry of Power and REC occasionally monitors few
villages randomly through various teams including officers from Project
Offices of Rural Electrification Corporation.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that the Central Government Departments
have Purchase Manual for Procurement. The representative from the
Ministry of Power informed the Committee that they have got the
Purchase Manual changed to include efficiency and star-rated products
to be used as part of the central purchases. They apprised the
Committee that there are a number of items where the Government of
India has now mandated that as a part of the Central Purchase they
would also take efficiency into account. They would not be looking at
the initial capital cost. They would take into account the life cycle cost
as to how much it will be during the life of that particular product.
The Committee was also informed that the Committee of Secretaries
has approved the proposal on ‘Energy Efficiency in Public Procurement’,
in principle and guidelines in this regard have been issued by the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee feel that this is a step in right
direction. The Committee desire that the Ministry should expedite the
implementation of their proposal on Energy Efficiency in Public
Procurement and also monitor it regularly to ensure its adherence.

50
Reply of the Government
BEE has initiated steps for promotion of energy efficiency in
procurement of certain electrical equipmentswhich are sold in a
competitive market. In this regard, on the request of MoP , the Ministry
of Finance had issued an Office Memorandum on 21st January 2013 to
promote the BEE star rated equipments while procuring Split Air
Conditioners, Frost Free Refrigerators, Ceiling Fans and Water Heaters.
A copy of the Office Memorandum is at Annexure. As per this Office
Memorandum, the public procurement agency, while procuring
appliances mentioned above, will ensure that the appliances carry the
threshold or higher BEE star-rating.
After the issuance of this office memorandum, Ministry of Power
came out with a Press Note on 6th February , 2013. BEE also
disseminated the information on office memorandum to the SDAs,
Government Procurement Agencies and the manufacturers. BEE is also
planning to organize a series of awareness/training workshops in this
regard. The preparation of a booklet covering data on star-rating
appliances, life cycle cost analysis tools, tendering guidelines, etc. is
in-process.
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.14)
Demand vis-à-vis Availability of Electricity
The Committee are pained to note that there is great disparity in
terms of per capita consumption of electricity in different States of the
country. Dadra & Nagar Haveli have the highest per capita electricity
i.e. 11,863.64 kWh, whereas, Bihar is having the lowest  i.e. 122.11 kWh.
There are many States viz. Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Assam etc.
where per capita consumption of electricity is way below the national
average of 778.71 kWh. The Committee are very much aware of the
fact that the electricity is under List III viz. a concurrent subject under
seventh Schedule of the Constitution which means both, the Centre
and the States, have to share the onus to ensure adequate electricity
availability for every citizen of the Country. Primarily, the States are
required to set up power plants corresponding to their needs for the
electricity and available resources with them. However, they try to set
up plants based on availability of funds. Whereas, the duty of the
Central Government is to ensure the holistic and inclusive growth of
the Power Sector by providing assistance, physical and financial, to

51
the States who are lagging behind in the race of development due to
one or the other reason. Though, the Government claims that they are
focussing on planning the generation and the transmission system in
the country on the concept of optimization of utilization of resources
on all-India basis rather on regional self-sufficiency , the Committee
find that the Central Government have failed in ensuring equitable
availability of electricity, which is base of social and economical
activities and lead to overall growth of the State. Often, the less per
capita consumption in certain States become a reason for setting less
generating units in that State, which is not only misleading but also
an injustice to the people such States. The less per capita consumption
does not necessarily indicate to the less demand but it could be due
to less availability of electricity. The Committee believe that this kind
of disparity in States in terms of per capita availability and consumption
of electricity is not in the interest of integrated and inclusive growth
of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Central Government should ensure more equitable availability of
electricity across the country by providing every assistance to the
lagging States for setting up more generating units and allocating more
electricity from the central pool and by transmitting it to deficit regions
from surplus regions.
Reply of the Government
Electricity being a concurrent subject, responsibility for its supply
and distribution lies with the concerned State Government/Power
Utilities in the State. Government of India supplements the efforts of
the State Governments by establishing power plants in the central
sector through Central Public Sector Undertakings.
Government is committed to inclusive growth of the power sector
in the country. The pace of generation capacity addition in the country
has increased considerably . Generation capacity addition achieved
during 11th Five Year Plan was 54,964 MW which is about 2.5 times
the capacity addition achieved during the 10th 52 Plan period.
Generation capacity addition achieved during the year 2012-13 was
20,622.8 MW which is the highest ever capacity addition in a single
year. Capacity addition of 88,537 MW has been planned from
conventional sources for the 12th Five Year Plan. With this level of
capacity addition demand for power on an all-India basis is likely to
be met by the terminal year of 12th Five Year Plan (2016-17).
Funds for setting up of power plants are generally arranged by
the project developer. In addition to setting up power plants, States

52
may meet their power requirement through purchase of power through
competitive bidding to meet their requirement, based on their
anticipated demand supply scenario.
Power from Central Generating Stations to beneficiary States/Union
Territories is allocated in accordance with laid down formula for
allocation of power which is being treated as guidelines from April,
2000. As per the guidelines, allocation of power is made to the States/
UTs in two parts, namely firm allocation of 85% and 15% for allocation
by the Government for meeting the urgent/overall requirement. The
firm allocation includes allocation of 12% free power to the affected
States and 1% for local area development in case of Hydro Power
Stations and 10% (not free) power to the home state in case of thermal
and Nuclear Power Stations. The balance 72% in the case of hydro
plants and balance 75% in the case of Thermal/Nuclear Power Plants.
Power is distributed amongst the States/UTs of the region in accordance
with the pattern of central plan assistance and energy consumption
during the previous five years, both factors having equal weightage.
Central plan assistance is determined in accordance with the Gadgil
formula, in which population of the States is also taken into
consideration.
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. 10/07/2013-Bud.,
dated 22nd July, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

53
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERMNET IS STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
  N EW D ELHI; MULAYAM SINGH YADAV ,
12 December, 2013 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy.

54
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON ENERGY (2013-14) HELD ON 11TH DECEMBER, 2013
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘62’ PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .C. Chacko
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
4. Shri Ravinder Kumar Pandey
5. Shri Padamsinha Bajirao Patil
6. Shri A. Raja
7. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
9. Shri Jagada Nand Singh
10. Smt. Pratibha Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
13. Dr. Anil Kumar Sahni
14. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. L. Nemjalhing Haokip — Under Secretary

55
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefly
apprised them of the agenda for the sitting. The Committee then took
up for consideration of the following draft Reports:
(i) 41st Report on ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana’.
(ii) 42nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 36th Report on
‘International Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy
Sector’.
(iii) 43rd Report on ‘Development of Hydro Sector’.
(iv) 44th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 37th Report on
‘Development of National Grid’.
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the
Committee adopted the aforementioned draft Report without any
change.
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above-mentioned Report and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament in the current Session.
5. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. **** **** ****
The Committee then adjourned.

56
APPENDIX II
(Vide Introduction of Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
35th REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY
(i) Total number of Recommendations 16
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15 and 16
Total: 11
Percentage 68.75%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8
Total: 02
Percentage 12.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
the replies of  the  Government  have  not  been
accepted by the Committee  and  which  require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 5, 13 and 14
Total: 03
Percentage 18.75%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which
final reply of the Government is still awaited:
                  -Nil-
Total: 00
Percentage 00%