MINISTRY OF POWER 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Role of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
in Protection of Interests of Consumers'] 
FOURTH REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka) 


FOURTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2009-2010) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Role of Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
in Protection of Interests of Consumers'] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.4.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.4.2010 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka) 


CO.E. No. 184 
Price : Rs. 125.00 
© 2010 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by [ainco Art India, 
New Delhi-110 005. 


CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSmON OF THE COMMIITEE (2009-10) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER I 
CHAPTER II 
Report . 1 
CHAPTER III 
Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 14 
Recommenda tions / Observa tions which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies 44 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration . 46 
CHAPTER IV 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in repect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited . 48 
ApPENDlCE..S 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
05.02.2010 117 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Covernmen] on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
31st Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Energy.. 119 
(i) 


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON ENERGY (2009-10) 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Mohammad Azharuddin 
3. Shri S.K. Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri P.c. Chacko 
5. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
6. Shri Ram Sundar Das 
7. Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar 
8. Shri Arjun Munda 
9. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
13. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
14. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
15. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao 
16. Dr. K.S. Rao 
17. Shri Canesh Singh 
18. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
19. Shri Vijay Inder Singla 
20. Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
21. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
Rnjyn Sabha 
22. Shri Motilal Vora 
23. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
24. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
25. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshyari 
(iii) 


26. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
27. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
28. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav 
29. Shri Mahendra Sahni* 
30. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik 
31. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt 
2. Shri Shiv Singh 
3. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar 
4. Shri Manish Kumar 
'Passed away on 6th November, 2009. 
(lv) 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
Deputy Secretary 
Executive Assistant 


INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Energy having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this 4th Report on the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in 30th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Energy (14th Lok Sabha) on 'Role of Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions- - 
in Protection of Interests of Consumers'. 
2. 111e 30th report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 13th February, 2009. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
18th August, 2009. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 5th February, 2010. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the 
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
5. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 30th Report of the Committee is 
given at Appendix-II. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report. 
18 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) 
MULA YAM SINGH YADAV,' 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
NEW DELHI; 
09 March, 2010 
(v) 


CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in their Thirtieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject 'Role of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions in Protection of Interests of 
Consumers' pertaining to the Ministry of Power. 
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 
13th February, 2009 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the 
same day. The Report contained 29 Recommendations/Observations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, IS, 17, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 
28 
Total - 15 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Serial. Nos. 1 and 13 
Total - 02 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which the reply 
of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 16 
Total-01 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. 2, 5, 10, It 12, 14, 19, 20, .21, 27 and 29 
Total - 11 
Chapter-V 


4. The Committee desire that Action Taken replies on the 
Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report and the final 
replies in respect of the Recommendations included in Chapter V of 
the Report for which only interim replies have been given by the 
Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee have observed that the Ministry in most of 
their replies have either simply stated that the matter is being 
examined/studied or furnished the recommendations of the FOR and 
instead of taking conclusive action have chosen to shift the 
responsibility on CERC/SERCs/States Governments for 
implementation. The Committee have taken serious note of the 
evasive replies furnished by the Ministry. The Ministry in their 
Action Taken Replies were expected to provide details of concrete 
steps taken by them for implementation of the recommendations of 
the Committee and not just stating the present factual status. The 
Committee feel that it is the responsibility of the Government to 
ensure the proper functioning of CERC and making it accountable. 
Similarly, CERC is supposed to guide, coordinate and mobilize 
SERCs/States Governments for proper implementation of projects/ 
programmes aimed at passing the benefits to the consumers/public. 
The Committee would like that in future the replies by the Ministry 
should be specific, complete and contain categorical reply with regard 
to implementation of the recommendations of the Committee. 
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations that 
require reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Public Awareness Regarding Role of Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions 
Recommendation (S1. No.2, Para 2.2) 
7. The Committee had recommended that suitable steps should be 
taken to create public awareness regarding the role of the Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions so that large number of peoples' groups/ 
organizations and public can take active part in the formulation of 
requisite consumer friendly policies. 
8. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated 
as under: 
"It is one of the functions of the Forum to evolve measures for 
protection of interest of consumers and promotion of efficiency, 
economy and competition in power sector. 
2 


The Forum of Regulators (FOR) in its report on 'Protection of 
Consumer Interests' has recommended a model consumer charter 
stipulating the rights and obligations of consumers. 
The Forum has also recommended that: 
(i) NGOs should be involved for consumer education and 
empowerment. 
(ii) Leaflets highlighting the consumers' rights under the 
standards of performance regulations should be distributed 
for dissemination of information amongst the consumers. 
(iii) 111is would be best achieved by printing the 'consumers' 
rights' on the back of the electricity bill. This would ensure 
wider access of message and improve awareness amongst 
the consumers. 
(iv) Knowledgeable retired personnel could be appointed by 
SERCs as consumer advocates for participating in (a) tariff 
hearing to represent interests of domestic, agricultural and 
small scale industry Small Scale Industries Low Tension (SSI­ 
LT) category consumers (b) hearing for load shedding 
protocols and (c) hearing for framing standards of 
performance." 
9. The Committee had made a specific recommendation that the 
Government should take suitable steps to create public awareness 
about the role of the Electricity Regulatory Commissions so as to 
have active participation of people in formulation of consumer 
friendly policies. The Committee are unhappy to note that instead 
of furnishing the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry have merely 
furnished the functions and summary of the recommendations of 
the Forum of Regulators (FOR) regarding consumer awareness and 
empowerment. The Ministry have not come out with a clear-cut reply 
as to whether the recommendation of FOR have actually been 
implemented. What the Committee had desired from the Ministry 
was to take suitable steps to create public awareness but no tangible 
action has been taken. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
follow up the recommendations of the FOR for conclusive action 
and intimate the Committee about the action taken. 
B. Empowerment of CERC/SERCs 
Recommendation (51. No.5, Para 2.5) 
10. As per Electricity Act, 2003, the Appropriate Commission may, 
with the approval of the Appropriate Government, specify the numbers, 
3 


nature and categories of other officers and employees. In this 
connection, the Committee had endorsed the views of the Indian 
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) that the Commission should 
have full autonomy in matters relating to staffing pattern, organization 
structure and adequate powers to recruit staff as required with an 
overall ceiling on expenditure. Concurring with these views, the 
Committee had recommended that more and more autonomy needed 
to be given to the CERC and SERCs in the recruitment process for 
which Government ought to take necessary steps. 
11. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
"The Recommendations of the IIPA were referred to the Forum of 
Regulators (FOR), who constituted a Working Group to examine 
the recommendations. The Recommendations of the Working Group 
had been accepted by the FOR and forwarded to the Ministry. The 
Central Government has sought the views of the Central Electricity 
Authority and the State Governments in the matter." 
12. The Committee had asked the Government to take necessary 
steps towards extending more autonomy to the CERC and SERCs in 
the recruitment process, organizational structure and service 
conditions of officers and employees. The Ministry of Power in their 
Action Taken Reply have merely informed that they have obtained 
the views of the Forum of Regulators (FOR) in this regard and have 
now sought the views of the Central Electricity Authority and the 
State Governments in the matter. The Committee had expected 
concrete action from the Ministry for implementation of their 
recommendation. The Committee feel that the Ministry should have 
taken prompt action on one of the most important aspects pertaining 
to efficient functioning of the CERC and SERCs. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to expedite consultation process with CEA and 
State Governments for expeditious conclusive action in the matter 
under intimation to the Committee. 
C. Need for Third Party Audit 
Recommendation (51. No.7, Para 2.7) 
13. The Committee in their 30th Report (14th Lok Sabha) had 
noted the provisions made in para 8.2.1 (2) of Tariff Policy, which states 
that third party verification/energy audit of technical and financial 
data for different areas/localities could be used to impose area/locality 
specific surcharge for greater AT&C loss levels and also the,SERCs to 
institute a system of independent scrutiny of financial and technical 
4 


data submitted by the licensees. The Committee, however, found that 
in many of the States energy audits are being done in-house by the 
licensees themselves. To ensure that the consumers are extended the 
benefit of energy audit results and at the same time are not 
unnecessarily put to disadvantage, the Committee had recommended 
that SERCs should ensure third party verification of energy audit results 
by engaging experts Zindependent consultants for scm tiny and analysis 
of the data submitted by the licensees for tariff determination. The 
Committee had also asked the Government to take the necessary steps 
so that guidelines of tariff policy in this regard are followed by all the 
SERCs. 
14. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
"All the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions were requested 
to furnish the details of third party verification of energy audit 
results for tariff determination in their respective States. The 
information furnished by the SERCs of the following States is as 
follows: 
SI. Name of 
No. the SERCs 
Comments 
1 2 3 
1. Assam Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
2. Bihar Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
3. Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
The Assam Electricity Regulatory 
Commission is yet to take up third 
party verification of the energy audit. 
TIle Commission however, feels that a 
third party !independent agencies 
should be engaged. 
Work on energy audit has not been 
initia ted by the Bihar Electrici ty 
Regulatory Commission and the results 
are yet to come. However, the financial 
and technical data submitted by the 
Bihar State Electricity Board is being 
scrutinized and analyzed by an 
independent consultant appointed by 
the Commission 
Third party verification of energy audit 
results has not been done so far. 
However, the Commission has been 
appointing consultants for scrutiny and 
analysis of data submitted by a 
licensee for tariff determination. 
5 


1 2 3 
4. Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
5. Gujarat Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
6. Jharkhand State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
7. Karnataka Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
8. Kerala Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
9. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
The energy audits have been done in 
house by the licensees themselves and 
Commission has not considered it 
necessary to verify the energy audit 
'results through independent third 
party. 
Tariff determination is being done with 
the help of consultant, the 
Administrative Staff College of India 
who are also looking after energy 
audit results for tariff determination by 
the Commission. 
Jharkhand State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has appointed 
independent and an expert agency 
(consultant) to carry out independent 
and in-depth scrutiny of the financial 
and technical data submitted by 
licensees. 
The Commission, as part of the third 
party verification of technical and 
financial data had engaged the service 
of PWC as consultants for scrutiny of 
Audit Result Report and tariff 
applications under multi-year tariff 
regime for the financial year 2008-2010. 
For verification of technical and 
financial data furnished by the 
Licensees, Commission has appointed 
a 'Compliance Examiner'. Verification 
and authenticity of data has also been 
included as his duty. 
For independent scrutiny of the 
financial and technical data provided 
by the Licensees/Generating Company, 
the Commission has appointed the 
following consultants: 
(i) M/s. A.F. Ferguson for verification 
of coal accounting procedure in 
thermal power station of MPPGCL 
6 


1 2 3 
10. Maharashtra Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
11. Rajasthan Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
12. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
(ii) My s Pandey Dua and Mathur 
Associates, Chartered Accountants 
for investigation of employees' 
expenses incurred by licensees and 
generating company. 
(iii) Mis. PricewaterhouseCoopers for 
conducting a detailed scrutiny of 
technical and financial data. 
The Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has undertaken third 
party verification of energy audit by 
assigning the work to Mz's. Feedback 
Ventures Ltd, Consultants in the power 
sector. 
All the DISCOMs are State owned. 
There is a statutory audit through the 
Chartered Accountant as well as by 
CAG, however, the Commission would 
like to have separate scrutiny of data 
at its own in future. 
Third party verification of energy audit 
results has not been done so far. 
The Forum of Regulators constituted a Working Grbup on "Loss 
Reduction Strategies" for detailed examination of issues around 
reduction of distribution losses. The report finalized by the FOR 
based on the inputs of the working group emphasizes that third 
party verification of the technical and financial data submitted by 
the utility is crucial, before such data is taken into account for 
determination of tariff. Further, FOR in its report on Multi Year 
Tariff and Distribution Margin has recommended that data on 
distribution loss levels should be verified through a third party as 
envisaged in the Tariff Policy. FOR has indicated that the services 
of accredited energy auditors and academic institutions such as 
Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) and other engineering colleges 
could be utilized for this." 
15. While observing that many of the State's energy audits were 
being done-in-house by the licensees themselves, the Committee had 
desired that all SERCs should ensure third party verification of 
7 


energy audit for scrutiny and analysis of financial and technical 
data submitted by the licencees in terms of Tariff Policy of the 
Government. The Committee had accordingly desired the Government 
to take the necessary steps so that guidelines of tariff policy in this 
regard are followed by all the SERCs. The Government in their 
reply have forwarded the information supplied by 12 SERCs in this 
regard. The Government have further stated that the Forum of 
Regulators (FoR) in its Report has also emphasized the need of third 
party verification of the technical and financial data submitted by 
the utility before such data is taken into account for determination 
of tariff and the services of accredited energy auditors and academic 
institutions such as Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) and other 
Engineering Colleges could be utilized for this purpose. Scrutiny of 
the information supplied by the SERCs reveals that most of the 
States are yet to put in place third party verification system as per 
the terms of the Tariff Policy. Moreover, the Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission has not considered it necessary to verify the 
energy audit results through independent third party. The Committee 
are surprised to note that the Ministry have simply forwarded the 
information received from some of the SERCs to the Committee and 
have not taken any steps to ensure that the guidelines on Tariff 
Policy are followed by all the SERCs. Though the Ministry have 
quoted the recommendations of the Forum of Regulators (FoR) 
endorsing the views of the Committee on third party verification, 
the Ministry have failed to intimate the action taken by them to 
ensure the follow-up. The Ministry cannot absolve themselves from 
the responsibility of ensuring third party verification of energy audit 
of all SERCs. Against this backdrop, the Committee reiterate that 
the Ministry should make sincere efforts to persuade all the SERCs 
to implement the guidelines on Tariff Policy regarding third party 
verification/audit of financial and technical data. The Committee are 
of the opinion that the stand taken by the Delhi Electricity Regulatory 
Commission of not having independent third party verification of 
energy audit is a gross violation of the Government policies and 
needs review in view of regular reports of dissatisfaction amongst 
consumers in the Capital. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee 
would also like the Ministry to seek an explanation from Delhi 
Electricity Regulatory Commission in this regard. 
D. Functioning of Consumers Grievances Redressal Mechanism 
Recommendation (S1. No. 14, Para 2.14) 
16. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had entrusted 
Indian Institute of Public Administration and Administrative Staff 
College of India (ASCI) with conducting a study on the consumer 
8 


redressal mechanisms and gIVIng a report within a period of three 
months. The Committee were also informed that ASCI had submitted 
the draft report which was being examined by the Ministry. The 
Committee had sought the details of the study Report and the precise 
action taken by the Government thereon. 
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
"The Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) was assigned 
a study on impact of reorganisation of State Electricity Boards, 
vide Ministry's letter dated December 29, 2005. 
The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) was assigned to 
undertake a study to assess the functioning of Consumers 
Grievances Redressal Mechanism in the States of Kerala, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Delhi, West Bengal, Orissa, 
Jharkhand, Assam, Tripura and Meghalaya vide Ministry's letter 
dated February 13, 2008. 
The ASCI has since completed the study and covered almost all 
the terms of reference in their study and submitted its draft reports 
in three volumes, inter-alia, containing its recommendations/ 
comments. 
The Ministry sought clarifications on the recommendations on two 
of the terms of reference. The ASCI has since furnished the 
clarifications. ASCI's Reports are now being examined in the 
Ministry." 
18. The Committee had specifically sought for the details of the 
Study Report submitted by ASCI and the precise action taken by 
the Government thereon. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply 
have informed that the ASCI has since completed the study and 
submitted its draft reports in three volumes. The ASCI has also 
furnished the clarifications sought by the Ministry. The Ministry 
have further stated that the reports of ASCI are being examined in 
the Ministry. The Committee had expected the Ministry to provide 
the details of the Study Report and precise action taken by the 
Government as well. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry 
have not moved forward from their previous position and instead of 
giving the details of the study report and action taken by the 
Government thereon, the Ministry have come out with the routine 
reply that the reports are being examined by them. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the details of the study reports and action taken 
by the Ministry thereon be furnished to them without any further 
delay. 
9 


E. Payment of Compensation to Consumer on Account of Default 
in Performance 
Recommendation (S1. No. 16, Para 2.16) 
19. The Delhi Electricity Supply Code and Performance Standards 
Regulations, 2007 envisage payment of compensation by the 
Distribution companies to consumers in the event of default in 
observance of the notified Standards of Performance. 111e Committee 
had noted the direction of the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(DERC) to all the Distribution companies to pay compensation to the 
affected consumers without there being a need for such consumers to 
apply for the same. The Committee had sought the details of the 
cases disposed off where compensation had been paid by the 
Distribution companies to the affected consumers. The Committee had 
also desired the Government/CERC to ensure that the other State 
Regulatory Commissions also follow suit in the matter to protect and 
safeguard the interests of the consumers. 
20. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
"The Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission has been maintaining 
that compensation to the affected consumers, in the event of default 
on the part of utility to observe the guaranteed Standards of 
Performance (SoP) needs to be paid without there being any 
necessity for such consumers to claim the compensation amount 
in writing from DISCOM. However, the DISC OMs contend that 
compensation needs to be claimed by the affected consumers and 
the fact mentioned in such consumer claims need to be verified 
before compensation can be paid. In some cases, compensation 
has been paid by the DISCOMs, BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. and 
BSES Yamuna Power Ltd. upon receiving the claims for such 
compensation from the affected consumers ... 
Further, the FoR in its report on "Protection of Consumer Interests" 
agreed that the provision in the rule issued by Government of 
India stipulating inter alia requirement of submission of a report 
by the ombudsman should be institutionalized by all SERCs. The 
relevant extract of the Rule is quoted as follows: "(a) The 
ombudsman shall prepare a report on a six monthly basis giving 
details of the nature of the grievances of the consumer dealt by 
the ombudsman, the response of the licensees in the redressal of 
the grievances and the opinion of the ombudsman on the licensee's 
compliance of the standards of performance as specified by the 
Commission under section 57 of the Act during the preceding six 
months; (b) The report under sub-clause (a) above shall be 
forwarded to the State Commission and the State Government 
within 45 days after the end of the relevant period of six months." 
10 


The FoR has recommended that the disposal of grievances should 
be monitored up to the point of compliance of the order of CGRF 
or ombudsman and not just the passing of order by these bodies." 
21. The Committee had sought the details of the cases disposed 
off where compensation had been paid by the Distribution companies 
to the affected consumers. A scrutiny of the information received 
from the Government in this regard reveals that in most of the 
States, no compensation has been paid due to non-receipt of 
complaints from the affected consumers. Also the number of 
consumers compensated in some of the States like Delhi and 
Jharkhand are too less. The Committee are disappointed to note the 
contentions of the DISCOMs, Delhi that compensation needs to be 
claimed by the affected consumers and the fact mentioned in such 
consumer claims need to be verified before compensation can be 
paid instead of paying compensation to the affected consumers 
without applying for the same. It is well known that the level of 
dissatisfaction/grievance regarding fast running of meters and inflated 
bills being received by the consumer in Delhi is very high. The 
Committee feel that many affected consumers may find it 
cumbersome to apply for the compensation and would rather forgo 
the compensation in view of the complexities involved therein, 
ultimately defeating the very purpose of protecting the interest of 
the consumers and making DISCOMs accountable in this regard 
besides maintaining a satisfactory level of quality control. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly reiterate that the compensation be paid 
without putting condition on the affected consumers to apply for 
the same. Keeping in view the non-seriousness shown by many States 
to ventilate the grievances of the consumers, the Committee desire 
the Government/CERC to ensure that the provision in this regard is 
implemented scrupulously by all the States. The Committee at the 
same time concur the views of the FoR that the disposal of grievances 
should be monitored up to the point of compliance of the order of 
CGRF or Ombudsman and not just passing of order by these bodies. 
The Committee expect that the recommendations of FoR shall be 
strictly implemented in letter and spirit to protect and safeguard the 
interests of the consumers. 
F. Implementation of Reliability Index Provision 
Recommendation (SI. No. 18, Para 2.18) 
22. The Committee had noted that as per the National Electricity 
Policy, 2005 (Para 5.13.2), the SERCs were required to draw a road­ 
map for the declaration of reliability under the Reliability Index (RI) 
11 


of supply of power to consumers of all cities and towns upto district 
headquarters as also rural areas. The Committee had pointed out that 
till date the States like Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttar Pradesh had not specified the Reliability Indices. Deprecating 
the delay in specifying the Reliability Indices in these States, the 
Committee had urged the Government to intervene and pursue the 
matter with the concerned SERCs to ensure that their Reliability Indices 
be declared on priority basis. 
23. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
"The National Electricity Policy casts the responsibility of 
compilation and publishing of Reliability Index (RI) data on the 
Central Electricity Authority. According to the Authority the State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions have started specifying the 
reliability indices to ensure customer satisfaction. However, some 
of .the SERCs are obtaining data from the power utilities for 
managing the reliability indices. It is necessary to have consumer 
indexing and logging of outages for computing reliability indices 
at consumer level. ... Under the R-APDRP funds are being provided 
to the utilities for conducting GIS based consumer indexing and 
remotely collecting the data from the meters installed on llkV 
feeders and distribution transformers. Only after consumer indexing 
is completed and system of IT based monitoring of consumer 
outages is in place, SERCs would be able to obtain reliability 
parameters from the utilities. It is expected that under R-APDRP 
in three years time above requirement would be met by the utilities. 
However, a road map is to be developed by the SERCs in 
consultation with utilities." 
24. The Committee expect the Ministry to follow-up with all the 
States/SERCs to implement the provision in letter and spirit. 
G. Mechanism for Renewable Energy Certificates 
Recommendation (51. No. 29, Para 2.29) 
25. The Committee had noted that the States which do not have 
the potential renewable sources, can purchase power from other States 
and that too not exactly through transmission lines, but by the issue 
of certificates which would be called 'renewable certificates' or 'green 
certificates'. The Committee were informed that the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy had engaged some consultants to work out the 
modalities for the same. The Committee had desired that the outcome 
12 


of the study carried out by the consultants as well as the action taken 
by the Government thereon be intimated to them in due course. The 
Committee had also recommended the Government to ensure that the 
'green certificates' be strictly issued only in those States which did not 
have enough renewable sources of energy. 
26. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated: 
"The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has informed that 
they had engaged Consultant Mis ABPS Infrastructure Advisory 
Pvt. Ltd. for development of Renewable Energy Certificate 
mechanism for India. The Consultant is yet to submit their final 
report although the modalities of the proposed design have been 
discussed." 
27. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of 
the final report of the consultant and the action plan of the 
Government for its implementation. 
13 


CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
The Committee are constrained to find that the post of Chairman, 
CERC which was lying vacant since March, 2007 was filled up only 
on 15th April, 2008. While acknowledging the fact that the process for 
selection of Chairman was initiated way back in August, 2006 an 
Statutory reference in this regard to the Selection Committee was made 
on 09.10.2006, the Committee are perturbed to note that instead of 
taking the required 3 months for finalising the process, the Selection 
Committee's recommendation was made available only on 14th August, 
2007, i.e. after 10 months. What is surprising is the fact that even 
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) took about 8 months 
thereafter to take the approval of the competent authority for making 
appointment to the post. The Committee deplore the inordinate delay 
in appointment of the Chairman of CERC which according to them 
could have been curtailed. The Committee expect the Government to 
take all necessary steps at the earliest to fill up all other vacant posts 
in this Organisation. 
Reply of the Government 
At present, there is no vacancy in Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission to be filled by the Central Government. Timely action is 
being taken to fill up the future vacancies in accordance with the 
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
The Committee also find that 8 SERCs in the States of Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu & Kasmir, Kerala, Punjab, Tamil Nadu 
and Uttar Pradesh have no Chairman and Members as on 15.07.2008. 
This is yet another instance which indicates the casual approach with 
which the regulation of power sector - which has a direct bearing on 
the consumers and their interests is being taken up both by the Centre 
and the States. The Committee would like the Ministry of Power to 
take up and pursue the matter of vacancies in SERCs at the appropriate 
14 


level with the respective State Governments so that these are filled up 
at the earliest. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps 
taken in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
Secretary (Power) vide his DO letter dated 21.10.2008 to the 
Chief Secretaries of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Bihar, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tripura and Uttarakhand has stressed that any 
vacancy in the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions particularly 
at the level of Chairperson of the Commission adversely impacts the 
functioning of the Commission and the Forum of Regulators (FoR). 
He has, therefore, requested that an urgent action may be taken to . fill 
up all existing vacancies in the SERCs. Advance action for filling up 
foreseeable vacancies may also please be taken, as required under 
Section 85(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 to prevent vacancies from 
either arising or continuing for any length of time. 
Incumbency status of Chairperson and Members of various 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions as on 27.4.2009 furnished by Forum 
of Regulators (FoR) is placed at Annex-l which indicates that the 
posts in the above mentioned State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
(SERCs) have been filled. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
The Committee find that as per the provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, the Electricity Regulatory Commissions shall be guided inter­ 
alia by the National Electricity Policy and the Tariff Policy. Besides 
laying emphasis on promoting competition in the long run which 
would lead to reduction in tariff, the National Electricity Policy also 
require the Electricity Regulatory Commissions to regulate utilities based 
on predetermined indices on quality of power supply, setting up 
Grievance Redressal Forums expeditiously and appointment of 
Ombudsman within six months. The Committee observes that in most 
of the States where Electricity Regulatory Commissions have been set, 
some sort of Grievance Redressal Forums has also been put in place 
and Ombudsman appointed. As regards, the tariff policy notified by 
the Central Government on 06.01.2006, the Committee note that its 
main aim is to enhance competition through the reduction in capital 
costs and bringing about efficiency in operations. It also requires that 
all future requirement of power should be procured competitively by 
the distribution licensees except in the case of expansion of existing 
15 


projects or in the case of State controlled/owned company as an 
identified developer. Even for public sector projects, tariff for all new 
generation and transmission projects needs to be decided on the basis 
of competitive bididng. The Committee observe that as specified by 
Tariff Policy that Accredited Transmission and Commercial (AT&C) 
reduction needs to be incentivised by linking returns to the power 
utilities in a Multi Year Tariff (MYT) framework to an achievable 
trajectory, most of the States have yet to be put in place the MYT 
framework. The Committee further notes that although distribution 
companies in the States have been directed by SERC to bring down 
the AT&C losses to a desired level by issue of MYT regulations with 
detailed methodology related to sharing of excess profits/losses with 
consumer, the same could nnt hp achieved inspite of measures taken 
such as feeder separation schemes, adopuou ~: theft preventive 
techniques, replacement of old overhead lines, installation of new 
electronic meters, etc. While appreciating the new policy initiatives to 
enhance competition through reduction in capital costs and efficiency 
in operations, the Committee recommend that the Government should 
strive hard to see that both the CERC and SERCs ensure that AT&C 
and high T&D losses are brought down to specified percentages at the 
earliest so that consumers are also benefited by reduction in tariff of 
electricity. 
Reply of the Government 
The Forum of Regulators (FoR) constituted a Working Group on 
'Loss Reduction Strategies' for detailed examination of the issues around 
distribution loss. Based on the inputs of the Group, FoR in its report 
on the matter has recommended various measures for reduction of 
distribution losses. Major recommendations of FoR include: 
(i) Focus should be on reduction of distribution losses. 
Transmission losses not to be clubbed with distribution 
losses. 
(ii) For segregation of technical and non-technical loss, baseline 
data should be compiled for each electricity division. 
(iii) Trajectory for loss reduction should be specified keeping in 
view actual loss levels, capital expenditure made in the past 
for improving the network and future capital expenditure 
plans. 
(iv) Segregation of feeder for agriculture supply should be 
resorted to especially in States where proportion of supply 
of agriculture sector is substantial. 
16 


(v) Sharing of gains. 
- Under-achievement of loss reduction target should be 
borne by the licensee. 
- In case of achievement over and above the targets the 
gain should be shared between the licensee and the 
consumers in the ratio to be determined by SERCs. 
(vi) The utilities should effectively use the theft related penal 
provisions in the Electricity Act, 2003. 
(vii) As stipulated in para 8.2.1(2) of the Tariff Policy, SERCs 
should encourage suitable local area based incentive and 
disincentive schemes for the staff of the utilities linked to 
reduction in losses. 
A statement showing AT&C loss (%) for State Electricity Boards, 
Power Departments, and DISCOMs maintained by Power Finance 
Corporation for the year 2001-02 to 2007-08 region-wise (figures of 
2007-08 tentative) is enclosed at Annex - 2 shows reduction in AT&C 
losses. 
The Action Plan of various States to reduce the AT&C losses as 
intimated by some of the SERCs is as follows: 
SI. Name of 
No. the SERC 
Action Plan 
1 2 3 
1. Assam Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
2. Bihar Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Commission decided to take up 
the matter of Multi Year Tariff for 
2008-09 and 2009-10. The Commission 
has always advocated reduction of 
transmission and distribution (T&D) 
losses in its six Tariff Orders so that 
these losses are brought down to 
specified percentage. Any loss incurred 
by the utilities beyond target set by 
the Commission will not be allowed 
to be passed on to the consumers in 
tariff for subsequent years as per the 
truing up exercise already taken up 
The Commission has fixed 
transmission and distribution loss 
17 


1 2 3 
3. Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
4. Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
5. Gujarat Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
6. Jharkhand State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
7. Kamataka Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
reduction target in its tariff order 
dated 26.8.2008 for the Bihar State 
Electricity Board for the year 2008-09 
as 38%, 2009-10 as 35%, 2010-2011 as 
32% and 2011-2012 as 29%. 
The Commission has passed three 
Tariff Orders and in every tariff order 
targets were given for reduction in 
transmission and distribution losses. 
The Commission is pursuing the 
distribution licensee to ensure that 
AT&C losses and T&D losses are 
brought down to reasonable levels 
The AT&C losses in Delhi have been 
brought down from the level of about 
50% in 2002 to the average level of 
about 20% as on 31.3.2009. The 
DISCOM wise AT&C loss reduction 
target to be achieved by the end of 
current control period i.e. by the 
financial year 2010-2011 by the 
DISCOMs is 17-20%. 
Gujarat Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has given stringent targets 
to the Discoms for reduction in T&D 
losses and has set the target for the 
period 2008-2011 to bring the losses 
DISCOM wise from 15.86 to 8.65. 
No trajectory for reduction of AT&C 
losses have been fixed on long term 
basis but the Commission has 
specifically directed its licensees to 
make concerted efforts to bring down 
AT&C losses. 
The Kamataka Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (KERC) has fixed targets 
for reduction of T&D losses by giving 
a road map. In its multi year tariff 
18 


1 2 3 
8. Kerala Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
9. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
10. Maharashtra Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
order issues in January, 2008, the 
Commission has fixed a loss reduction 
trajectory to be achieved during 
financial year 2008-2010 (first control 
period of the MYT regime) 
The Kerala Electricity Regulatory 
Commission is almost achieving the 
T&D losses reduction targets for the 
year 2004-05 from 24.95% to 18.69% 
in the year 2008-09 (Projected) by 
replacing faulty energy meters with 
high precision electronic meters and 
through initiatives such as re­ 
conductoring, installing more 
distribution transformers etc. 
The Government of Madhya Pradesh 
has prescribed a trajectory for 
reduction of distribution losses for the 
year 2006-07 from 30.0 - 43.0% to 23.5 
-31.0% for the year 2010-11. The 
Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has laid down framework 
for distribution MYT stipulating that 
in case the Utility is able to achieve 
the loss levels below the specified 
levels, then such gains will be shared 
on 50-50 basis between Utility and the 
Consumers. This will force the Power 
Companies to adopt measures and 
take necessary steps to reduce losses. 
The Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory 
Commission in its Multi Year Tariff 
Orders for the control period of 2007- 
2010 has specified the distribution loss 
trajectory Discomwise from 30.5-2.93 
to 10-2.93 The commission vide its 
Terms and Conditions of Tariff 
Regulations, 2005 has defined the 
mechanism for sharing of gains or 
losses on account of controllable 
factors. 
19 


1 2 3 
11. Rajasthan Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
12. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
According to the Rajasthan Electricity 
Regulatory Commission, the DISC OM 
has reduced losses significantly and 
are almost matching the targets given 
by the Commission. The Feeder 
Renovation Programme initiated by the 
DISCOMS at large scale, is now on 
completion stage and the AT&C losses 
are expected to be reduced further. 
The Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory 
Commission vide its letter dated 
6.11.2008 has already set the AT&C 
loss targets for the Tamil Nadu 
Electricity Board which are 19.30% for 
the year 2008-09, 18.90% for 2009-2010, 
18.50% for 2010-2011 and 18.10% for 
2011-12 
In addition, Government has launched Restructured Accelerated 
Power Development and Reforms Programme with the major focus on 
loss reduction. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
The Committee observe that as per para 8.2.1(2) of Tariff Policy, 
third party verification/energy audit of technical and financial data 
fOT different areas/localities could be used to impose area/locality 
specific surcharge for greater AT&C loss levels and this, in tum, would 
generate local consensus for effective action for better governance. 
Further para 8.2.1(2) of the policy requires the SERCs to institute a 
system of independent scrutiny of financial and technical data 
submitted by the licensees. The policy also emphasizes that an in­ 
depth scrutiny of the financial and technical data submitted by the 
licensees would form the basis for tariff determination. The Committee 
are, however, concerned to note that in many of the States energy 
audits are being done in-house by the licensees themselves. To ensure 
that the consumers are extended the benefit of energy audit results 
and at the same time are not unnecessarily put to disadvantage, the 
Committee feel that SERCs should ensure third party verification of 
20 


energy audit results by engaging experts/independent consultants for 
scrutiny and analysis of the data submitted by the licensees for tariff 
determination. The Committee also desire that the Government should 
take the necessary steps so that guidelines of tariff policy in this regard 
are followed by all the SERCs. 
Reply of the Government 
All the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions were requested 
to furnish the details of third party verification of energy audit results 
for tariff determination in their respective States. The information 
furnished by the SERCs of the following States is as follows: 
S1. Name of 
No. the SERCs 
Comments 
1 2 3 
1. Assam Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
2. Bihar Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
3. Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
4. Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Assam Electricity Regulatory 
Commission is yet to take up third 
party verification of the energy audit. 
The Commission however, feels that, a 
third party/independent agencies 
should be engaged. 
Work on energy audit has not been 
initiated by the Bihar Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and the results 
are yet to come. However, the financial 
and technical data submitted by the 
Bihar State Electricity Board is being 
scrutinized and analyzed by an 
independent consultant appointed by 
the Commission 
Third party verification of energy audit 
results has not been done so far. 
However, the Commission has been 
appointing consultants for scrutiny and 
analysis of data submitted by a 
licensee for tariff determination. 
The energy audits have been done in 
house by the licensees themselves and 
Commission has not considered it 
necessary to verify the energy audit 
results through independent third 
party. 
21 


1 2 3 
5 Gujarat Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
6. Jharkhand State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
7. Kamataka Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
B. Kerala Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
9. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
Tariff determination is being done with 
the help of consultant, the 
Administrative Staff College of India 
who are also looking after energy 
audit results for tariff determination by 
the Commission. 
Jharkhand State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has appointed 
independent and an expert agency 
(consultant) to carry out independent 
and in-depth scrutiny of the financial 
and technical data submitted by 
licensees. 
The Commission, as part of the third 
party verification of technical and 
financial data had engaged the service 
of PWC as consultants for scrutiny of 
Audit Result Report and tariff 
applications under multi-year tariff 
regime for the financial year 200B-2010. 
For verification of technical and 
financial data furnished by the 
Licensees, Commission has appointed 
a 'Compliance Examiner'. Verification 
and authenticity of data has also been 
included as his duty. 
For independent scrutiny of the 
financial and technical data provided 
by the Licensees/Generating Company, 
the Commission has appointed the 
following consultants: 
(i) M/s AF. Ferguson for verification 
of coal accounting procedure in 
thermal power station of MPPGCL. 
(ii) M/s Pandey Dua and Mathur 
Associates, Chartered Accountants 
for investigation of employees' 
expenses incurred by licensees and 
generating company. 
(iii) M/s Pricewaterhouse Coopers for 
conducting a detailed scrutiny of 
technical and financial data. 
22 


1 2 3 
10. Maharashtra Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
11. Rajasthan Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
12. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory 
Commission has undertaken third 
party verification of energy audit by 
assigning the work to M/ s Feedback 
Ventures Ltd., Consultants in the 
power sector. 
All the DISCOMs are state owned. 
There is a statutory audit through the 
Chartered Accountant as well as by 
CAG, however, the Commission would 
like to have separate scrutiny of data 
at its own in future. 
Third party verification of energy audit 
results has not been done so far. 
The Forum of Regulators constituted a Working Group on 
"Loss Reduction Strategies" for detailed examination of issues around 
reduction of distribution losses. The report finalized by the FOR based 
on the inputs of the working group emphasizes that third party 
verification of the technical and financial data submitted by the utility 
is crucial, before such data is taken into account for determination of 
tariff. Further, FOR in its report on Multi Year Tariff and Distribution 
Margin has recommended that data on distribution loss levels should 
be verified through a third party as envisaged in the Tariff Policy. 
FOR has indicated that the services of accredited energy auditors and 
academic institutions such as Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) and 
other engineering colleges could be utilized for this. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
The Committee have been informed that fixing tariff for the various 
classes of consumes is State specific but the principles and methodology 
for determination of tariff applicable to the generating companies and 
transmission licensees in the Central sector have been specified in CERC 
(Terms and conditions of Tariff) Regulations 2004. These regulations 
23 


also serve as guidelines for State Commissions to specify the regulation 
for terms and conditions for determination of tariff in respect of the 
generating companies and transmission licensees under their control. 
The Ministry of Power have informed the Committee that tariff 
rationalization has not been achieved in full, but the progress has 
been good. TIle Committee feel that the consumers generally are not 
satisfied with the service rendered and the tariff of electricity supplied 
to them, the whole process of reorganization of Electricity Boards and 
the reforms as such have not served the desired purpose. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government should take the 
necessary measures to improve the distribution system so that 
consumers get good service as well as benefit of the tariff 
rationalization. 
Reply of the Government 
Views of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission were sought 
in the matter. According to the Commission, to ensure quality of service ~ 
the distribution licensee has to take care of two important 
considerations, viz., supply availability and network availability. FOI~ 
in its report on "Multi Year Tariff and Distribution Margin" has 
recommended that: 
• Recovery of fixed cost should be linked to achievement for 
Composite Index of Supply Availability (timely contracting 
adequate power to meet forecast load ) and Network 
Availability to be specified by SERe. 
• For every 1% underachievement in composite availability 
for urban and/or rural areas, Return on Equity shall be 
reduced by 0.1% of Equity. 
As regards tariff rationalization, the information as available with 
FOR Secretariat on steps taken by State Commissions on tariff 
rationalization is enclosed as Annexure-3. 
As informed by various State Electricity Regulatory Cornmissions 
consistent efforts are being made for improvement and strengtiocl',;,,; 
of distribution system in their States by implementing Rajiv C:~'1:j;:: 
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), Accelerated Power 
Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP), Atal [yoti Yojana. 
rural electrification work and for reduction of AT&C losses. 
Government has approved re-structured APDRP during the XI Plan 
as a Central Sector Scheme. The focus of the programme is on actual, 
demonstrable performance in terms of loss reduction. 
24 


The programme size of re-structured APDRP during XI Plan is 
Rs. 51,577 crore. Projects under the scheme would be taken up in Two 
Parts. Part-A would include the projects for establishment of baseline 
data and IT applications for energy accounting Z auditing & IT based 
consumer service centers. Part-B would include the distribution 
strengthening projects. Outlay for Part-A (Baseline System) projects is 
Rs. 10,000 crore and that for Part-B projects is Rs. 40,000 crore. Initially 
funds for projects under both the parts would be provided through 
loan. The entire amount of loan for Part-A projects would be converted 
into grant on the completion of the project and up-to 50% (90% for 
special category States) loan of Part-B projects would be converted 
into grant on achieving the 15% AT&C loss in the project area on a 
sustainable basis. 
Government of India launched Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran 
Yojana (RGGVY) in March 2005 with an objective to electrify over one 
lakh uri-electrified villages and to provide free electricity connections 
to 2.34 Crore rural BPL households. The scheme provides 90% capital 
subsidy for the projects. The continuation of the scheme in the XI Plan 
was sanctioned on 3rd January 2008 with a provision of Rs. 28,000 
Crore capital subsidy, which covers 27 states in the country. 
111e status of implementation as on 15th May 2009 is as below: 
No. of Projects Cost of Subsidy No. of villages to No. of free connections 
sanctioned the Projects released be Electrified to be Provided (In Lakh) 
(Rs. crore) (Rs. crore) 
Target Achieved Target Achieved 
562 26,001 13,913.45 1,18,146 61,360 245.08 60.04 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
Although, the provisions of Section 61(f) of the Electricity Act, 
2003, provide that Appropriate Commission shall specify the terms 
and conditions for the determination of tariff and is stated to be guided 
by Multi Year Tariff (MYT) principles, only some States have adopted 
this procedure. The Committee desire that such arrangement sho'1ld 
also be in vogue in the rest of the States for which Central Government 
ought to impress upon them at appropriate level. Further, since the 
licensees/ distribution companies are making huge profits by resorting 
to the setting up of tariff slabs for various categories of consumers, 
the Committee would like to be informed as to whether any such 
25 


policy in regard to fixing different tariff slabs for the consumers has 
been formulated by the Government. The Committee feel that instead 
of resorting to different slab systems across the country for fixation of 
power tariff, Government should examine the feasibility of achieving 
particular uniform rates of power supply for different categories of 
consumers, i.e. Domestic, agriculture and industrial, etc. in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) has been 
specifying Multi-Year Tariff (MYT) Regulations for Generation and 
Transmission. The first control period was of 3 years for the period 
from 2001-04, followed by MYT for 5 years from 2004-09. CERC has 
recently issued the tariff regulations for 2009-14. 
As per the information available with the Forum of Regulators 
(FOR) Secretariat, 9 SERCs (Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, New Delhi, 
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Gujarat, Karnataka, West Bengal and 
Chhattisgarh) have issued MYT Regulations for Distribution. FOR 
constituted a Working Group on 'MYT and Distribution Margin'. The 
report evolved by the forum based on the inputs of the Working Group 
suggests inter-alia a model MYT framework for distribution licensees. 
In the context of differentiation of tariff, Section 62(3) of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 provides as under:- 
"The Appropriate Commission shall not, while determining the 
tariff under this Act, show undue preference to any consumer of 
electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load 
factor, power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity during 
any specified period or the time at which the supply is required 
or the geographical position of any area, the nature of supply and 
the purpose for which the supply is required". 
Some State Electricity Regulatory Commissions have, however, 
reduced the number of slabs within a consumer category as part of 
tariff rationalization. 
Further Tariff Policy provides in para 8.4.2 that: 
"The National Electricity Policy states that existing PPAs with the 
generating companies would need to be suitably assigned to the 
successor distribution companies. The State Governments may make 
such assignments taking care of different load profiles of the 
distribution companies so that retail tariffs are uniform in the State 
26 


for different categories of consumers .. Thereafter the retail tariffs 
would reflect the relative efficiency of distribution companies in 
procuring power at competitive costs, controlling theft and reducing 
other distribution losses." 
Under the Electricity Act, 2003, the State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions (SERCs) are empowered to determine the tariff for supply 
of electricity to various consumers in the State. No approval of the 
Central Commission or the Central Government is required for this 
r purpose. The tariff of electricity depends on the overall power purchase r: 
cost as well as the operational and financial performance of the 
Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) i.e. Aggregate Technical and 
Commercial (AT&C) Losses, operational expenses, capital investment 
for system upgradation/ augmentation etc. In. determining the 'tariff, 
the SERCs, inter-alia, are required to safeguard consumers' interest and 
at the same time, ensure recovery of the cost of electricity in a 
reasonable manner. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
The Standing Committee on Energy, in their 9th Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on APDRP, presented to Lok Sabha on 25.08.2005, had 
recommended that besides resolving the issues like steep tariff hike 
and reduction in T&D losses, the private distribution companies in 
Delhi should also sort out the issues relating to increasing complaints 
of fast running of electricity meters. As regards the number of 
complaints received by distribution companies in Delhi, the Committee 
are informed during 2007-08, 17293 complaints related to billing and 
23051 complaints on metering problems were received by the 
distribution companies. The DERC has also informed that the Delhi 
Electricity Supply Code and Performance Regulations, 2007 require the 
electricity meters to conform to the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 
Installation and Operation of Meters Regulation 2006. The CEA 
regulations specify that meters shall comply with the requirements of 
the relevant standard notified by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
which inter alia define the error limits of meters. The error limits for 
electricity meters are set by BIS in their relevant standards and current 
limits are ± 1% and ± 2.5% for class I static (electronic) type meter 
under standard and on site conditions. The Committee are happy to 
note that DERC has notified ERTL (North), Okhla, Delhi and CPR! 
which are National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories (NABLs) accredited Government laboratories, as 
independent third parties for testing of meters. However, the fact 
27 


remains that consumers in Delhi are mainly dissatisfied with such 
measures. The Committee strongly feel that ways and means should 
be found to ensure satisfaction of the consumers in respect of 
over-billing as well as fast running of meters. In case of complaints of 
fast running meters, quick action needs to be taken to replace them. 
The Committee also recommend that the consumers should be allowed 
to have a meter of their own choice from a set of meters approved by 
the agencies like CPR!. The Committee also feel that distribution 
companies should educate the consumers as to how the electric 
appliances are to be used with a view to ensuring minimum 
consumption of electricity which in tum would reduce the possibility 
of the excess reading of sensitive meters. 
Reply of the Government 
Electricity is a concurrent subject. Distribution of electricity comes 
within the purview of the States. Accordingly, the Distribution 
Companies (OISCOMs) are regulated by the respective State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (SERCs) under the provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003. The Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC) has 
reported that the accuracy standards of different classes of electricity 
meters are decided by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). The current 
standard for domestic electricity of meters issued by BIS provide for 
a tolerance of ± 2.5 per cent. Therefore, a meter found to be fast or 
. slow within the prescribed limit of ± 2.5 per cent is considered to be 
functioning accurately and, therefore, does not have any billing related 
-implications. 
The DERC has also informed that in recent years a number of 
meter testing drives have been conducted by the DISCOMs, the 
Government of NCT of Delhi and by the DERC and the number of 
meters found to be running fast out. of those tested was small. 
The position regarding other States is as follows:- 
The Govemment of Chhattisgarh has allowed the consumers to 
have meters of their own choice from the set of approved meters. The 
DISCOMs in this State have taken up consumer awareness drive from 
time to time for' educating consumers to reduce their energy 
consumption by adopting various measures. 
In Goa the consumers are being allowed to have the meters of 
their choice having the required specification and which have been 
duly tested in accordance to IS/BIS specification. Measures are being 
taken for educating consumers through advertisements/posters etc. on 
energy conservation/use of energy efficient equipments/appliances. 
28 


In Haryana, the Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. has 
empanelled manufacturers of meters and the consumer is free to choose 
anyone of them. The Utility has also included its consumers awareness 
programme in its Capital Investment Plan for the financial year 
2009-10. 
The distribution companies in Madhya Pradesh are already taking 
action to educate the consumers and providing necessary information 
by organizing camps and workshops at local level. 
According to Orissa, the Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(OERC) (Condition of Supply) Code, 2004 provides that the consumers 
can himself procure the meters either from the vendors certified by 
the licensee confirming to licensees technical specifications of may 
request the licensee to supply the meter. Various consumer awareness 
programme are being conducted by the OERC and licensees through 
electronic, audio and print media. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
Performance of power stations and inter-State Transmission system 
regulated by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) is 
governed by the benchmark Standards of Performance specified by' 
the Commission as part of multi-year terms and conditions of tariff 
notified by it. Further, the CERC has specified a benchmark of target 
availability / capacity index in order to ensure reliability of supply which 
ultimately has to reach the end consumer through a distribution utility, 
the capacity of generating stations to produce electricity and of a 
transmission utility/licensee to deliver the same from the point of 
generation to the point of drawal. The Committee note that in most 
of the States, the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) 
have notified the Standards of Performance for quality, continuity and 
reliability of service to the consumers after consultation with licensees, 
stakeholders and general public. Some States are stated to have taken 
initiatives to notify and implement the Standards of Performance. In 
this regard, Karnataka has made an innovation by introducing Office 
of the Consumer's Advocacy (OCA), who hears complaints about the 
non-compliance of the Standards of Performance by the utilities. In 
Madhya Pradesh, quarterly and annual Reports on the performance 
standards are being published in newspapers and are available in 
Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC). The 
MPERC also hold workshops with NGOs to disseminate information 
on the performance standards among consumers. The distribution 
29 


companies have been directed by MPERC to display performance 
standards at their offices. As per the directions of MPERC, six lakh 
pamphlets containing details of performance standards were distributed 
alongwith electricity bills in Bhopal, Indore and Jabalpur. Further, 
Ombudsmen are directed to review performance standards bi-annually. 
Similarly, Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC) specified 
formats for submitting information related to performance and obtains 
compliance reports from the Distribution Licensees and same are also 
uploaded on the Commission's website. The Standards of Performance 
Regulations provide for the various limits and time period for the 
parameters (Interruption, Period of Schedule Outages, Voltage 
variations, Harmonics) related to quality of power. To enforce these 
standards, detailed procedures have been prescribed in the Grid Code 
to be complied with by the licensees. While the Committee appreciate 
the steps taken by some of the State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions, for monitoring the Standards of Performance and 
reliability of supply through monthly Reports, yet the Committee find 
out that many of these Commissions have not so far fixed the pre­ 
determined indices on quality of power supply, to be followed by 
licensees. Taking note of the fact that as many as 21 State Electricity 
Regulatorv Commissions (SERCs) have laid down Standards of 
Performance, the Committee desire that the Government should 
persuade all the SERCs to take elaborate steps to ensure that the 
Distribution Companies supply the consumers with the continuous, 
quality and reliable supply of power. To ensure this, the Committee 
recommend that SERCs/Distribution companies should regularly 
disseminate information on Standards of Performance (SoP) being 
followed by the Distribution Companies. This needs to be ensured 
that the quarterly reviews are carried out by SERCs and the defaulting 
Distribution Companies are penalized. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Reliability Indices (RIs) are generally specified by State Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions as part of Standards of Performance (SoP) 
Regulations. Status of SoPs notified by some SERCs containing RIs is 
. at Annex-B. 
The Central Government has made Forum of Regulators Rules, 
2005, ac.cording to which laying of standards of performance of licensees 
as required under the Electricity Act, 2003 is the function of the FoR. 
In regard to dissemination of information on and .nonitoring of 
compliance of SoPs, the Forum of Regulators (FoR) in its report on 
30 


'Protection of Consumer Interest' has made the following 
recommendations: 
• A model consumer charter stipulating the rights and 
obligations of consumers. 
• NGOs should be involved for consumer education and 
empowerment. 
• Leaflets highlighting the consumers' rights under the 
standards of performance regulations should be distributed 
for dissemination of information amongst the consumers. 
• This would be best achieved by printing the 'consumers 
rights' on the back of the electricity bill. This would ensure 
wider access of message and improve awareness amongst 
the consumers. 
• Provision in the rule issued by Government of India 
stipulating inter alia requirement of submission of report by 
the Ombudsman should be institutionalized by all SERCs. 
Action taken by some of the SERCs are as follows: 
S1. Name of 
No. the SERCs 
Action Plan 
1 2 3 
1. Assam Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
2. Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
3. Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Commission has established 
Consumer Advocacy Cell (CAC) to 
disseminate the information. The CAC 
is bringing out an information bulletin 
titled "Consumer Grid". 
The Commission had enlisted the 
services of a reputed NGO to create 
awareness among consumers about 
their rights and obligations under the 
Electricity Act, 2003. 
The DERC has published the 
information contained in Delhi Electric 
Supply Code and Performance 
Standards Regulations, 2007 in a 
consumer friendly booklet form being 
freely distributed at Resident Welfare 
Association/Consumer meeting by 
DISCOMs. 
31 


1 2 3 
4. Gujarat Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
Himachal Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
6. Kamataka Electricity 
Regulatory Co~mission 
7 .. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
8. Maharashtra Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
9. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The GERC has released a booklet titled 
"Guidelines on Rights of Electricity 
Consumers under the Electricity Act, 
2003" which contains detailed 
information on rights of consumers as 
well as SoP including amount of 
compensation if the SoP standards are 
not followed. 
The Commission has informed that the 
utility has been submitting quarterly 
reports and consolidated Annual 
Reports on SoP 
The quarterly report being submitted 
by the licensees are being analysed by 
the Office of Consumer Advocacy 
The Commission has enlisted about 
125 NGOs across the Sta te and 
following the procedure as contained 
in the Forum of Regulators report. 
The Commission has framed a 
comprehensive "Electricity Consumers' 
Rights Statement" to educate the 
consumers. 
The Commission is monitoring the 
half-yearly reports being submitted by 
the licensee. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
The Committee note that as per the National Electricity Policy, 
2005 (Para 5.13.2), the SERCs are required to draw a road map for the 
declaration of reliability under the Reliability Index (RI) of supply of 
. power to consumers of all cities and towns upto district headquarters 
as also rural areas. The Committee are, however, dismayed to note 
that till date the States like Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, [harkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Punjab, 
Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have reportedly not specified the 
Reliability Indices. The Committee feel that specifying the Reliability 
Indices should have been the top priority of SERCs to ensure consumer 
satisfaction. The Committee, deprecate the delay in specifying the 
32 


Reliability Indices in these States and strongly urge the Government. 
to intervene and pursue the matter with the concerned SERCs to ensure 
that their Reliability Indices be declared without any further loss of 
precious time. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Electricity Policy casts the responsibility of compilation 
and publishing of Reliability Index (Rl) data on the Central Electricity 
Authority. According to the Authority the State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions have started specifying the reliability indices to ensure 
customer satisfaction. However some of the SERCs are obtaining data 
from the power utilities for managing the reliability indices. It is 
necessary to have consumer indexing and logging of outages for 
computing reliability indices at consumer level. Status of SERCs which 
have notified SoPs containing RIs provided by the CERC is placed at 
Annex-5. Under the R-APDRP funds are being provided to the utilities 
for conducting GIS based consumer indexing and remotely collecting 
the data from the meters installed on 11 V feeders and distribution 
transformers. Only after consumer indexing is completed and system 
of IT based monitoring of consumer outages is in place, SERCs would 
be able to obtain reliability parameters from the utilities. It is expected 
that under R-APDRP in 3 years time above requirement would be met 
by the utilities. However, a road map is to be developed by the SERCs 
in consultation with utilities. 
Some of the SERCs have laid down the Reliability Index which 
are as follows: 
51. Name of 
No. the SERCs 
Action Plan 
1. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
The Commission has laid down the 
levels of RI for all cities and towns 
up to the District Headquarter towns 
and also for the industrial growth 
centre. According to the Commission 
the Rl for the period April 2008 to 
September 2008 varies from 98-99.50% 
2. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Commission has set RI on 
6.11.2008 for all the cities, towns up 
to district headquarters and rural areas 
which varies from 95% in the year 
2007-08 to 99.95% in the year 2001- 
2012 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009J 
33 


Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
The Committee note with great concern that the major issue 
brought to the notice by the CERC with regard to the violation of 
Indian Electricity Grid Code (lEGe) remain frequent overdrawal from 
the Grid by certain States at lower frequencies. The Committee have 
been informed that the procedure of day ahead scheduling and pricing 
of deviations from the schedule (unscheduled interchange or UI) was 
part of the IEGC prepared by Central Transmission Utility and 
approved by the Commission which was implemented w.e.f. 1st 
February, 2000. The provision for pricing of UI, however, became 
effective only after implementation of the Availability Based Tariff (ABT) 
progressively in various regions beginning from July, 2002. The 
Committee also note that the ceiling rate of UI is fixed at 49.0 Hz and 
is related to the price of electricity that can be produced using the 
costliest fuel and thus reflects system marginal cost. However, there 
have been instances when States have overdrawn below the desired 
frequencies. In this regard, the Committee note that while disposing of 
a petition filed by the Western Regional Load Despatch Centre, the 
Central Commission vide its order dated 28th January, 2003 had directed 
that MPSEB shall pay a penalty of Rs. One lakh only invoking powers 
conferred on the Commission under Section 45 of now repealed ERC 
Act, 1998. Similarly, while disposing of a petition filed by Northern 
Regional Load Despatch Centre (NRLDC), the Commission had 
imposed a penalty of Rs. One lakh only on Uttar Pradesh Power 
Corporation Limited (UPPCL) invoking powers vested with it under 
Section 142 of the Electricity Act, 2003. A penalty of Rs. One lakh on 
UPPCL was also imposed by the adjudicating officer appointed by the 
Commission under Section 143 of the Act, to conduct an inquiry into 
the instances of non-compliance by the respondent of the instruction 
-of the NRLDC during the period 1.4.2006 to 30.4.2006. The Committee 
feel that the penalty imposed on the States overdrawing from the 
Grid at low frequency is too meagre to discourage them from 
. overdrawing and to force them to follow the Grid Code. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that more stringent penalties should 
be taken by the Central Government/CERC to prevent overdrawal 
from the Grid and as such to protect the Grid from collapsing. 
Reply of the Government 
The Central Government has constituted National Load Desptach 
Centre located at New Delhi to discharge the function of supervision 
over the Regional Load Desptach Centres, scheduling and dispatch of 
electricity over inter-regional links in accordance with grid standards 
34 


specified by the Authority and grid code specified by Central 
Commission in coordination with Regional Load Desptach Centres and 
coordination with Regional Load Desptach Centres for achieving 
maximum economy and efficiency in the operation of National Grid, 
etc. The Central Government has also constituted Regional Load 
Desptaoh Centres for complying with such principles, guidelines and 
methodologies in. respect of the wheeling and optimum scheduling 
and despatch of electricity as the Central Commission may specify in 
the Grid Code. 
As informed by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
Apart from levying penalty on the defaulting entities as per the 
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central Commission has of 
late taken strong exception to non-compliance of grid code in the 
matter of overdrawal of electricity, violations of regulations on inter­ 
State Open Access and inter-State trading. The Commission has initiated 
action against the MDs/CEOs of the companies concerned under 
Section 149 of the Act in addition to taking action against the companies 
and also levied penalties in some cases. 
In addition, the Central Commission has notified Central Electricity 
. Regulatory Commission (Unscheduled Interchange Charges and related 
matters) Regulations, 2009, on 30th March, 2009 where in Regulation 
7, it has been provided that in addition to UI Rates corresponding to 
frequency of 49.2 Hz, as stipulated under regulation 5, an additional 
Unscheduled Interchange Charge at the rate equivalent to 40% of the 
UI Rate corresponding to frequency of 49.2 Hz shall be applicable for 
over-drawal or under-injection of electricity for each time-block when 
grid frequency is below 49.2 Hz. 
Provided that for under-injection of electricity during the time­ 
block when grid frequenc;y is below 49.2 Hz for the generating stations 
using coal or lignite or gas supplied under Administered Price 
Mechanism (APM) as the fuel, Additional Unscheduled Interchange 
Charge shall be equivalent to 40% of the UI Cap Rate. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
The Committee note that some of the States have not even paid 
the UI charges. The Committee also take note of the fact that in a 
petition filed by WRLDC, the Commission has directed MPSEB to pay 
Rs. 25 crore on or before 25.06.2006 and the balance amount of 
Rs. 25.7 crore by 27.07.2006. Further, Uttar Pradesh is also reported to 
35 


be not paying the outstanding arrears of Rs. 770 crore of Unscheduled 
Interchange. In view of the huge outstanding arrears on accounts of 
non-payment of UI changes, the Committee feel that the Government 
should take up the matter at the highest level to ensure that the States 
abiding by the Grid Code do not suffer on account of the unauthorised 
overdrawal of power by other States. The Committee fully endorse 
the view of the Government that the outstanding amount from the 
defaulting States needs to be recovered by way of the Central 
appropriation of their allocated funds and desire that the action taken 
in this regard be reported to them. 
Reply of the Government 
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission apart from levying 
penalty on the defaulting entities as per the provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, the Central Commission has taken strong exception to non­ 
compliance of grid code in the matter of overdrawal of electricity, 
violations of regulations on inter-State Open Access and inter-State 
trading. The Commission has initiated action against the MDs/CEOs 
of the companies concerned under Section 149 of the Act in addition 
to taking action against the companies and also levied penalties in 
some cases. As regards, recovery of outstanding amount from the 
defaulting States by way of the Central appropriation of their allocated 
funds, the Ministry is seeking the views of the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
The Committee agree with the concern expressed by the Ministry 
about States violating the unscheduled interchange barrier and 
overdrawing power to the detriment of other States, and expect them 
to appropriately fix UI charges taking into account the cost of 
generation of power from various kind of fuels including naphtha and 
these charges may be allowed to increase as and when the fuel cost 
is increased. The Committee also fully endorse the views of the 
Government that the regulators should evolve such a practice that 
when the Annual Return Rates (ARRs) are being filed, the damages 
which have been imposed for the UI charges should be stated 
separately and very clearly and those payments which are in the nature 
of damages should not go to show purchase of power because that 
really is the inefficiency or incompetence of that particular Distribution 
company or entity. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that 
the matter may be deliberated by FORs to arrive at a consensus and 
36 


the Committee may be apprised of action taken in the matter. At the 
same time the Committee strongly recommend that certain more 
stringent measures are needed to be evolved by the Central 
Government in consultation with the CERC to avoid any major grid 
disturbances in the future. 
Reply of the Government 
The Forum of Regulators in its last meeting held on 11-12th june, 
2009 deliberated on this recommendation and has decided that SERCs 
should not permit in the Annual Review Requirements (ARR) with 
effect from 1.8.2009, the inclusion of 'additional VI charge' imposed 
on the utilities under CERe's VI Regulations for overdrawal during 
the time blocks when frequency was below 49.2Hz. The minutes of 
the meeting containing decisions on this recommendation have been 
forwarded to the SERCs by the Commission. FOR after deliberations 
have taken a consensus decision that VI will not be allowed in ARR. 
Apart from levying penalty on the defaulter entities as per the 
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central Commission has 
informed that it has taken strong exception to non-compliance of grid 
code in the matter of overdrawal of electricity, violations of regulations 
on inter-State Open Access and inter-State trading. The Commission 
has initiated action against the MDs/CEOs of the companies concerned 
under Section 149 of the Act in addition to taking action against the 
companies and also levied penalties in some cases. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
The Committee note that regulations for open access in inter-State 
transmission issued by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) in February, 2004, were amended in February, 2005, to further 
harmonise them with the requirements of trading in electricity. The 
CERC has now finalised the new open access regulations for the inter­ 
State transmission after consultation with the stakeholders and the 
new regulations have been reported to become fully effective with 
effect from April I, 2008. Steps are stated to have been taken in 
19 States to implement the provision of Electricity Act, 2003 regarding 
issue/notification of the regulation for open access. Further, 
35 consumers in Chhattisgarh, 17 applicants in Madhya Pradesh, 
9 consumers in Rajasthan have been reported to be availing/ sanctioned 
open access of electricity. The Committee observe that the annual 
volume of electricity traded through open access route is only of the 
37 


order of two per cent of the total available energy. 111e new regulations 
for open access State that in case of bilateral intra-regional transaction, 
the transmission charges for the use of inter State transmission system 
shall be Rs. :30/MWh, for bilateral, between adjacent regions, these 
will be Rs. 60/MWh and Rs. 90/MWh for bilateral wheeling of 
electricity through one or more intervening regions. Further, in case of 
the collective transactions charges at the rate of Rs. 30/MWh for energy 
approved for transmission for each point of injection and for each 
point of drawal shall be payable for use of the inter-State transmission 
system. The Committee also. observe that the transmission charges 
recovered from open access customers are to be utilised for reduction 
in the monthly transmission charges payable by long-term customers 
of the region after allowing 25% to be retained by the Central 
Transmission Utility and the transmission charges for the use of State 
network to be disbursed to the State Transmission Utility concerned. 
The Committee believe that these new regulations which have come 
into force with effect from 1st April, 2008, would not only improve 
the magnitude of bilateral trade of power in the country where the 
present transactions are taking place between the SEBs or their 
successor utilities, but will also benefit the consumers once open access 
at intra-State level also becomes effective. The Committee appreciate 
the efforts made by the Ministry to see that the open access is 
operationalised in the country and also take note of the fact that it 
was unanimously resolved to support this proposition in the Chief 
Ministers conference held during 2007. The Committee recommend 
the State Governments should ensure that the open access takes off in 
their States more steadily and progressively. 
Reply of the Government 
111e Secretary (Power) vide his DO letter dated October 20, 2008 to 
Chief Secretaries of all State Governments has impressed that Open 
Access is a critical component of the Electricity Act, 2003 which makes 
it mandatory to introduce Open Access by January, 2009. He also drew 
the attention on the emphasis by the Hon'ble Prime Minister in the 
Chief Ministers' Conference held on May 28, 2007 on ensuring open 
access to consumers. It was resolved in the conference that the State 
Government commit themselves to operationalising 'Open Access' in 
the transmission and distribution sectors and issue policy directives to 
Regulators, if necessary. In the Round Table Conference with the Forum 
of Regulators and State Power Secretaries held in November, 2007 it 
was agreed that State Electricity Regulatory Commissions will notify 
open access charges and SLDCs would be made independent. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
38 


Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
The Committee are concerned to note that some States are reported 
to be forcing their regulators to bring directions to use power within 
the State and also there has been a tendency of some States to impose 
excessive wheeling charges for the export of power which makes it 
unremunerative for generating companies to sell their power outside 
the State. While appreciating the Govemment's action 'to direct the 
Forum of Regulators to bring out a website which will post all the 
rates which have to be paid and charges which would be levied for 
utilising open access as well as the distribution companies who intend 
to purchase power through open access, the Committee urge the 
Government to take immediate steps to ensure that all the Regulatory 
Commissions to follow a uniform policy regarding. open access and 
levying of wheeling charges therefore to usher in effective 
operationalisation of open access in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Power vide D.O. letter of 20th October, 200B from 
Secretary (Power) has requested the Chief Secretaries of all State 
Governments that SERCs determine open access surcharge, wheeling 
charge and stand by charge of electricity according to the provisions 
of the Tariff Policy latest by February, 2009. 
Action taken by some of the SERCs are as follows: 
S1. Name of 
No. the SERC 
Action Taken 
1 2 3 
1. Bihar Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
Order determining the transmission 
charges, wheeling charges and cross 
subsidy charges etc. payable by open 
access customers to utility has been 
issued by the Commission. 
DERC has issued orders for Intra-State 
Open Access on 19.B.200B and also 
prescribed the surcharge, vide order 
dated 29.B.200B. The wheeling and 
Transmission Charges were included in 
the respective MYT orders. 
2. Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
39 


1 2 
3. Cujarat Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
4. Himachal Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
5. Jharkhand Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
6. Kamataka Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
7. Kerala State Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
8. Madhya Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory 
Commission 
9. Maharashtra Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
10. Orissa Electricity 
Regulatory Commission 
The Commission has fixed wheeling 
charges rationally. According to the 
Commission Transmission charges are 
also very low and 4% wheeling 
charges also fixed for wheeling or 
generation from renewable energy 
sources. 
The Commission has 
regulations for determining 
charges etc. 
The wheeling charges for use of inter­ 
State transmission system in [harkhand 
is fixed on the basis of the efficient 
cost of transmission which are 
6.5 paisa per kwh. 
iss ued 
wheeling 
The Commission has determined 
transmission charges and wheeling 
charges for long term and short term 
open access transactions: 
Regulations on open access issued by 
the Commission as early as in 2005. 
The MPERC has issued orders on 
wheeling charges and cross subsidy. 
According to the Commission the 
charges are reasonable and not 
deterrent to open access. 
The transmission charges and wheeling 
charges are revised yearly and are 
approved in the respective Tariff 
Orders of the Commission. 
The Open Access Regulations have 
been published by the Commission. 
Open Access charges which includes 
transmission charges and wheeling 
charges and cross subsidy charges are 
being notified by the Commission 
every year. 
40 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 


Recommendation (Serial No. 28) 
The Committee note that Section 86 (I) (e) of the Electricity Act, 
2003, provides that the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions shall 
promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from the renewable 
sources of energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with 
the grid and sale of electricity to any person and also specify, for 
purchase of electricity from such sources - a percentage of the total 
consumption of electricity in the area of a Distribution Licensee. The 
National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy also suggest preferential 
tariff and implementation of Section 86 (I) (e) with progressively 
increasing percentages for renewable power generation. Consequently 
some State Governments are making efforts to exploit the available 
renewable energy potential in their States - whether it is through the· 
wind, biomass, solar, small hydro projects and as a result of these 
efforts the States like Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Kamataka, Cujarat, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh have 3873.4 MW, 1755.9 MW, 1011.4 MW, 
1252.9 MW, 538.8 MW and 187.7 MW of installed capacity of electricity 
from renewable sources of energy. Steps are also stated to be taken by 
the State nodal agencies to further promote the development of energy 
from renewable energy sources. The Committee are however, 
constrained to note that a number of States have not as yet even 
specified the Renewable Power Purchase obligation percentages. The 
States who have specified the power purchase obligations, the figure 
varies from 2% to 10%. Although, the Committee acknowledge that 
State Comrnissions . should decide as to how and which renewable 
source of energy needs to be tapped or procured, the Committee 
observe that the non-implementation of provision of Section 86 (I) (e) 
of the Electricity Act, 2003, by some of the States would further hinder 
the exploitation and use of renewable energy in those States. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Central Government/CERC 
should take up the matter at appropriate levels and ensure that all the 
States lay down the obligations not only for the generation of electricity 
from renewable sources of energy but also for the purchase of such 
electricity by the Distribution Licensees. The Committee also expect 
the Forum of Regulators (FOR) to playa proactive role in promoting 
renewable energy and bringing about uniformity in the Renewable 
Energy Purchase Obligation provisions in all the States. 
Reply of the Government 
The Electricity Act, 2003, National Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy 
cast the responsibility of promoting renewable sources of energy on 
the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions. 
41 


According to the Forum of Regulators, the Forum in its report on 
"Policies on Renewables" has made several recommendations seeking 
to promote development of renewable sources of energy. Salient 
recommendations are as unden=- 
• Minimum level of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) at 
5% till 2010 on lines of National Action Plan on Climate 
Change; 
• A part of RPO may be reserved for RE resources in the 
region, such as solar PV and solar thermal, which are in 
the nascent stage of exploitation and technology involved 
has risks. 
• SERCs to provide for penalty for non-compliance of RPOs. 
• Facilitative framework for inter-State exchange of power. 
• CEA to provide for appropriate grid connectivity standards 
for renewables. 
• Concessional transmission charges by STU for sale of power 
within the State. 
• Preferential tariff based on the cost-plus approach for non­ 
firm RE-based projects during loan repayment period after 
which they should be asked to compete. 
• GBIs are preferable to capital subsidies for promotion of RE 
. technologies. 
• GBI will be necessary if renew ables, particularly solar is to 
be promoted on the scale envisaged in NAPCC. 
• GBls should be announced upfront, which could be factored 
in the tariff to be set by ERCs. 
• Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) at national level to 
promote RE sources. 
The FOR has informed that the present status of Renewable 
Purchase Obligation (RPO) in States is as follows: 
SINo. SERC Power Purchase obligation 
From Renewables (%) 
1 2 3 
1. APERC 
2. AERC 
For FY '08-09 = 5.0% 
5% as per draft notification 
42 


• 
1 2 3 
3. CSERC 5% from biomass, 
3% from small hydro plants, 
2% from solar energy, wind, bagasse based 
cogeneration etc. 
4. DERC 1%, 
5. GERC For FY 08 - 09 = 2% 
6. HERC 10% 
7. HPERC 20% from SHPP 
8. KERC BESCOM, ESCOM & CESC.. 10% 
HESCOM, & GESCOM and Hkeri Society 7.00% 
9. KSERC Up to 5% 
10. MPERC 10% 
11. MERC. 4% 
12. OERC 4% 
13. PSERC 1% 
14. RERC Renewable Energy purchase obligation: 
Year Wind Bio-Mass 
2006-07 2% 5%' 
2007-08 4% 6% 
2008-09 5% 7% 
2009-10 6% 7.5% 
2010-11 6.75% 8% 
2011-12 7.5% 8.5% 
15. TNERC 10% 
16. UERC 2009-10 of 8% 
17. UPERC 7.5% 
18. WBERC Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
WBSEDCL 4.8 6.8 8.3 10 
CESC Ltd. 4.0 6.0 8.0 10 
DPL 2.5 4.0 7.0 10 
DPSCLtd. 2.0 . 4.0 7.0 10 
DVC 2.0 4.0 7.0 10 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
43 


CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
The Committee note that functions of the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (CERC), an independent statutory body with 
quasi-judicial powers, are mainly to regulate the tariff of generating 
companies; regulate inter-State transmission of electricity; determine 
tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity; issue licenses to persons 
to function as transmission licensees, adjudicate upon disputes involving 
generating companies or transmission licensees; specify grid code 
having regard to grid standards; specify and enforce the standards 
with respect to quality, continuity and reliability of services by licensees 
and also fix trading margin in the inter-State trading of electricity. 
Section 61 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that the SERCs shall be 
guided by the principles and methodologies specified by the CERC 
for determination of tariff applicable to generating companies and 
transmission licensees. Also under the provisions of Section 107 of the 
Act, the Central Government has powers to give directions to the 
CERC in matters of policy involving public interest. The Committee, 
however, are surprised to find that no such direction has ever been 
given by the Central Government to the CERC (since coming in to 
force of the Electricity Act, 2003). This proves that the Central 
Government has acted with complete indifference or lack of any interest 
in the matter. The Committee would like Central Government to fulfill 
their responsibility in protecting the interests of consumers by ensuring 
frequent and meaningful interaction between the Central Government 
and CERe. The Committee expect the Govenunent to issue necessary 
direction on policy related matters concerning consumers at the earliest. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
During briefing on the subject 'Role of CERC and SERCs in 
Protection of Interests of Consumers' it had been submitted to the 
Standing Committee on Energy that the Central Government has not 
given any direction to the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
44 


(CERC) under the provisions in Section 107 of the Electricity Act, 2003, 
as the occasion has not arisen so far. 
Moreover, after notifying the National Electricity Plan, National 
Electricity Policy and Tariff Policy, sufficient guidance has been given 
to the CERC and hence, the need has not yet arisen. 
As far as the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions are 
concerned it is for the respective State Governments to issue directions 
to the concerned SERCs as per the provisions in Section 108 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 which reads, "(1) In the discharge of its functions, 
the State Commission shall be guided by such directions in matters of 
policy involving public interest as the State Government may give to 
it in writing. (2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction 
relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, the decision of 
the State Government thereon shall be final." 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
The Committee also note that after exhausting the channel of CGRF 
and Ombudsman, the affected consumer has no place to go for appeal 
except for having an option to go through the normal legal process as 
the Regulatory Commissions are not empowered to hear any appeal. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that some sort of mechanism needs 
to be worked out by the Government in this regard so that the 
electricity consumers may be spared from the cumbersome legal 
processes in seeking the redresssal of their grievances. 
Reply of the Government 
The Electricity Act, 2003 gives precedence inter-alia to Consumer 
Protection Act. The consumer therefore has the right to approach 
consumer Courts apart from the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum 
(CGRF) and Ombudsman. 
It is felt that further multiplicity of levels of redressal may result 
in litigations and harassment of consumers. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
45 


CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
. THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
The Delhi Electricity Supply Code and Performance Standards 
Regulations, 2007 envisage payment of compensation by the 
Distribution companies to consumers in the event of default in 
observance of the notified Standards of Performance. The Commission 
has directed all the Distribution companies to pay compensation to 
the affected consumers without there being a need for such consumers 
to apply for the same. The Committee would like to know details of 
the cases disposed off where compensation have been paid by the 
Distribution companies to the affected consumers. At the same time, 
the Committee would like the Government/CERC to ensure that the 
other State Regulatory Commissions also follow suit in the matter to 
protect and safeguard the interests of the consumers. 
Reply of the Government 
The Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission has been maintaining 
that compensation to the affected consumers, in the event of default 
on the part of utility to observe the guaranteed Standards of 
Performance (SoP) needs to be paid without there being any necessity 
for such consumers to claim the compensation amount in writing from 
DISCOM. However, the DISCOMs contend that compensation needs 
to be claimed by the affected consumers and the fact mentioned in 
such consumer claims need to be verified before compensation can be 
paid .. In some cases, compensation has been paid by the DISCOMs 
13SES Rajdhani Power Ltd. and BSES Yamuna Power Ltd. upon 
receiving the claims for such compensation from the affected consumers. 
As per Forum of Regulators, the number of cases where 
compensation has been paid by the licensee to the affected consumers 
is at Annexure-d. 
Further, the FoR in its report on "Protection ·of Consumer Interests" 
agreed that the provision in the rule issued by Government of India 
46 


stipulating inter-alia requirement of submission of a report by the 
ombudsman should be institutionalized by all SERCs. The relevant 
extract of the Rule is quoted as follows: "(a) The ombudsman shall 
prepare a report on a six monthly basis giving details of the nature of 
the grievances of the consumer dealt by the ombudsman, the response 
of the licensees in the redressal of the grievances and the opinion of 
the ombudsman on the licensee's compliance of the standards of 
performance as specified by the Commission under section 57 of the 
Act during the preceding six months; (b) The report under sub-clause 
(a) above shall be forwarded to the State Commission and the State 
Government within 45 days after the end of the relevant period of six 
months." 
The FOR has recommended that the disposal of grievances should 
be monitored up to the point of compliance of the order of CGRF or 
ombudsman and not just the passing of order by these bodies. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
47 


CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
As regards the transparency in the exercise of powers and 
functioning of the CERe, the Committee have been given to understand 
that the CERC floats discussion paper among stakeholders, calls for 
comments and then holds public hearings before preparing the draft 
regulation. The draft regulation is also stated to be put on the website 
of the Commission for eliciting the comments/response of the 
stakeholders and pursue at large with a view to eventually notifying 
the regulation. The Committee desire that suitable steps should also 
be taken to create public awareness regarding the role of the Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions so that large number of peoples' groups/ 
organizations and public can take active part in the formulation of 
requisite consumer friendly policies. 
Reply of the Government 
It is one of the functions of the Forum to evolve measures for 
protection of interest of consumers and promotion of efficiency, 
economy and competition in power sector. 
The Forum of Regulators (FOR) in its report on 'Protection of 
Consumer Interests' has recommended a model consumer charter 
stipulating the rights and obligations of consumers. 
The Forum has also recommended that: 
(i) NGOs should be involved for consumer education and 
empowerment. 
(ii) Leaflets highlighting the consumers' rights under the 
standards of performance regulations should be distributed 
for dissemination of information amongst the consumers. 
(iii) This would be best achieved by printing the "consumers 
rights" on the back of the electricity bill. This would ensure 
wider access of message and improve awareness amongst 
the consumers. 
48 


(iv) Knowledgeable retired personnel could be appointed by 
SERCs as consumer advocates for participating in (a) tariff 
hearing to represent interests of domestic, agricultural and 
small scale industry Small Scale Industries Low Tension 
(SSI-LT) category consumers, (b) hearing for load shedding 
protocols, and (c) hearing for framing standards of 
performance. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
The Committee observes that as per Electricity Act, 2003, the 
Appropriate Commission may, with the approval of the Appropriate 
Government, specify the numbers, nature and categories of other 
officers and employees. However, the salaries and allowances payable 
and other service cond i tions of the Secretary, officers and other 
employees are to be such as specified with the approval of the 
Appropriate Government. In this connection, the Indian Institute of 
Public Administration (IIPA) has conducted a study on the impact of 
reorganization of State Electricity Boards (SEBs), wherein they have 
recommended that the Commission should have full autonomy in 
matters relating to staffing pattern, organization structure and adequate 
powers to recruit staff as required with an overall ceiling on 
expenditure. Concurring with these views, the Committee recommend 
that more and more autonomy need to be given to the CERC and 
SERCs in the recruitment process for which Government ought to take 
necessary steps. 
Reply of the Government 
The Recommendations of the IIPA were referred to the Forum of 
Regulators (FoR), who constituted a Working Group to examine the 
recommendations. The recommendations of the Working Group had 
been accepted by the FoR and forwarded to the Ministry. The Central 
Government has sought the views of the Central Electricity Authority 
and the State Governments in the matter. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
49 


Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
The Committee note with satisfaction that most of the State 
Governments are making efforts to reduce the cross subsidy and hope 
that the Sallie would be kept within limits, benefiting only the most 
deserving sections of the society i.e. agriculturists/BPL households, etc. 
At the same time, the Committee desire that it would be useful if 
important details like the cost of electricity to the Government, subsidy 
given to consumers thereon, etc. are clearly mentioned in the bills 
issued to the consumers to educate and make them aware of the money 
being spent by the Govemment - for making available to them the 
electricity at d particular rate as is being done in certain States like 
Rajasthan, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
11,e Ministry sought this information from the State Governments. 
According to Government of Haryana. the existing software of the 
DISCOMs does not support incorporation of details of subsidies in the 
consumer bill. However, they have noted the recommendations of the 
Committee and would upgrade the software. 
In Madhya Pradesh the quantum of subsidy provided by the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh to agriculture and other category of 
consumers are already being mentioned in the monthly energy bills. 
The Chhattisgarh Government has said that giving such details to 
consumers in his bill will lmnecessary increase the size of the bill and 
administration cost. 
A few State Governments like Orissa are not extending any subsidy 
to any class of consumers. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee have been given to understand that the Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions are to facilitate capacity building of consumer 
groups. Section 94 (3) of the Act provides that the appropriate 
Commission may authorize any person as it deems fit to represent the 
interests of the consumers in the proceedings before it. It is pertinent 
to note in this regard that a unique feature was introduced by 
Kamataka Electricity Regulatory Commission by constituting the Office 
50 


of Consumer Advocacy (OCA) in the year 2001 under the similar 
provision of Karnataka Electricity Reforms Act, 1999. Further, the OCA 
has been facilitating redressal of consumer grievances and up to 
31st March 2007, the OCA received 1043 complaints out of which 
891 were resolved to the satisfaction of the consumers and the action 
was being taken to dispose off the remaining 152 complaints. Similarly, 
in Maharashtra, MERC has formulated its Consumer Grievance 
Redressal Forums and Electricity Ombudsman Regulations, 2006, which 
provides guidelines to the Licensees in the matter. As per the guidelines, 
separate machinery has been set up by MERC for the redressal of 
grievances. All the five Distribution Licensees in the State have 
established Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums in each Distribution 
Zone falling within their area of electricity supply. The Committee 
further observe that Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Ltd. (MSEDCL) has established twelve CGRF at each Zone, i.e., 
Amravati, Nagpur (Urban), Nagpur (Rural), Aurangabad, Nashik, Pune, 
Beed, Latur, Kolhapur, Kalyan, Konkan and Bhandup. While 
appreciating that distribution companies in Maharashtra have 
established CGRF in each Zone, the Committee recommend that the 
Government/CERC should pursue all SERCs to ensure that CG~/ 
Ombudsman are set up in each distribution zone at convenient and 
easily accessible locations/places in each State to make them 
approachable by the common consumers. As regards disposal of cases 
by the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums, the Committee note 
that in Madhya Pradesh, the State Government has introduced the 
facility of on-line-registration of complaints and fifty-eight per cent of 
the cases have been reported to be gone in favour of the consumers. 
Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC) held 
workshops with 125 NGOs that have been registered with it who in 
turn educate the consumers in the State. As satisfactory work is being 
done by Electricity Commission in the aforesaid States, the Committee 
feel that all such reform processes should also be put in place in other 
States also so that there is greater involvement of consumer groups in 
the policy decisions having a bearing on the interests of the consumers 
and redressal of their grievances. For this, the CERC/FOR need to 
take proactive role in consultation and coordination with Electricity 
Commissions of those States. 
Reply of the Government 
The Forum of Regulators (FOR) has informed that in its report on 
'Protection of Consumer Interest' it has recommended inter alia that 
'CGRF should be located at a place which is easily accessible by the 
consumer'. 
51 


FOR has also recommended a model consumer charter stipulating the 
rights and obligations of consumers. Other relevant recommendations 
include: 
• NGOs should be involved for consumer education and 
empowerment. 
• Leaflets highlighting the consumers' rights under the 
standards of performance regulations should be distributed 
for dissemination of information amongst the consumers. 
• 111is would be best achieved by printing the "consumers 
rights" on the back of the electricity bill. This would ensure 
wider access of message and improve awareness amongst 
the consumers. 
• Knowledgeable retired personnel could be appointed by 
SERCs as consumer advocates for participating in: (a) tariff 
hearing to represent interests of domestic, agricultural. and 
Small Scale Iindustries Low Tension (SSI-LT) category 
consumers; (b) hearing for load shedding protocols; and 
(c) hearing for framing standards of performance. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
The Committee find that Section 173 of the Electricity Act, 2003 
provides that nothing contained in this Act or any rule or regulation 
made thereunder or any instrument having effect by virtue of this 
Act, rule or regulation shall have effect in so far as it is inconsistent 
with any other provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 or the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 or the Railways Act, 1989. The said Act thus 
does not interfere with the rights of the consumers within the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Any consumer of electricity is, therefore, 
at liberty to approach any of the Consumer Courts for a legal redressal 
of his/her grievance. The Electricity Act, 2003, however, provides a 
more expeditious mode of consumer redressal whereunder it has been 
made obligatory on the distribution company - a licensee to establish 
forum which shall be addressing consumer grievances. Not satisfied 
with the decision of this forum, the consumer can appeal to 
Ombudsman appointed for the purpose. Taking note of the fact that 
the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums (CGRFs) have been set up 
and Ombudsmen have been appointed in almost all the States, the 
Committee are of the view that the CERC/SERCs should ensure that 
these bodies function independently out of any Governmental control(s), 
whatsoever. 
52 


Reply of the Government 
The Electricity Act, 2003 provides that every distribution licensee 
shall, within six months from the appointed date of grant of licence, 
whichever is earlier, establish a forum for redressal of grievances of 
the consumers in accordance with the guidelines as may be specified 
by the State Commission. 
Almost all State Electricity Regulatory Commission have notified 
guidelines for establishing of Consumer Grievance Redressal Forums 
by the licensees in the States. 
According to Forum of Regulators (FOR) on the issue of functioning 
of CGRF and ombudsman the FOR has made the following 
recommendations in regard to the independence of these institutions:- 
• The qualification and experience required for the 
appointment of a chairperson of the Forum should be 
specified in such a manner as to ensure that the person is 
not serving as a regular employee of the licensee. 
• It is necessary to ensure that the consumer who has a 
grievance should have the right to approach the CGRF 
directly without any precondition of approaching a particular 
staff or other committee set up by the licensee. Though the 
consumer should have a right to directly approach the 
CGRF, periodic meetings and interactions by the local utility 
staff with the consumers may also be encouraged as these 
have proved useful in resolving petty and routine issues. 
• All SERCs should make provisions in their regulations 
clearly stipulating that non-compliance of the orders of 
CGRF would be treated as contravention of the regulations 
of SERC making the licensee liable for action under section 
142 of the Act. 
• Each SERC, while specifying the regulation under section 
42(5) and (6), should provide a time limit (say 45 days or 
60 days) for disposal of grievances by the CGRF. In the 
event of the CGRF not disposing off the grievances within 
the stipulated time period, the consumer should have the 
right to approach the ombudsman for settlement of non­ 
redressal of his grievance by the CGRF. In addition, the 
provisions of section 142 of the Act may also be invoked 
for non-compliance of the regulations of the State 
Commission. 
53 


• Institution of the ombudsman should be created on a full­ 
time basis so that proper attention is given to the resolution 
of the grievances of consumers. It is, therefore, suggested 
that the practice of designating an officer of SERC as 
ombudsman should be discontinued. 
• Expenses of the office of the ombudsman should not be 
met by the distribution licensee, as it might raise a question 
on the independence of the ombudsman. The office of the 
Ombudsman should be funded by SERCs and a separate 
budgetary allocation could be made in the budget of SERC 
for this purpose. The SERC may recover such expenses from 
the licensees directly. 
• The institution of the ombudsman should be created on a 
full-time basis so that proper attention is given to the 
resolution of the grievances of consumers. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
The Committee are surprised to note that only after the Committee 
chose to take up for detailed examination the subject 'Role of CERC 
and SERes in Protection of Interests of Consumers', the Ministry 
decided examine issues related thereto. A study on the consumer 
redressal mechanisms was entrusted to Indian Institute of Public 
Administration and Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) for 
conducting the study and give a report within a period of three months. 
TIle Committee have been informed that ASCI has submitted the draft 
report which is being examined by the Ministry. TIle Committee would 
like to be apprised of the details of this study Report and the precise 
action taken by the Govemment thereon 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) was assigned 
a study on impact of reorganisation of State Electricity Boards, vide 
Ministry's letter dated December 29, 2005. 
The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) was assigned to 
undertake a study to assess the functioning of Consumers Grievances 
Redressal Mechanism in the States of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Delhi, West Bengal, Orissa, [harkhand, Assam, Tripura and Meghalaya 
vide Ministry's letter dated February 13, 2008. 
54 


The ASCI has since completed the study and covered almost all 
the terms of reference in their study and submitted its draft reports in 
three volumes, inter-alia, containing its recommendations/comments. 
The Ministry sought clarifications on the recommendations on two 
of the terms of reference. The ASCI has since furnished the 
clarifications. ASCI's Reports are now being examined in the Ministry. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
The Committee observe that the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 
has been capturing 'Outrage duration' and 'Number of Outrages' of 
11 KV feeders in respect of State capitals, district headquarters and 
towns with population of more than 8 lakhs. Subsequently, the CEA 
has now covered the towns with a population of more than 1 lakh. 
Since, National Electricity Policy also requires that the data of Reliability 
Index of supply of power to consumer should be completed and 
published by the CEA, the Committee desire that speedy action needs 
to be taken up in the matter so that relevant data collected by the 
Distribution Companies/State agencies could be compiled by the CEA. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Central Electricity Authority is collecting information in respect of 
number and duration of outages of power supply to consumer and 
reliability index besides the outages of 11 KV feeders in respect of 
State Capital and major towns with population more than eight lakhs 
as well as other towns having population of more than one lakh on 
monthly basis. So far only data in respect of Delhi, Cujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Karnataka and Maharashtra have been 
received. Since consumer indexing based on geographical information 
system has not so far been completed in most of the towns. The data 
in respect of other towns could not be made available by the 
Distribution Utilities. So far data in respect of 70 towns at 11 KV 
feeder level and 56 towns at consumer level are being received. It is 
expected that data from more number of towns will be received after 
implementation of schemes sanctioned under Restructured Accelerated 
Power Development and Reforms Programme by the Govenunent. 
55 


A copy of the information in' respect of llkV feeder and consumer 
for the month of April 2009 is placed at Annexure-6. This data is 
captured directly from the Distribution Utilities and compiled on 
monthly basis and is made available in the CEA website for wider 
access. Central Electricity Authority has also been directed to take' 
action as desired by the Committee. 
In addition, section 59(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 provides that 
the Appropriate Commission shall at least once in every year arrange 
for publication, in such form and manner as it considers appropriate, 
of such of the information furnished to it by licensee (s), in respect of 
the Standards of Performance specified by the Commission. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
The Committee note that the Forum of Regulators (FOR) which 
was constituted as per Section 166(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003, consists 
of the Chairperson of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) and Chairperson of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
(SERCs). The Forum is envisaged with functions like analysis of the 
tariff orders and other orders of the Central Commission and the State 
Commissions, harmonization of regulation in power sector, laying of 
Standards of Performance of licensees as required under the Act, 
sharing of information among members of the Forum on issues of 
common approach, evolving measures for the protection of consumers 
and promotion of efficiency, economy, competition and also undertaking 
research work-in-house or through outsourcing on the issues relevant 
to power sector regulation. The Committee observe that one of the 
main functions assigned to the Forum of Regulators is to strive for the 
harmonization of regulation in power sector. The Committee are, 
however, constrained to find that so far the FOR has held only six 
meetings since its inception (February, 2005) where certain important 
issues like strengthening the consumer advocacy system, Return on 
Equity (ROE) for distribution, operationalisation of open access in 
distribution, harnessing of surplus captive generation and Depreciation 
Rates for distribution were discussed and consensus on them was 
evolved. The Committee recommend that it would be only - and in 
line with the mandate of the Forum of Regulators under the Act, if 
the FOR holds its meetings more frequently and analyse the important 
issues/ challenges facing the power sector like tariff orders of State 
Commissions, especially those which have been challenged by the 
respective State Governments/Distribution companies. At the same time, 
56 


the Committee would also like the. FOR to evolve consensus and 
common approach on other important issues of common interest like 
fixing of Power Purchase Obligations from the renewable energy 
sources, implementation of power sector reform programmes, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
FOR was constituted in February, 2005. During the period from 
February, 2005 to Ma rch, 2007 six meetings were held: During the 
period from March, 2007 to June, 2008 no meeting was held because 
the post of Chairperson, FOR was vacant. From June 2008 till date six 
meetings of FOR have been held. FOR deliberates issues of importance 
facing the power sector and evolves consensus. For detailed analysis 
on the critical issues, FOR constituted Working Groups on "Protection 
of Consumer's Interest", "Open Access: Theory and Practice", "Loss 
Reduction Strategies", "Policies on Renewables", "Demand Side 
Management and Energy Efficiency", "Multi Year Tariff Framework 
and Distribution Margin", "Staffing of Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions", and "Metering Issues". Based on the inputs of the 
Working Groups, FOR has finalized reports on these issues (except on 
metering which is likely to be finalized shortly). 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
The Committee have been informed that the Forum of Regulators 
has appointed the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad as 
consultant for conducting a study on Electricity Reforms and 
Regulations - a Critical Review of last 10 years experience with the 
main objectives (a) To review the role of various authorities involved 
in the process of reforms in the electricity sector in India, more 
importantly, the role played by the Government (Central as well as • 
State), Government agencies, the Regulatory Commission, Appellate 
Authorities and (b) To assess the roles envisaged for various 
stakeholders including the Government (Central as well as State), 
Government agencies, Regulatory Commissions, Appellate Authorities 
and the constraints and gaps on achievements of the objectives set, 
and the way forward etc. According to the Ministry, draft Report in 
this regard is expected shortly. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the main findings of this study and the remedial action 
taken by the Government thereon. 
Reply of the Government 
The Forum of Regulators (FOR) has informed that the Indian 
Institute of Management (lIM), Ahmedabad, has submitted its final 
report on "Electricity Reforms and Regulations - a Critical Review of 
last 10 years experience" which was discussed and approved in 
12th Meeting of FOR. Key findings and issues captured in the study 
57 


are enclosed at Annexure-7. The Forum has informed that it is in the 
process of finalizing the action to be taken. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
The Committee note that the CERC has issued guidelines in 
February 2007 for the setting up of power exchanges in the country. 
The rules, byelaws and procedures for operation of a power exchange 
are approved by the CERC and the promoters of the exchange(s) have 
the freedom to develop, manage and operate the power exchange 
within the ambit of such approved rules, byelaws and procedures. 
Further, the Ministry have also specified that power exchange is a 
voluntary platform and no existing power purchase agreements or 
bilateral agreements are disturbed as a result of the setting up of a 
power exchange. The Committee find that the CERC has given 
permission to M/s. India Energy Exchange Ltd. and the first power 
exchange has started operation on 9th [une, 2008. Further, the CERC 
has also given permission to Power Exchange India Ltd. to set up the 
power exchange. The application of M/s. NTPC Ltd. seeking permission 
to set up and operate a power exchange (with other stakeholders viz. 
M/s. NHPC and NCDEX) is, however, reported to be pending with 
the CERe. According to the Government, power exchange should be 
an option available to the utilities apart from other ways in which 
they can buy and sell power. Although, the Committee feel that the 
very purpoc;e of the setting up of power exchanges should have been 
to bring down the CO!;t of electricity, the Committee are concerned to 
take note of a candid submission made by a representative of CERC 
'it will give another option to both the buyers and the sellers. Thus, 
if the buyers are more and sellers are less, then prices will go up and 
if there are more sellers and less number of buyers, then prices will 
come down.' The Committee apprehend that in the present scenario 
of power shortage in the country, where the number of buyers are 
always going to be more than the number of sellers, the power 
exchanges programme may end-up in the increase in the rates of 
electricity and may not benefit the consumers as envisaged originally. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government/CERC to 
formulate guidelines whereby a higher limit of trading margin upto 
which the sellers should be allowed to benefit, is fixed. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Fixing trading margin for inter state and intra state trading of 
electricity is the function of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission/ 
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions. The matter of trading margin 
is sub-judice before the Honble Supreme Court in the matter of 
PTC Vs. CERe, 3902 of 2006. 
58 


According to the CERC, it had published a Staff Paper on \ 
"measures for restraining the prices of electricity in short term sale I 
trading". The Commission after considering the relevant aspects 
involved in the matter and views of the stakeholders, issued order in 
December, 2008. The Commission ruled inter alia that the purpose of 
imposition of price cape would not be met without addressing the 
other crucial aspects such as review of unscheduled interchange (UI) 
mechanism and absence of mechanism to regulate price on sale of free 
power by the State Govemment. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29) 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have informed the 
Committee during evidence that it is working on a different proposition 
whereby those States who do not have the potential renewable sources, 
can purchase from other States and that too not exactly through 
transmission lines, but by the issue of certificates which would be 
called 'renewable certificates' or 'green certificates'. According to the 
Ministry, these certificates can be obtained by the power generators. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy have reportedly engaged 
some consultants to work out the modalities for the same. The 
Committee would like to know the outcome of the study carried out 
by the consultants as well as the action taken by the Government 
thereon in due course. The Committee also recommend the Govemment 
to ensure that the 'green certificates' be strictly issued only in those 
States which do not have enough renewable sources of energy. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has informed that they 
had engaged Consultant Mis. ABPS Infrastructure Advisory Pvt. Ltd. 
for development of Renewable Energy Certificate mechanism for India. 
The Consultant is yet to submit their final report although the 
modalities of the proposed design have been discussed. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. 47/5/2009-R&R Dated 18.8.2009] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
18 Phalgunn, 1931 (Stika) 
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, 
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on Energy. 
NEW DEI.lII; 
09 March, 2010 
59 


ANNEXURE I 
STATUS OF CHAIRPERSON AND MEMBERS OF ERCs 
(AS ON 27.04.2009 ) 
SI. Name 01 Name Designation Date 01 Date 01 
No. ERC Appointment Retirement 
2 3 4 5 6 
01. Sh. A. Raghotham Rao Chairperson 16.07.2008 24.04.2013 
02. APERC Sh. R. Radha Kishen Member 16.06.2006 15.06.2011 
03. Sh. c.R. Sekhar Reddy Member 14.08.2008 13.08.2013 
04. Sh. [ayanta Barkakati Chairperson 06.06.2008 05.06.2013 
05. AERC Sh. Himdari Dutta Member 
06. Sh. J.P. Saikia Member 
07. Sh. Berjinder Singh Chairperson 16.02.2006 25.09.2010 
08. DERC Sh. K. Venugopal Member 19.01.2005 19.01.2010 
09. Sh. Shyam Wadhera Member 
10. Dr. P.K. Mishra Chairperson 02.09.2008 01.09.2013 
11. CERC Sh. Man Mohan Member 11.05.2004 10.05.2009 
12. Member VACANT 
13. Sh. Bhaskar Chatterjee Chairperson 28.08.2006 27.08.2011 
14. Haryana ERC Sh. Tej Singh Tewatia Member 25.02.2005 24.02.2010 
15. Sh. Rohtash Dahiya Member 
16. HPERC Sh. Yogesh Khanna Chairperson 31.01.2006 30.01.2011 
17. Sh. Mukhtiyar Singh Chairperson 16.07.2008 31.12.2012 
18. jharkand ERC Sh. rc Verma Member 30.09.2004 29.09.2009 
19. Member VACANT 
20. Sh. K.P. Pandey Chairperson 15.12.2004 14.12.2009 
21. Karnataka ERC Sh. Vishwanath Hiremath Member 
22. Sh. K. Srinivasa Rao Member 
60 


2 3 4 5 6 
23. Sh. C. Balakrishnan Chairperson 05.09.2005 10.06.2009 
24. Kerala ERC Sh. C. Abdullah Member 05.09.2005 04.09.2010 
25. Sh. Ayyappan Member 15.12.2005 14.12.2010 
26. Dr. J.L. Bose Chairperson 15.02.2007 12.01.2010 
- 27. MPERC Sh. K.K. Garg Member 21.01.2008 11.12.2011 
28. Sh. C.S. Sharma . Member 09.07.2008 08.07.2013 
29. Sh. V.P. Raja Chairperson 18.12.2008 17.12.2013 
30. MERC Sh. A. Velayutham Member 18.08.2004 17.08.2009 
31. Sh. S.B. Kulkarni Member 13.09.2005 12.09.2010 
32. Sh. B.K. Das Chairperson 20.11.2006 23.09.2011 
33. OERC Sh. K.c. Badu Member 04.04.2007 03.04.2012 
34. Sh. B.K. Misra Member 
35. Sh. Jai Singh Gill Chairperson 10.02.2006 19.01.2011 
36. Punjab ERC Ms. Baljit Bains Member 07.01.2005 06.01.2010 
37. Sh. Satpal Singh Pall Member 10.02.2006 09.02.2011 
38. Sh. D.C. Samant Chairperson 27.02.2009 26.02.2014 
39. RERC Sh. K.L. Vyas Member 01.06.2005 01.06.2010 
40. Sh. S.K. Mittal Member 05.09.2008 05.09.2013 
41. Sh. S. Kabilan Chairperson 03.01.2007 02.01.2012 
42. TNERC Sh. R. Rajupandi Member 
43. Sh. B. Jeyaraman Member 30.06.2004 29.06.2009 
44. Sh. Rajesh Awasthi Chairperson 29.12.2008 28.12.2013 
45. UPERC Sh. P.N. Pathak Member 15.06.2004 14.06.2009 
46. Sh. R.D. Gupta Member 02.07.2004 01.07.2009 
47. Sh. V.J. Talwar Chairperson 03.08.2007 02.08.2012 
48. Uttarakhand ERC Sh. Anand Kumar Member 18.03.2008 17.03.2013 
49. Member VACANT 
61 


2 3 4 j 6 
50. Sh. Prasad Ranjan Ray Chairperson 01.10.2008 12.09.2013 
51. WBERC Sh. R.P. Samaddar Member 01.01.2006 31.12.2010 
52. Sh. Prititosh Ray Member 04.11.2001 03.11.2009 
53. Chhattisgarh SERC Sh. S.K. Misra Chairperson 01.07.2004 30.06.2009 
54. Sh. B.K. Sharma Member 24.03.2008 03.01.2012 
55. Tripura ERC Sh. Manoranjan Karmakar Chairperson 12.01.2009 11.01.2014 
56. J&K SERC Sh.K. B. Pillai Cha i rperson 23.06.2004 21.05.2009 
57. Bihar ERC Sh. B.K. Halder Chairperson 10.04.2008 14.12.2010 
58. Sh. S.K. Jayaswal Member 26.07.2005 25.07.2010 
59. MSERC Chairperson VACANT 
60. JERC for Manipur Sh. Hemarn Bihari Singh Member 24.01.2003 23.01.2013 
& Mizoram from Manipur 
61. Sh. Rin Sanga Member from 24.01.2008 31.07.1009 
Mizoram 
62. JERC for UTs Dr. vx Garg Chairperson 22.10.2008 03.07.2013 
except Delhi 
63. Sh. R.K. Sharma Member 
62 


ANNEXURE II 
AT&C LOSS(%) FOR SEBs, PDs & DISCOMS 
Region State 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Eastern Bihar 66.02 77.64 66.25 82.50 78.17 42.63 43.83 
Jharkhand 60.21 72.63 62.47 62.83 51.66 52.51 59.95 
Orissa 
CESCO 48.81 29.40 49.97 55.81 42.55 46.97 42.89 
NESCO 51.02 40.26 45.05 39.52 41.31 32.52 30.57 
SESCO 40.47 36.76 38.21 35.65 45.10 42.17 45.62 
WESCO 46.42 39.70 38.32 35.88 33.95 36.93 38.4 
Sikkim 81.33 80.12 66.67 38.44 44.77 40.72 39.2 
West Bengal 35.29 26.62 32.87 23.91 26.60 30.90 23.53 
Total 47.34 44.37 44.81 43.16 41.80 38.21 35.98 
North Eastern Arunachal 61.94 61.73 16.34 25.43 37.17 52.03 45.19 
Pradesh 
Assam 36.97 39.43 43.35 39.31 
CAEDCL 37.35 42.59 40.07 
LAEDCL 27.83 31.71 25.31 
UAEDCL 39.45 38.55 35.88 
Manipur 74.11 76.81 69.70 88.50 77.83 94.32 80.62 
Meghalaya 21.60 42.39 39.35 38.16 33.36 37.32 35.03 
Mizoram 76.10 49.63 38.70 24.62 17.17 44.97 19.31 
Nagaland 60.89 53.74 55.63 43.22 44.76 52.19 42.92 
Tripura 31.60 34.27 14.84 20.93 24.92 23.46 22.53 
Total 40.65 44.10 40.56 39.01 35.92 41.33 36.45 
63 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Northern Delhi 60.06 
BRPL 51.78 45.72 41.98 41.25 32.93 40.17 
BYPL 62.49 55.54 51.70 48.58 43.24 42.65 
NDPL 56.39 48.16 35.89 28.01 28.33 31.95 
Haryana 
DHBVNL 40.70 41.40 40.53 43.96 40.78 34.48 31.79 
UHBVNL 45.93 42.54 40.09 43.37 41.90 28.96 32.58 
H.P. 28.30 29.52 9.26 21.71 15.15 13.18 16.15 
J&K 68.22 68.22 68.79 68.33 66.69 67.56 73.43 
Punjab 27.66 26.45 25.52 24.00 25.84 24.87 21.18 
Rajasthan 
AVVNL 49.03 41.22 46.21 49.76 47.55 42.61 38.83 
JDVVNL 52.77 41.99 45.75 47.57 47.03 37.21 37.24 
JVVNL 59.32 39.99 41.68 43.22 42.26 38.06 34.49 
Uttar Pradesh 
UPPCL 46.92 31.78 
DVVN 51.46 58.02 55.59 50.21 44.03 
MVVN 39.48 38.72 47.20 45.12 33.33 
PaVVN 38.29 32.40 42.43' 31.51 31.29 
PoVVN 45.36 58.07 46.08 63.55 26.2 
KESCO 60.89 47.06 49.14 47.78 
Uttarakhand 37.59 . 43.48 45.62 38.20 42.86 40.63 
Total 46.01 37.85 40.14 41.54 40.44 37.18 33.61 
Southern Andhra Pradesh 
APCPDCL 28.90 30.19 18.99 23.96 18.82 18.24 14.9 
APEPDCL 14.48 17.62 16.57 14.27 12.67 12.46 8.74 
APNPDCL 26.50 27.09 9.80 21.91 19.20 26.61 10.92 
64 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
APSPDCl 24,47 27.44 17,06 20.55 16.51 17,20 7,29 
Karnataka 
KPTCL 40.50 
BESCOM 35,70 28,91 29,99 35,75 26,88 26.58 
GESCOM 43.53 43.86 42,99 52,74 46,98 40,69 
HESCOM 47,72 31.65 41.78 40.38 37,40 40,72 
MESCOM 35,68 25,82 27,03 20,83 12,09 21.45 
CHESCOM 46,03 40.58 40,82 
Kerala 31.83 36.19 32,73 32.12 25,95 25,02 22,9 
Pondicherry 38,94 41.67 20.53 16,46 16,05 16.55 17.21 
Tamil Nadu 19.26 20,02 20.64 19,41 20.53 20.10 18,98 
Total 27,63 28,05 22,71 24.18 23,93 22,69 19,85 
Western Chhattisgarh 39,02 37.48 30,99 32.12 37,84 36.12 34,62 
Goa 48.53 22,99 21.28 18.34 15.18 19,39 14.24 
Gujarat 23.28 31,24 35,48 35.15 
DGVCl 22.40 20.59 19.36 
MGVCl 24,61 20,08 23.07 
PGVCl 43,05 38,27 40.39 
UGVCl 27.57 20.15 23,6 
Madhya Pradesh 48,60 49,42 41.52 54,27 50.35 
MPMKVVCl 43,20 56,64 55.79 
MPPKVVCL 46,91 39,24 44.36 
MPPuKYVCL 47,90 52.14 47.18 
Maharashtra 46.34 44,25 38,95 27,98 50,22 
MSEDCL 36,74 39.35 35.19 
Total 39,60 40.45 37.55 35.19 38,29 37.37 35,93 
Grand Total 38,86 36,64 34,90 34,82 35.18 33,07 30.56 
Source: PFC 
Figures of 2007-08 are tentative. 
65 


ANNEXURE III 
STEPS TAKEN BY STATE COMMISSIONS ON TARIFF 
RATIONALIZATION 
SI.No. Name of State Comments 
1 2 3 
1. Assam • Overall increase in tariff was 3.66% over 
the approved ARR in 2004-05 (against 
claim to increase 26.16%); 
• Re-categorization of consumers has been 
done into two broad groups of HT & 
LT; 
• Introduction of lifeline tariff for those 
consumers who are in need of minimum 
quantum of electricity at a low price; 
• Abolition of un-metered category; 
• Reduction of cross subsidy from 
previous level of Rs. 80 crores to Rs. 60 
crores; 
• Rationalization of tariff for major groups 
whose productive activities contribute 
spin-off benefits to the economy of the 
State; 
• Special care in tariff design to avoid 
tariff shock to any group of consumers; 
• Sharing of benefits of loss reduction 
between consumers and licensee to 
encourage loss reduction. 
• First tariff order issued in September, 
2006 wherein attempt has been made 
to rationalize tariff to some extent. 
• After formation of SERC in July, 2004, 
three tariff orders have been issued; 
• In every tariff order steps have been 
made to reduce cross subsidy. 'By way 
of rationalization in tariff 29 categories 
HT consumers have been reduced to 17, 
number of LT consumers categories has 
been reduced from 24 to 12; 
2. Bihar 
3. Chhattisgarh 
66 


1 2 3 
6. Haryana 
• Cost of supply which was Rs. 3.45 per 
unit in the first tariff has been 
progressively brought down to Rs. 3.20 
(2006-07) and Rs. 2.98 (2007-08); 
• Average tariff has come down from 
Rs. 3.87 per unit to Rs. 3.47 per unit in 
Hi' category and from Rs. 2.49 per unit 
to Rs. 2.02 per unit in LT category; 
• Tariff rationalization measures taken by 
SERC include : 
Number of slabs in domestic category 
were reduced from 4 to 3; 
Slabs in domestic category have been 
introduced based on sanctioned load; 
Definition of sanctioned load 
ra tionalized. 
• Discoms are required to submit detailed 
monthly figure on their AT&C losses. 
• During initial period, the retail tariff of 
distribution licensees were rationalized 
by reducing number of tariff categories 
and by clubbing certain types of 
charges. However, subsequently these 
tariff categories were retained. 
• Distribution and retail tariff has not 
• been revised since FY 2001. 
4. Delhi 
5. Gujarat 
7. Himachal Pradesh • Cross subsidy has been reduced and 
slabs within a category have also been 
rationalized; 
• Introduction of two part KVAh based 
tariff for all consumers except domestic 
category having connected load above 
20 KW; . 
• Rationalisation of the Peak Load 
Exemption Charge (PLEC) and the Peak 
Load Violation Charge (PLVC); 
• Introduction of a night time concessional 
tariff for select consumer categories to 
flatten load curve; 
67 


1 2 3 
• Adoption of Cost to Serve Model; 
• Introduction of high voltage rebate and 
low voltage surcharge to encourage high 
voltage Distribution, a step towards­ 
reduction of T&D Loss. 
8. Jammu & Kashmir • Only one tariff order issued; 
• Power tariff for industries has been 
changed from KWh to KVAh unit of 
power supply; 
• Demand chart has been introduced for 
HT power supply. 
• Number of slabs in domestic category 
and HT category have been reduced; 
• In domestic there are only three 
categories, in commercial (urban and LT 
industries) there is only one category. 
9. Jharkhand 
10. Karnataka • Levels of cross subsidy have been 
reduced - for HT industries from 60% 
in 2000 to 25% in 2006, for LT industries 
from 48% in 2000 to 26% in 2006; 
• Separate tariff for urban and rural areas 
introduced. 
11. Kerala • Govt. of Kerala vide G.O.No. 34/06/ 
Power (A) Department issued u/s 108 
of the Electricity Act, 2003, has directed 
to reduce cross subsidy ratio. This has 
been questioned in the High Court by 
some stakeholders and is pending with 
the Court. 
12. Madhya Pradesh • Road map for ensuring that tariffs 
should be within plus & minus 20% of 
average cost of supply by 2010-11, has 
been notified in pursuance of Tariff 
Policy; 
• SERC has focused on tariff 
rationalization which includes aligning 
tariffs with the average cost of supply 
and improving cost average. 
• SERC has been steadily reducing the 
cross-subsidy over the years, by 
increasing tariffs for subsidizing 
categories in proportion to the cost of 
supply; 
13. Maharashtra 
68 


1 2 2 
14. Meghalaya 
• While designing the tariffs for each 
category, the Commission has 
considered the average cost of supply 
by including only the non-costly sources 
of power and has attempted to ensure 
that the cross-subsidy is reduced as 
regards base tariffs. 
• Only one tariff determination so far. Too 
early to determine trends towards 
rationalization. 
17. Rajasthan 
• Tariff rationalization efforts by SERC 
include - introduction of cost based 
tariff, relating energy charges at different 
voltage levels to reflect cost of supply; 
• While determining voltage charges, the 
principle of higher rates for supply at 
low voltage level and grad~lally reduced 
rate as per voltage levels cost, has been 
adopted .. 
• At the time of tariff revision the 
Commission ensures that the cross 
subsidy being provided by subsidizing 
categories does not increase and cross 
subsidization of subsidized categories 
gets reduced. 
• Tariff rationalization efforts include 
abolition of minimum charges for all 
categories consumers except agricultural; 
• Directions to the DISC OMS to file 
petition for tariff revision with the 
consideration that tariff of BPL supply 
shall be at-least 50% of the cost supply; 
• Cross subsidy within the different 
categories of consumers to be limited 
to + / - 25% of the cost supply by 
2010-11; 
• Provision of ToD tariff to be 
incorporated for consumers having 
contract demand of 1500KVA and above; 
15. Orissa 
16. Punjab 
69 


1 2 3 
18. Tamil Nadu 
19. Tripura 
20. Uttar Pradesh 
• Reduction in number of tariff schedules 
for different consumers categories etc.; 
• Power purchase cost adjustment has 
been passed through to the extent of 
50% only of the actual variation. 
• SERC has issued following 
rationalization in its tariff order of 
March, 2003 : 
• Concept of different tariff to metro and 
non-metro areas has been removed; 
• Number of slabs has been reduced from 
6 to 5 in domestic tariff; 
• Previous tariff has been merged with the 
present tariff by removing the lighting 
load restriction of tariff; 
• For LT consumers new category 
introduced; 
• Incentive to off-peak hour consumption 
introduced. 
• SERC has issued two tariff orders; 
• Progressive reduction of higher tariff for 
industry / commercial/bulk supply made; 
• Attempt of low tariff for domestic 
consumers. 
• Gap between average estimate rate 
approved by SERC and average cost of 
supply to consumers as a ratio of 
average cost of supply indicate 
consistent reduction in the levels of 
cross subsidy; 
• Standard deviation of revenue 
assessment rates of categories with 
respect to overall cost of supply has 
been accepted as proxy measure of 
prevailing cross subsidy in the tariff; 
• In applying the principle of assessment 
rates approved by the SERC for the past 
four years and for 2004-05, a consistent 
reduction in the levels of cross subsidy 
over the years is perceptible; 
70 


1 2 3 
21. Uttarakhand 
22. West Bengal 
• The tariff is rationalized by supplying 
improved efficiency standards for the 
generating stations by Regulations. 
• UERC rationalized the tariff structure, 
apart from reducing tariff; 
• Existing 31 sub-categorization in various 
categories brought down to 23 sub­ 
categories; 
• Separate category for the consumers, 
living in snow-bound areas for 
providing them concessional tariff; 
• Rebate for consumers using solar water 
heating system; 
• To simplify tariff structure, rrurumum 
charges and meter rent have been done 
awa- with. 
• Cross subsidy has been brought down 
within the range of + / -20%(except 
agricultural irrigation); 
• TOO tariff has been introduced. Already 
applicable to bulk consumers. TOO tariff 
has been optionally offered for 
agriculture consumer. Prepaid meters 
have been introduced as a pilot project, 
in 2007-08; 
• Unmetered· supply to agricultural 
consumers has been reduced 
significantly. Only metered supply is 
given to all new consumers; 
• Upto llKV, all supplies affected by 
WBSEOCL - one of the entities 
succeeding the WBSEB after the latter's 
unbundling - are now metered supply 
only; 
• All new connections have static meters. 
Electro magnetic meters are being 
replaced by static meters of approved 
quantity. 
71 


ANNEXURE IV 
NUMBER OF CASES WHERE COMPENSATION HAS BEEN PAID 
BY THE LICENSEE TO THE AFFECTED CONSUMERS 
Sl.No. Name of State Comments 
1 2 3 
1. Assam • Provisions for compensation are 
provided in the Regulations on 
Standards of Performance; 
• Till now no imposition of penalty has 
been made. 
2. Bihar 
3. Chhattisgarh 
• Procedure for payment of compensation, 
in case of non-compliance of standards 
of performance to the licensees, specified 
in Performance Standards Regulations; 
• So far no complaints have been received 
from the consumers in this regard. 
• Licensees are required to submit 
quarterly reports on number of cases for 
which compensation was payable under 
the Regulations and the amount of 
compensation paid/payable; 
• First report for the year ending 2007 
was published by the Commission 
inviting comments from the public; 
• Non response from the public so far and 
licensee has reported that no claim for 
compensation has been made. 
• Provision for penalty/compensation in 
case of violation of performance 
standards, specified by SERC; 
4. Delhi 
• Matter regarding automatic 
compensation to the consumers 
presently under consideration of the 
Commission/under discussion with 
DISCOMS; 
72 


1 2 3 
• Commission hears all cases of violation 
of Regulations u/s 142 of the Electricity 
Act, 2003; 
• 23 cases of penalty imposed on the 
Discoms ranging from Rs. 500/- to 
Rs. 100000/-; 
• In 8 cases compensation , ranging from 
Rs. 1000/- to Rs. 10000 has been 
awarded to the affected consumers. 
5. Gujarat • The Regulations notified by the SERC 
provide that the compensation to the 
affected consumers shall be paid by a 
licensee automatically following the 
decision by Redressal Forum/ 
Ombudsman in the next billing cycle. 
• No claims have been received by the 
SERC; 
6. Haryana 
7. Himachal Pradesh 
• The payment is 'automatic' in case of 
normal fuse-off, line- breakdown, 
distribution transformer failure, period 
of load shedding, voltage variation, 
meter complaint, new connection, billing 
problem etc. ; 
• Due to lack of infrastructure, there has 
been little success in implementing the 
relevant regulation. 
• No claim has been lodged with the 
Commission; 
• If the Licensee fails to meet the 
guaranteed SoP, compensation shall be 
paid by the Licensee. 
8. Jammu & Kashmir • No complaint or case has been received, 
on quality of power supplied or related 
matters. 
9. Jharkhand • In five cases compensation has been 
awarded; 
73 


1 2 3 
• Licensees have been directed to establish 
consumer's complaints cell as part of 
implementing Standards of Performance 
failing which energy charges would be 
reduced from January, 2008. 
11. Kerala 
• Provision for compensation specified in 
Standards of Performance Regulations. 
• Details of compensation to be provided 
by licensees are specified in 
the Regulations on Standards of 
Performance. 
10. Kamataka 
12. Madhya Pradesh • To ascertain the amount of 
compensation payable by Discoms, 
SERC instituted a suo-motu petition; 
• Commission also convened a meeting 
with NGOs of the State to disseminate 
information regarding claiming 
compensation for any aggrieved 
consumer and for making consumers 
aware of the services they deserve from 
licenses; 
• Six lakh pamphlets on Performance 
Standards published by the SERC to 
empower consumers to claim 
compensation for any under 
performance by Utilities; 
• Discoms were directed to spread over 
messages through electronic and print 
media on Performance Standards; 
13. Maharashtra • Level of compensation payable to 
consumers for failure to meet Standards 
of Performance (SoP) is provided in the 
Regulations on Standards of 
Performance of distribution licenses; 
• SERC follow ups and directs all CGRFs 
to submit six-monthly reports; 
• To develop CGRFs an institution, all 
licensees have been asked to provide 
necessary infrastructure to CGRFs. 
74 


1 2 3 
14. Meghalaya • No complaint from consumers has been 
reported as yet. 
• Provision for compensation to the 
consumers for default in service by 
Licensees, specified in Performance 
Standards Regulations; 
• OERC effectively implementing 
procedure laid down in the Regulations; 
• No compensation so far paid by the 
Licensees to the Consumers on the 
ground; 
• Licensees have reported that consumers 
complaints have been attended to within 
the specified time limit; 
• SERC has entrusted the job of verifying 
the authenticity of datal claims of 
licensees to the consumers 
representatives' and its officials; 
• Compensation rules have been specified 
under Regulations on Standards of 
Performance. 
15. Orissa 
16. Punjab • Performance Standards Regulations 
specify that compensation shall be made 
within 90 days to the consumers for not 
providing specified services by the 
licensees within the stipulated time 
schedule. 
18. Tamil Nadu 
• SERC is in the process of specifying 
mechanism of compensation by the 
Discoms to the aggrieved persons, in 
case of non-adherence of standards of 
performance; 
• The regulations relating to payment of 
compensation came into force in 
1.1.2007; 
17. Rajasthan 
• No compensation was paid by the 
TNEB between 1.1.2007 and 31.3.2007. 
75 


1 2 3 
19. Tripura • The provision has been kept in the 
Regulations on SoP; 
• No case of compensation is yet reported. 
20. Uttar Pradesh • Mechanism for automatic compensation 
within 90 days, put in place by SERC; 
• Data being collected in terms of 
consumers having filed manual claims. 
• The Regulations on Performance 
Standards on restoration of power 
supply and voltage fluctuation shall 
come into effect w.e.f. 01.04.2008; 
21. Uttarakhand 
• The Regulations provide that licensee 
shall register every complaint regarding 
power failure, quality of power, meters, 
bills at the complaint centers and also 
maintain consumer-wise records etc. to 
avoid any violation of SoP; 
• Regulations also provide that 
compensation shall be adjusted against 
electricity bill within 90 days from the 
date of violation; 
• On failure of payment of compensation 
within time limit, aggrieved consumer(s) 
can approach CGRFs for redresssal. 
Provisions of additional penalty in such 
a case. 
22. West Bengal • 666 cases (including 90 cases in which 
compensation to the consumers has 
been allowed) have been sorted out in 
favour of the consumers, till December 
2007. 
76 


ANNEXURE V 
STATUS OF SERCS WHICH HAVE NOTIFIED SOPs 
CONTAINING RIs 
Sl.No. Name of State Comments 
1 2 3 
2. Bihar 
• Distribution Licensees Standards of 
Performance Regulations, 2004 notified; 
• Utilities are regulated by predetermined 
indices on quality of power supply, 
voltage variation limits and neutral 
voltage displacement. 
• Specified standards with respect to 
quality, continuity and reliability of 
services to be maintained by a 
Distribution Licensee in its Standards of 
Performance of Distribution Licensee 
Regulation, 2006; 
• Licensee would be liable for payment 
of compensation to the affected 
consumers. 
1. Assam 
3. Chhattisgarh • Standards of performance in distribution 
of electricity, notified in July, 2006; 
• These Regulations cover issues like 
restoration of power supply, attending 
normal fuse of call complaints, 
replacement of failed distribution 
transformers, complaints regarding 
unscheduled load shedding, complaints 
regarding voltage variation beyond 
permissible limits, replacement of failed 
meters, providing new connections etc; 
• Quarterly reports on compliance of 
performance standards, published by 
SERC at least once in a year; 
77 


1 2 3 
• Method to compete distribution system 
reliability index also specified. 
4. Delhi • Reliability indices viz. system average 
interruption frequency index (SAIFI), 
system average interruption duration 
index (SAIDI), monitory average 
interruption frequency index (MAIFI), 
laid down in Electricity Supply Code 
and Performance Standards Regulations, 
2007; 
• These indices indicate reliability of 
services being offered by distribution 
companies (Discoms); 
• Other standards specified by DERC 
include procedure and time limit for 
Discoms to attend to problems of 
consumers on metering, billing etc.; 
• Compensation for non-compliance of 
performance standards by Discoms; 
• Pre-determined indices on quality of 
power supply like requirement of 
maintaining not less than 99% in case 
of fuse-off calls rectification within 
3 hours for urban areas /8 hours for 
rural areas.: 
5. Gujarat • Standard of Performance of Distribution 
Licensees Regulations notified in March, 
2005 which deals with the matters 
relating to quality, continuity and 
reliability of services; 
• Specified formats for submission of 
information related parameters like - 
interruption, period of schedule outages 
to performance; 
• Regular compliance reports from the 
distribution licensees to SEI~C; 
78 


1 2 3 
6. Haryana 
• SoP Regulations provide for various 
limits/ time period for the, voltage 
variations, harmonics - related to 
quality of power. 
• SoP regulations notified in. July, 2004 
which incorporate quality, continuity 
and reliability of service that a licensee 
shall achieve in discharge of its 
obligation; 
• Guaranteed standards of performance 
specify the rate of compensation if 
licensee fails to meet them; 
7. Himachal Pradesh 
• Reliability Indices viz. SAIFI, SAIDI and 
MAIFI has been specified in the 
regulation. 
• SoP specified for the Licensee and in 
case the licensee fails to meet the 
standards specified, the licensee is liable 
to pay compensation; 
• Guaranteed SoP has been formulated; 
• Determination of base line indices is 
under process. 
8. Jammu & Kashmir • Distribution Performance Standard 
Regulations 2006, which contain the 
indices on the quality power supply, 
notified by the J &K SERe. 
9. Jharkhand • Standard of performance for distribution 
licensee notified by the Commission in 
2005; 
10. Kamataka 
• SERC ordered in one case, reduction of 
energy charge on tariff by 2.5% for 
failure to implement the regulations. 
• Standard of supply, continuity and 
quality of power supply, specified in 
Grid Code; 
79. 


1 2 3 
11. Kerala 
• Frequency limits being maintained 
through implementation of Availability 
Based Tariff (ABT). This has helped in 
ensuring grid discipline; 
• The Commission, through monthly 
reports, is monitoring the interruptions 
and reliability of supply. 
• Overall standards of performance 
specified by KSERC; 
• Quality of Supply for voltage and 
frequency is specified in Kerala 
Electricity Supply Code, 2005. 
• Regulation of distribution performance 
standards notified by MPERC on 
28.10.2005; 
12. Madhya Pradesh 
• Quarterly and annual report on 
performance standards are published in 
newspapers/ available in MPERC 
website; 
• NGOs workshop held by MPERC in 
August, 2007 to disseminate information 
on performance standards amongst 
consumers; 
• Discoms directed by MPERC to display 
performance standards at their offices. 
Field visit by MPERC to ensure 
compliance of directions; 
• Ombudsman directed to review 
performance standards bi-annually; 
• As per directions of MPERC six lakh 
pamphlets containing details of 
performance standards, distribution 
along with electricity bills in Bhopal, 
Indore and Jabalpur; 
• Pre-identified indices like total number 
of 11KV feeders, sum of outage duration 
of all feeders, outage duration per 
feeder, number of outage per. feeder, 
total number of tripping, feeder 
reliability index of area etc.; 
80 


1 2 2 
• Monthly 
reliability 
information on power 
indices, published in 
newspapers every year; 
• Quality Monitoring Cell constituted in 
MPERe. 
13. Maharashtra • Regulations on Standards of 
Performance (SoP) viz. Electricity Supply 
Code & Other Conditions of Supply, 
Terms & Conditions of Tariff and 
General Conditions of Distribution 
License, have been issued; 
14. Meghalaya 
• SERC through different orders also gives 
directives to utilities for enforcing 
standards with respect to quality, 
continuity and reliability of service, 
however, due to sever demand-supply 
gap in the State, SERC regulated 
quantity of supply to ensure that no 
category of consumers is discriminated 
against; 
• Reliability in indices have been specified 
in the Regulations on SoP; 
• Reports on various indices are hosted 
by licensees in their websites which are 
monitored by SERe. SERC has also 
engaged an agency to carry out field 
inspections on behalf of Commission. 
• Promulgated the Meghalaya Electricity 
Supply Code, 2006 and the MSERC 
(Standards of Performance) Regulations, 
2006; 
15. Orissa 
• These Regulations provide consumers 
with the necessary means of securing 
their rights in accordance with the 
provisions of Act. 
• Regulation on Licensee's Standard of 
Performance notified in May, 2004, 
81 


1 2 3 
which specifies minimum standard with 
respect to quality, continuity and 
reliability of services by Licensees; 
Guaranteed Standard of Performance 
and overall Standard of Performance; 
• Under Guaranteed Standard of 
Performance, performance of licensees is 
monitored on parameters like restoration 
of power supply, voltage variation, 
harmonics, complaints about meters, 
applications for new connection/ 
additional load, complaints about 
consumer's bills etc; 
16. Punjab 
• Methods of computing distribution 
system reliability indices like SAIFI, 
SAlDI, MAIFI, are specified in overall 
Standards of Performance; 
• Under the standards of performance, 
licensees are required to attend to the 
service within a fixed period of time. 
Provision of incentive or disincentive 
linked to performance; 
• Monthly, quarterly and annual reports 
are being submitted by the Discoms on 
guaranteed standards of performance 
and overall standards of performance. 
• Specified in Electricity Supply Code and 
Related Matters Regulations (w.e.f. 01- 
01-2008); 
17. Rajasthan 
• Licensee shall be liable to pay 
compensation for violation. 
• Already specified various standards of 
performance (SoP) for the licensees to 
ensure quality, continuity and reliability 
of services, and system availability, 
voltage management, voltage unbalance, 
current unbalance, system adequacy, 
frequency management, service 
reliability, harmonic distortion for 
transmission licensees. 
82 


1 2 3 
18. Tamil Nadu 
19. Tripura 
20. Uttar Pradesh 
• Standard of Performance Regulations 
came into force in Sept., 2004 with 
salient features - effective new service 
connections, change of tariff, shifting & 
transfer of service connection, quality of 
supply, interruption and restoration of 
supply, handling of complaints, payment 
of compensation, level of overall 
performance, to be achieved by the 
licensee etc.; 
• Regulations related to payment of 
compensation when the licensee fails to 
meet the specified performance 
standards came into force in Jan, 2007; 
• SERC has set standards in respect of 
effecting new service connection, 
duration of interruption, voltage 
parameters, transformer failure rates, 
waiting time for restoration of supply 
etc.; 
• SERC has directed the utility (as per 
CEA Regulations on connectivity 
standards on harmonics) to measure the 
harmonics and its impact on distribution 
system. 
• Regulations on Performance Standards 
and Supply Code notified. 
• Reliability index at the' feeder level and 
at consumer level determined by 
UPERC. Also defined are guaranteed 
time limits for various break downs, 
voltage variations, rectification of billing 
disputes, installation/replacement of 
meters; 
• SAIFI, SAIDI, MAIFI indices of 
reliability defined; 
• Licensees directed to do rostering based 
on AT&C losses of a particular division; 
83 


1 2 3 
21. Uttarakhand 
22. West Bengal 
• Incentive/disincentive schemes linked 
with the loss levels at distribution 
transformers introduced for the benefit 
of consumers and staff of the licensee. 
• Regulations specifying standards with 
respect to quality, continuity and 
reliability of services by licensee have 
been issued; 
• SERe has also taken steps to streamline 
the billing system of the licensee by 
issuing time bound action plan to 
eliminate billing deficiencies and often 
visited different parts of the State for 
effective compliances of the same; 
• Standards of Performance Regulations 
have specified the power supply on 
quality, restoration, voltage variations/ 
unbalance and period of schedule 
outages; 
• Reliability indices viz. System Average 
Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI), 
System Average Interruption Duration 
Index (SAIDI) and Momentary Average 
Interruption Frequency Index (MAIFI) 
specified by the SERe. 
• Standards have been laid down by 
notifying the allowable periods of 
unplanned interruption of supply to 
consumers to ensure quality, continuity 
and reliability of supply; 
• Indices on quality of power supply are 
yet to be developed which require 
collection of data (voltage level of 
supply, the terrain, climate condition, 
salinity of atmosphere and such other 
na tural characteris tics of different 
localities within the area of supply of 
distribution licensee, consumer mix, the 
character of various loads under 
different categories of consumers, the 
predominant mode of supply etc. 
84 


ANNEXURE VI 
State Capital/Urban 
RELIABILITY INDEX-FEEDER LEVEL COMPARATIVELY FINANCIAL YEAR DATA 
Feeder Reliability Slate 
Agg!(lmt.'ratior. 
Lltilil:' Ivpe 1\11_ 'lfOutagM PL'T f~der MeTage DuratiCln of an Outage (hh:mml 
------- 2f04-O.' z003-{)6 ~7 2OOT.a5 2OO4..ffi 2003-& 2iX)}.Oi 2t.(l7~ lOOMS 2005.06 2OO6-Ci 2007-Gi 2004-05 2005-{N) 2OO6-Oi 2007~ 200Hl.'i 2005-{)6 2OO6-Oi 2007-re 
Xumber of Feeders Outage duration per f~~r Chh;mm) 
Andhra Pradesh 117 III 134 N.A. 00:22 00:19 00:24 N.A. 99.6 99.47 99.38 N.A. 
10 II IJ II 12 14 I; 16 17 18 19 10 1) 2. 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andbra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Anchra Pradesh 
ex> 01 
Andhra Pradesh 197 22S N.A. N.A. 0:29 01:29 N.A. N.A. 98:93 96:12 N.A. 
Hvderabad 
Anantapur 
Kumool 
Maheboobnegar 
Nalgorda 
Sanga Reddy 
Vishakhapatnam 
Srikakutam 
Vizianagaram 
Kakinada 
Eluru 
Machilipatnam 
Cuntur 
Ongole 
Nellore 
Chittoor 
Kadapa 
CPlXl 
CPOCL 
CPOCL 
CPOCI. 
CPlXl 
CPOCL 
EPlXl 
EPlXl 
EPlXl 
EPlXl 
EPlXl 
SPlXl 
SPlXl 
EPDCL 
SPlXl 
EPlXl 
SPlXl 
5C 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
MT 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
m 471 
IS 
IS 
~.A. 
,7 
N.A. 
~A 
NA 
t'.A. 
NA. 
NA. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
25 
22 
10 
82 
I; 
2B 
Ii 
31 
II 
32 
15 
16 
;0) 619 H:37 46: I3 53:60 N.A. 
27 27 II:46 76:1-1 393:31 N.A. 
22 21 ;l:I5 40:33 125:29 N.A. 
10 II JO:jl 2B:jl 352:00 N.A. 
04:05 OUI 31:16 N.A. 
N.A. S5:29 191:41 N.A. N.A. 
139 Ii3 19:26 Il:OS 49:38 N.A. 
N.A. 21:09 2S:31 N.A. N.A. 
16 19 N.A. 26:31 123:3i N.A. N.A. 
JO JO N.A. 63:03 183:45 N.A. N.A. 
IS IS N.A. 61:06 29S:15 N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 93:56 2Sl:22 N.A. N.A. 221 243 N.A. N.A. 0:26 OUO N.A. N.A. 9S;93 96:)j N.A. 
Il2 N.A. N.A. 0:22 00;23 N.A. N.A. 99;40 99;51 N.A. 31 -IS N.A. 5B5 4);06 N.A. N.A. 
12 21 N.A. 27:05 40:05 N.A. N.A. 
32 J6 N.A. 65:09 37:23 N.A. N.A. 
15 20 N.A. 39;2j) 186:06 N.A. N.A. 
17 25 N.A. 94:08 )40;12 N.A. N.A. 
22 78 24S N.A. 00:32 00;59 01:35 N.A. 99.87 99.12 %.5 N.A. 
113 128 165 N.A. 00;23 00;19 00;46 N.A. 99:38 99.53 98.57 N.A. 
117 93 265 N.A. 00;16 00:19 01:23 N.A. 99;65 99;67 95:98 N.A. 
46 15 55 N.A. 00:06 00:05 00.34 N.A. 99;95 99:99 99:64 N.A. 
176 98 N.A. N.A. 0;29 00;58 N.A. N.A. 99:02 97:81 N.A. 
51 N.A. 01;20 1:18 00:59 N.A. 99:78 99;87 99;43 N.A. 
37 Tl N.A. N.A 0:35 00;22 N.A. N.A 99;76 99;67 N.A. 
105 169 N.A. N.A. 0:15 00:+1 N.A. N.A. 99:69 98:59 N.A. 
115 2!ll N.A. N.A. 0:33 00:54 N.A N.A. 99:2B 97;9 N.A. 
107 282 N.A. N.A. 0;36 01:03 N.A. N.A. 99:27 96:59 NA 
142 
61 66 N.A. N.A. 0;27 00;36 N.A. N.A. 99;69 99:54 N.A. 
133 51 N.A. N.A. 0;29 00:37 N.A. N.A. 99:28 99;57 N.A. 
17 15S N.A. NA 0:;0 OI:Il N.A. N.A. 99:55 97:8S N.A. 


00 (j) N 10 11 13 14 15 I; 18 19 1Il I, 21 12 2J 
Andhra Pradesh 37 N.A. 00:23 0: 19 00: i8 N.A. 99:46 99:64 99:7 N.A. 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Andhra Pradesh 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Assam 
Assam 
Bihar 
Bihar 
Chandigarh 
Chhattisgarh 
Delhi 
Delhi 
Delhi 
Delhi 
Vi~ywada 
Warangal 
Karimnagar 
Khammarn 
Nizamabad 
Adilabad 
Ramagundam 
Rajahmundry 
Tirupari 
Itanagar 
Dispur 
Cuwahati 
Patna 
Patna 
Chandlgarh 
Raipur 
Delhi (NOPL Areal 
Delhi (East & Central) 
Delhi (West & South) 
Delhi (NDMC A!l'al 
SPDCL 
NPDCL 
NPDCL 
NPDCL 
NPDCL 
NPDCL 
NPDCL 
EPDCL 
SPDCL 
Deptt of Power 
ASEB 
ASEB 
BSEB (pESU East) 
BSEB (pESU I'kst) 
Chandigam £I"Y. Deptt. SC 
CSEB 
NDPL 
BYPL 
BRPL 
NDMe 
MY 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
SC 
sc 
60 64 64 69 47:28 31:21 26:1J.l N.A. J2j 
N.A. 57 58 62 N.A. 31:54 94:50 N.A. N.A. 
97 
76 128 N.A. N.A. 0:25 00:45 N.A. N.A. 99:64 98:92 N.A. 
N.A. 15 15 15 N.A. 5Oj3 99:33 N.A. N.A. 
16 16 17 16 70:00 68:59 106:30 N.A. 119 
S6 124 N.A. N.A. 0:35 00:48 N.A. N.A. 99:42 98:86 N.A. 
N.A. 16 16 17 N.A. 4659 67:33 N.A. N A. 
N.A. 11 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
73 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:45 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:38 N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 23 
12 13 N.A. 47:20 13:09 N.A. N.A. 
106 102 N.A. 00:35 0:39 01:02 N.A. 99:13 99:21 98:78 N.A. 
N.A. 19 
32 34 N.A. N.A. 54:41 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 
27 32 N.A. N.A. 4242 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
55 93 N.A N.A. 0:31 00:~1 N.A. N.A. 99:46 99:23 N.A. 
14 14 N.A. N.A. 291:30 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
70 3.1 N.A. N.A. 0:41 00:10 N.A. N.A. 99:46 99:85 N.A. 
86 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:30 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:31 N.A. 
11 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
243 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 96:67 N.A. 
N.A. 
68 N.A. N.A. N.A. 214:59 N.A. N.A. N.A. 370 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:35 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:55 N.A. N.A. N.A. MY 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. sc 
u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u 
29 N.A. N.A. 00:51 00:33 N.A. N.A. 99:72 99:82 
MY 
N.A. N.A. 190 2IXI N.A. N.A. 24:24 15:28 N.A. N.A. 29 
MT 
N.A. N.A. N.A. !II.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
30 01:55 01:22 OO:'H 02:18 'l9:13 9'1:85 99:96 99:19 
sc 
MY 
sc 
'H5 584 622 097 49:33 13:>1 03::1 69: 15 26 10 
77 38 01:33 01:01 00:58 01:16 98:8 99:11 99:58 99:87 532 6!l4 626 650 105:H 77:40 37:05 11:25 88 
76 01'38 01:05 00:39 01:35 98:88 99:08 99:62 9'1:85 774 869 927 958 98:07 82:31 33:29 12:47 60 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
34 
MT 


10 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 lJJ 21 2l OJ 2' 
Cuiarat Gandhi Nagar N.A. N.A. 02:08 01: 11 N.A. N.A. 99:95 99:98 
CUi"" Ahmedabad 
Cujaral Surat 
Ccjerat Surat 
Cejarat vadodra 
Gujarat Godhra 
Cujarat Dahod 
Cujarat Anand 
Cui,rat Nadiad 
Cui,rat Railot 
Cujarat Palanpur 
Cujarat Himatnagar 
Cui,rat Mehsana 
Cujarat Patan 
Cujarat Kalol 
Cui,rat velsad 
Cui,rat Navsari 
Cui,rat Bharuch 
Cui,"t Narmada 
CD Goa 
-..J 
Panaji 
Torrent Power AEC SC 
Torrent Power AEC MT 
DGVCL 
Torrent Power SEC 
MGVCL 
MGVCL 
MGVCL 
MGVCL 
MGVCL 
GEB 
UGVCL 
UGVCL 
UGVCL 
UGVCL 
UGVCL 
DGVCL 
DCCL 
DGVCL 
DGVCL 
Goa Ele<y. Depn. 
N.A. N.A. 24 N.A. N.A. 0,:14 03:,9 N.A. N.A. 22 
655 7411 m 812 08:00 07:07 07:14 06:22 
MT 35 105 N.A. N.A. N.A. 208:22 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
MT 286 m 356 365 18:17 09:00 57:58 00:2; 
o N.A 23 N.A. 143 N.A. N.A. N.A. 14:28 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A N.A. N.A. 13 N.A. N.A. N.A. 5~34 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 27:14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 18:28 N.A. N.A. N.A. 60 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:79 
112 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:15 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:69 N.A N.A. N.A. 
o 
o 
01:51 01:51 01:56 OU7 99:91 99:92 99:92 99:93 
183 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:07 N.A. 97:62 N.A. 
0226 02:2; 09:5-1 00:32 99:79 !I'l:90 99:34 N.A. 
28 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:31 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:83 
115 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:31 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:26 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 13:5-1 N.A. N.A. N.A. 93 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:09 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:84 
o N.A. N.A. 74:36 77:05 N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 30 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
166 148 N.A. N.A. 00:29 00:31 N.A. N.A. 99:15 99:12 
MT 
N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 43:50 35:28 N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. 
o 12 N.A. N.A. 31:03 29:49 N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 61:12 18:1O N.A. N.A. 158 112 N.A. N.A. 00:27 00:26 N.A. N.A. 99:3 99:45 
N.A. N.A. 12 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
12; 107 N.A. N.A. 00:21 00:20 N.A. N.A. 99:5 99:6 
92 92 N.A. N.A. 00:20 00:20 N.A. N.A. 99:65 99:66 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 93:05 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 79:16 58:35 N.A. N.A. 139 150 N.A. N.A. 00:34 00:23 N.A. N.A. 99:1 99:33 
136 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:11 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:94 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 85:05 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o 10 N.A. N.A. N.A. 93:33 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 1 N.A. N.A. N.A. 23:44 N.A. N.A. N.A. 11 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01.09 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99.73 N.A. 
78 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:93 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o 
SC 
110 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:16 N . .4. N.A. N.A. 99:03 N.A. 
N.A. 0 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 


co co 14 10 I) 21 13 14 I; 10 11 I) 
" " 18 19 
C"" ~ ~ ~ u ~ u u u u u u u u u u u u u 
Goa 
Harvana 
Harvane 
Harvana 
Himachal Pradesh 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Jammu and Kashmir 
jharkhand 
jharkhand 
jherkhand 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Karnauka 
Kamataka 
Xeldem 
Margao 
Faridabad 
Gurgaon 
Panchkula 
Shimla 
Srinagar 
Jammu 
Ranchi 
Dhanbad 
jarnshedpur 
Bangalore 
Kolar 
Tumkur 
Chilradurga 
Davanagera 
KGF 
Hoskote 
D.B. Pura 
Ram Nagar 
Goa EI",v. Deprt 
Coa EI"". Deptt. 
DHBVNL 
DHBVI\'L 
UHBVNL 
HPSEB 
Power Devp. Deptt. 
Power Devp Depu. 
ISEB 
ISEB 
j5EB 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
BESCOM 
o 
o 
N.A. 
N.A. 
Mf u ~ ~ U ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ U U U U U U ~ U U ~ 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. )I.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
~ U ~ U ~ U ~ U U ~ U U U U ~ U U AA AA AA Mf 
o 
SC 
SC 
xrr 
SC 
Mf 
Ml 
SC 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
NA 
N.A. 
N.A. 
NA 
N.A. 
)I.A. 
I\.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
AA~U~~UUUUAAAAUAAU~AAAA~ 
~UUUAA~AAAAAAAAAAAA~AAAAAAAAAAAA 
AA ~ AA AA ~ AA ~ AA U U U AA AA U AA AA AA AA 
NA N.,\ :-l.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
AA AA ~ U ~ AA U AA AA AA AA ~ AA ~ AA AA AA ~ 
NA NA N.A. NA N.A. NA N.A N.A. NA N.A. N.A NA N.A N.A. N.A. NA NA N.A. 
U ~ AA ~ ~ U ~ AA U U AA U AA AA AA U AA U 
674 712 N.A. N.A. 29:>1 18:60 :-IA N.A. 75 WA N.A. 00:20 00:23 N.A. N.A. 99:66 99:67 N.A. 69 
N.A. N.A. UI:08 97:08 N.A. N.A. 279 N.A. N.A 00:20 00:21 N.A. N.A. 98:47 98:89 N.A. 40S 
14 17 N.A. N.A. 90: 13 11:33 N.A. N.A. 7S N.A. :-<A 00:34 00:17 N.A. N.A. 98:97 99:74 N.A. 157 
N.A. N.A. 107:31 109:10 N.A NA 110 )I.A. N.A. 00:25 00:30 N.A. N.A. 98:77 96:75 N.A. 158 
18 18 N.A. N.A. 40:16 ,;;02 N.A. N.A. 79 N.A. N.A. 00:36 00:11 N.A. N.A. 99:47 9'l:83 N.A. 77 
14 14 N.A. N.A. 105:01 118:38 N.A. N.A. 231 N.A. N.A. 00:38 00:31 N.A. NA 98:80 98:65 N.A. 19, 
N.A. N.A. 153:25 48:18 N.A. N.A. 136 N.A. N.A. 00:41 00:11 N.A. N.A. 98:25 99:45 N.A. '127 
N.A. NA 14.1:60 63:56 NA N.A. 143 N.A. N.A. 00:54 00:27 N.A. N,A. 98:36 99:17 N.A. 160 
N.A. N.A 161:14 48:18 N.A. N.A. 193 N.A. N.A. 00:41 00:15 N.A. N.A. 98:16 99:45 N.A. 134 


--------- -----.---- ----.-- 
Kamataka Channapatna 
Karnatska 
Karnataka 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
K •• mataka 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Kamataka 
OJ Karnataka 
<0 
Chintamani 
CB. Pura 
Harihara 
Hubli 
Dharwad 
Gada~ 
Karwar 
Haveri 
Belgaum 
Khanapur 
Bii'pur 
B'g,ikol 
Gulh'rg' 
Manglore 
Udupi 
Shimoga 
Bhadravathi 
Chcknagalur 
Madikeri 
if} I; ~4 I: 
" 15 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
NA N.A. N.A 158:51 jq: 16 N.A. N.A. 
16 17 18 ;9 2lJ 11 12 !' 
HElJ..t;),1 265 N.A. N.A. ooJ5 00:09 N.A ~I.A. 98:19 99:.; N.A. 
N.A. NA N.A. 152:47 90:20 ".A. N.A. J!"iLm~ 
:';fSCOM 
BI<;_-OM 
HESCOM 
HI5COM 
HESCO~I 
HESCOM 
HESCOM 
HESCOM 
HESCOM 
HESCOM 
HESCOM 
GESCOM 
\iESCOM 
MESCOM 
lI.ESCOM 
\IESCOM 
MESCOM 
ME5COM 
NA N.A. N.A. 152:27 116:21 N.A. N.A 
272 
231 236 N.A N.A. 00:39 00:23 N.A. N.A. 98::6 98:97 N.A. 
N.A. N.A N.A. SO:31 86: J3 N.A. N.A. 
241 265 N.A. N.A. 00:)8 00:26 N.A. KA. 98:26 98:67 N.A. 
N.A. 40 47 N.II. N.A. 176:<8 N.A. N.A N.A. 
301 2j3 N.A. N.A. 00:16 00:20 N.A. N.A. 9'1:08 99:02 N.A. 
N.A. IS 19 N.A. N.A. 217:5-1 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
337 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:31 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:98 N.A. 
373 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:1i N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:51 N.A. 
371 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:27 N.A. N.A N.A. 98:08 N.A. 
364 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:30 N.A. N.A. N A. 97:89 N.A. 
~ " " " ~ " " " ~ " 265 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:3S N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:08 N.A. 
N.A. 1) N.A. N.A. 279:28 N.A N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A N.A. N.A N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.II. N.A N.A. 
4<9 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:37 N.A. N.A. N.A %:81 N.II. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 212:30 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. 
?@ N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:41 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:57 N.A. 
N.A. 
V"~""""""U"~""U"""" N.A 
N.A. ~"~"""~""""U~"~"AA~~ 
W"""""""AA"""~""""~~ N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.II. N.A. N.A. N.II. N.A N.A. N.A. IH. N.A. N.A 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. l'-A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 167:;5 N.A. N.A. N.A 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 184:15 N.A. ~.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.II. N.A. 122:27 N.A. ~.A. N.A. 
N.A. 36 12 N.A. N.A. 168:19 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 
1) 
10 


<D 
a II 10 
" I) 14 15 l3 !, 16 17 18 
" 20 
Karnataka 221 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:32 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:;7 
Karnataka 
Kamataka 
Kerala 
Kerala 
Kcrala 
Kt r~la 
Kerata 
Kerala 
Kerala 
Kerala 
Kerala 
Kerala 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Myso", 
Mandya 
Hasan 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Koch; 
KolJam 
Kozhikode 
Kesaragod 
Palakkad 
Kottyam 
Emakulam 
Thrissur 
Alappuzha 
Bhopal 
Indore 
Khandwa 
Burhanpur 
Khergone 
Barwani 
Dhar 
CESa 
osct 
ctso, 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
KSEB 
MPPK V veo 
MPPK V veo 
MPPK V veo 
MPI'K V veo 
MPPK V veo 
MPPK V veo 
MPPK V veo 
.0 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 77 N.A. N.A. N.A. 116:44 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 2lS:j'I N.A. KA. N.A. 
12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 196.32 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
0; III 38:22 O·US 06:11 04:39 76 12 
491) N.A. N.A. N.A. oo:lS ~.A. N.A. N.A. 97:)1 
376 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:31 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:7; 
II 00:3Q 00:21 00:'4 01:20 9'l:'X> 0<1:95 9'l:93 0<1:9; 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
n N.A. lL~::>J 71:5; 75:19 NA. 25.1 229 222 N.A. 00:2; !Xl 19 00:20 N.A. qg:iS 9'1:18 '19:14 NA 
1Il N.A. N.A. N.A. !Xl37 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9Sj N.A. 
31 68 N.A. N.A. 02:02 04:02 N.A. N.II. '19:2S %:S9 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
18 22 N.A. N.A. 131:11 N.A N.A. N.A. 
631 N.A N.A. N.A. 00:22 ~.A. N.A. N.A. 97:]'S 
:4; N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:29 ;; A N.A. N.A. 9;:99 
559 N.A. N.A. l'i.A. 00:20 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:74 
sc 4S 62 
31 32 N.A. N.A. 63:07 272:32 N.A. N.A. 
229 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:23 NA N.A N .. I. 98:96 
119 N.A. N."'. N.A. oo:l() NA N.A. '1.A. '19:09 
lIJ N.iI. N.A. N.A. 129:10 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U 
498 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:16 N.A. N.II. N.A. 9Sj! 
N.II. 
lli~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U 
~~~~~~~~UU~~~~~~U 
~~~~~~~~~UAAAA~AA~~AA N.A. 
IO~~~AA~~~~~~~~AA~AAAA N.A. 
AA AA ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ AA AA ~ AA N.A. 
II~~~~~~AA~~~AA~UAAAAU N.A. 
Mf 69 n 
Mf N.A. 14 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
Mf N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. 
sc N.A. N.A. N.A. 
Mf N.A. 134 IlS 
N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 22'1:;;; N.A. N.A. N.A. 
II N.A. N.A. N.A. 164:20 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
12 N.A. N.A. N.A 185:jj N.A. N.A. N.A. 
80 N.A. N.A. N.A. 87:02 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
32 N.A. N.A. N.A. 7'J:14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 


10 11 1.1 I; 13 J: I~ 19 21J 2i I, ~.1 
" 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madlwa Pradesh 
~1adhya Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhva Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
c:o Manipur ...•. 
jhabua 
Ujain 
[abalpur 
Cwalior 
Katni 
Chindwara 
Boregaon 
Maneri 
5.lgar 
Darnell 
Chauarpur 
Cnanatoria 
Rewa 
-atna 
I\>was 
Shajapur 
Ratlam 
Mandsaur 
Neemuch 
Imphal 
MPPK I' yeo 
Ml'PK YVeO 
MPPo K V YCO 
MPMK V veo 
MPPo K V vco 
MPPo K V yeo 
Ml'Po K I' yeo 
MPP,) K V yeo 
Ml'Po K V yeo 
Ml'Po K I' yeo 
Ml'Po K I' VCO 
MPP" K I' veo 
MPPo K V yeo 
w'p" K V yeo 
MPPKweo 
~IPPK\'Veo 
MPpKWCO 
MPpKVVeo 
MPPKWeo 
EI"y. Depu. 
o ~.A. 
10 75 N.A. N.A. N.A. :;'917 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
66 N.A. N.A. N.A. 06::>1 N.A. N.A. N.A. 95:78 N.A. 
6; 00 N.A. 08:35 09:24 263:12 N.A. i7 5.1 212 N.A. 00:11 00:10 01:05 N.A. 99:<lO 99:.10 96.0 
o N.A 
76 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 3m N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 3):52 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 63: 14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
20 N.A. N.A. N.A. 327:30 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
Mf N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 9S N.A. N.A. :-<.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o 1' . .'.. 'J.A. 
N.A. N.A. Ii N.A. N.A. N.A. 4;:42 N.A. N.A. N.A. 116 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:22 N.A. N.A. N . .'.. 'l'l:i7 N.A. 
69. N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:29 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:62 N.A. 
S7 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:23 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9%1 N.A. 
97 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:39 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:28 N.A. 
5-13 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:34 N.A. N.A. N.A. 96:26 N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 1000:21 N.A. N.A. N . .'.. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 20:l3 N.A. N.A. N.A. IIS5 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:01 N.A. N.A. N . .-\. 99:76 N.A. 
631 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:3; N.A. N.A. N.A. &sj8 N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 94:49 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
14 N.A. I'.A. N.A. ;11:i9 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 39:22 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
1.1 N.A. N.A. N . .'.. 685:0\ N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 214:1; N.A. N.A. N.A. 
IS N.A. N.A. N.A. 111:10 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
12 N.A. N.A. N.A. 431:50 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. b6S:17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
S5 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:07 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9S:S2 N.A. 
i,5 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:11 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9n; N.A. 
61 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:38 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:;; N.A. 
sn N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:25 N.A. N.A. N.A. 92:!8 N.A. 
179 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:11 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:5; N.A. 
5; N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:02 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:73 N.A. 
103 N.A. N.A. N.A. 04:09 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9;:04 N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
133 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:5; N.A. N.A. N.A. 92:37 N.A. 
sc 
MT 
o 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A N . .'.. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 


<0 I\) 14 10 11 j) 
" 15 16 17 18 19 20 12 L' 
M~halaya 19 59 N.A. N.A. 00:45 01:00 N.A. N.A. 99:58 99:32 N.A. 
Meghalava 
McghalaY3 
MeghaJaya 
Meghalaya 
lvll'ghala~'a 
Ml'ghalaya 
Mizoram 
Mizoram 
Mncram 
Mrzcram 
Mizcram 
Mizoram 
Mizoram 
Mizoram 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Shillong 
Nongstion 
jowai 
Nongpoh 
Tura 
Bagbrrera 
\'\Iilliamnagar 
Aiz3W\ 
Champhai 
Lunglei 
Saiha 
Lawngtlai 
Kolasib 
Serrhhip 
Mamit 
Mumbai (Citl') 
Mumbai (Su:"urbs) 
Mumbai (City) 
Malund 
Bhandup 
Megh. SEB 
Megh. SEB 
Megh. SEB 
~Iegh. SEB 
Megh. SEB 
Megh. SEB 
Ml'gh.SEB 
Power & Elecv Deptt SC 
Power & Eecv Deptt. 0 
Power &: Eie0. Deptt, 0 
Power & Eleey. Deptt 0 
Power & Elecy. Deptt. 0 
Power & Elecy Depn 0 
Power & Elecy Dept!. 0 
Power & E~cy. Deptt. 0 
BEST 
ReI. Energy 
Tata Power Co. Ltd. Mf 
MSEB 
MSEB 
SC 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
SC 
MT 
MT 
MT 
N.A. 31 32 NA NA 36:26 59:~ N.A N.A. 
]7 55 N.A. N.A. 02:60 02:28 N.A. N.A. 98:7] 9NI N.A NA NA N.A. IIH] 136:23 N A. N.A. 
223 m N.A NA IXlOS 00:50 NA KA. 99:65 '7:7 N.A. NA NA NA 30.:9 20 1:21 NA N A. 
34 237 N.A. NA 04:04 00:30 N.A. NA 98:+1 98:iH N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. 136:45 118:59 NA N.A 
I()'! 96 N.A. N.A 00:51 00:27 NA NA 98:99 99:51 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 88:45 42:34 NA N.A. 
521 176 NA N.A. 01·02 00:56 N.A. N.A 93:8; 98:1 N.A. NA N.A. NA 53S:18 116:29 N.A. NA 
404 1% N.A. N.A. 00:12 01:03 KA. NA 98:76 97.65 N.A N.A. N.A. NA 283:30 205:47 N.A. N.A. 
lil! 270 177 N.A. 1:06 01:01 01:05 N.A. 97:79 96:86 97:8 N.A. 24 30 )1 N.A. 193:29 274:43 192:57 NA 
295 168 NA NA 2:26 eass N.A. N.A. 91:82 9136 NA N.A. NA NA 716:47 668:40 N.A. N.A. 
262 334 306 N.A. 1:02 00:60 00:50 NA 95:92 %:19 97: II N.A. N.A 269:27 333:21 25121 N.A. 
274 219 226 N.A. 5:33 07:04 05:03 NA 8268 79:9 84:53 N.A. NA 1517:30 1760:24 1143:51 N.A. 
j12 58.1 NA 6:56 0;:19 03:;1 NA 59;.!4 6;:38 69:15 N.A. N.A. 3553:00 3033:00 2218:40 NA 571 
96 35 71 NA 1:23 01:58 00:47 N.A. 98:47 99:22 99:36 N.A. N.A. 134.07 67:57 ;5:05 NA 
186 107 N.A. 1:55 01: 17 ()(IJ] NA 95:93 97:57 99:33 NA N.A. 357:37 212:40 58:37 N.A. 166 
167 N.A. 193 N.A. 2:2.' NA 0i:21 NA 95:46 NA 98:84 NA N.A. 397:32 N.A. 276:;0 NA 
NA 1:13 01:30 01:1; N.A. 99:97 99:96 99:% N.A. 316S llO5 3405 N.A. 0208 03:11 03:17 NA 
iSl 791 01:06 01: 16 01:01 00:40 
201 N.A. NA N.A. ooJl N.A NA N.A NA !Ii A. NA 00:37 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:99 
672 716 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 
1Xl20 {jI).20 1Xl21 00:22 99.99 99:99 99::99 99:99 
N.A. NA N.A. NA NA NA N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
IOUAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAUUAAAAAA N.A. 


10 12 1) 
" 15 17 
" 18 19 2tJ ~1 LJ 2. 
Maharashtra II N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
Maherashtra 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Maharashtra 
Nagaland 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
Orissa 
«) Orissa 
W 
Thane 
Pune 
Nagpur 
Nashik 
Aurangabad 
Kohima 
Bhubneshwar 
Puri 
Khurda 
Nayagam 
Cuttack 
Dhenkanal 
Angul 
Kendrapara 
Jagat5inghpur 
Berhampur 
Chatrapur 
Digapahandi 
Aska 
jeypore 
MSEB 
MSEB 
MSEB 
MSEB 
MSEB 
Elecy. Deptt. 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
CESCO 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
MT N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
96 99 N.A. N.A. 16:43 N.A. N.A. N.A. 103 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00: 16 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:69 N.A. 
MT N.A. 
15 15 N.A. N.A. 44:02 N.A. N.A. N.A. 211 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00: I, N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:; N.A. 
MT N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 26:44 N.A. N.A. N.A. 37 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:44 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:69 N.A. 
MT N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 45:21 N.A. N.A. N.A. m N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:-1S N.A. 
Mf N.A. 
44 4; N.A. N.A. 59:41 N.A. N.A. N.A. 171 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:21 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:32 N.A. 
SC N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 77:14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 954 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:05 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:12 N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 1()3:05 N.A. N.A. N.A. 433 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:28 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:68 N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 61:15 N.A. N.A. N.A. 658 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:06 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:3 N.A. 
o N.A N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 181:s! N.A. N.A. N.A. 636 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:92 N.A. 
o 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
SC N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. 


<0 
~ N 10 I~ 14 15 16 13 I' 10 23 17 18 21 22 
Orissa ~'1alkangiri 
Orissa Nawarangepur 
Orissa Bhanjanagar 
Orissa Phulbani 
Orissa Boudh 
Orissa Ravazada .. Orissa Cunupur 
Orissa Paralakhemundi 
Orissa Malkangiri 
Punjab Amritsar 
Punjab Ludhiaua 
Punjab [alandhar 
Punjab Paliala 
Punjab Bathinda 
Punjab A!JnSd 
Punjab Faridkot 
Punjab \1oga 
Punjab Kotkapura 
Punjab Firozpur City 
Punjab S/U Firozpur 
SOUDiCO 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
sournco 
PSEB 
I'SEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
!'SEB 
PSEB 
I'SEB 
I'SEB 
!'SEB 
!'SEB 
!'SEB 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. ~.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. KA. NA ~.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. ~.A. NA N.A. N.A. 
o N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. 1'.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA NA N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. 
o N:A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 1\.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. 
o N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. 
o 
o NA 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. 
MT 112 
Mr. 276 
Mr 100 
MT N.A. 
o N.A. 
o NA 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
o N.A. 
ns 93 260 
uuuuuuuuuuuuuu~uuu 
171 372 00:28 ()():5S 01:!l- 00:58 'l9.51 97:1; 97:63 9;:83 113 127 43:02 249:32 207:24 )62:20 
295 W ;0.0:1 ;7:16 n;Q ;3:'16 40 41 49 116 
101 98 us 2,;:16 21:5) N.A. 22:58 64 61 N.A. 
>l 4; N.A. N.A. 81:31 9():2S N.A. N.A. 91 43 
29 32 N.A. 3H8 3;:i).! 31:)9 N.A. 9() SS JO 
N.A. 4S:6{) 32:16 11:10 N.A. 137 
12 13 N.A. 'H:12 N.A. );:39 ~.A. 67 N.A II 
19 18 N.A. 46:'H NA 28:12 N.A. 46 N A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.;" N.A. N.A. N.A. 
J; N.A. 01:02 N.A. 011:.5 N.A. 99:46 NA <N:oS 17 
H 01:1' 01:23 111:29 01:14 'l9.43 'l9:3; 'l9:17 <j<j:J.\ 
64 00:24 00:22 N.A. 00:22 94.71 'l9:7j NA 99:74 
73 N.A. N.A. ()():'H Ol:)j N.A. NA 'l9:07 98:94 
12 N.A. ()():l4 00:)1 02:4; N.A. 99';9 99:6 'l9:63 
S4 12 N.A. 00:21 00:23 OH\ N.A. 99.41 'l9:83 99:02 
32 N.A. 00:18 N.A. 01:07 1'<.A. 99.38 N.A. <j<j.;s 
14 I; N.A. N.A. N.A. ss.n N.A NA N.A. ;2 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:07 NA N.A N.A. 99:34 
u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u 


10 12 13 I; I, l~ 19 20 II !I 21 1.1 24 
Punjab GHS/jBD N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. I\.A. N.A. N.A. 
Punjab Zira/Makhu 
Punjab Muktsar 
Punjab Botala 
Punjab Gurdaspur 
Punjab Pathankot 
Punjab Attari 
Punjab Chogewan 
Punjab Majitha 
Punjab Ajnala 
Punjab Mohali 
Punjab Kapunhala 
Punjab Ramdass 
Punjab F.G. Churian 
Punjab [andiaia 
Punjab Tarn Taran 
Punjab Sang",' 
Punjab Roper 
Punjab Khanna 
~ Punjab Hoshiarpur 14 17 21 N.A. N.A. N.A. 63:02 N.A. N.A. N.A. 120 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:31 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:22 
PSEB 
?SEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
PSEB 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A 
N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A.. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
II 16 N.A. 116:05 N.A. 62:42 N.A. i2 N.A. 01:21 N.A. 00:;3 N.A. 98:67 N.A. 99:26 86 N.A. 11 
J3 14 16 N.A. 273:;8 N.A. 486:4S N.A. 244 N.A.. 320 N.A. 01:07 N.A. 01:31 N.A. 96:87 N.A. 91:44 
JO 31:15 254:60 N.A. 139:;2 66 219 N.A. 321 00:29 01:10 N.A. 01:22 99:61 97:09 N.A. 91:98 
11 10 11 N.A. 251:26 N.A. m:ll N.A. 265 N.A. 3J.I N.A. 00:57 N.A. 01::!; N.A. 97:13 N.A. 91:57 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ U ~ ~ U ~ U U U U ~ U ~ ~ 
35 N.A. N.A. N.A. 136:15 N.A. N.A. N.A. 10 N.A. N.A. N.A. 14:17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9SA 
10 N.A. N.A. N.A. 3l:l5 N.A. N.A. N.A. 108 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00: 17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9%1 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
33:15 N.A. N.A. 380:17 85 N.A. N.A. 326 00:23 N.A. N.A. 01:10 99';9 N.A. NA 95:66 
14 N.A. N.A. 387:43 554:36 N.A. N.A. 69 56 N.A. N.A. 05:38 09:51 N.A. N.A. 95:57 93:22 
N.A. N.A. 31:14 18:;8 N.A. N.A. 71 34 N.A. N.A. (l(): 11 00:33 N.A. N.A. 99:85 99:78 
14 20 N.A. N.A. N.A. 20:43 N.A. N.A. N.A. 56 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:22 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:76 N.A. 


co 0'> JO 12 13 24 18 19 10 14 I; 16 17 :1 12 ~3 
Punjab N.A. N.A. N.A. .Nj N.A. N.A. N.A. 98 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:26 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:j1 
Punjab 
Pondicherrv 
Raiaslhan 
Rajaslhan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
,ikkim 
Slkkim 
Sikkim 
Sikcim 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Ntldu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Nava Shahar 
Abohar 
Pondicherry 
jaipur 
jodhpur 
RajasamanJ/Kankroli 
Udaipur 
Nagaur 
Banswara 
Dungarpur 
Sikar 
Gangtok 
Namchi 
Gyalzing 
Mangan 
Chennai 
Ccimbatcre 
Madurai 
Trichy 
Salem 
PSEB 
PSEB 
Elecy. Depu. 
jaipur WNL 
jodhpur WNl 
Ajrner VVNL 
Ajmer WNL 
Ajmer WNL 
Ajrner VVNL 
Ajmer WNL 
Ajmer VVNL 
Power Deptt. 
Power Ueptt. 
Power Deptt. 
Power Deptt. 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
o 
o 
o 
sc 
Mf 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
sc 
o 
o 
o 
sc 
MT 
~fT 
MT 
o 
N.A. 
N.A. 
NA 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
f>lS 
49 
2S 
30 
15 
10 11 N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
V~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. iII.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
I. N.A. N.A. ill A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. iII.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
iII.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. '1.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. NA 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
iII.A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. '{A. N.A. N.A. NA N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
sn n; 17:35 23:iJ<l 18:S4 18:;9 82 N.A. 00:1 00:13 00:. N.A. 9'l:8 99:7. 99:78 9'l:iS % 105 695 
5) j6 59:31 71:53 Sl:j{) 177:37 211 00:41 (IHI 00:.1 00:51 99:32 99: IS 99:05 q7:91 56 105 123 53 
j{) 59 13:1, 21:;3 NA 73:3.1 3,1 N.A. 103 00:26 00:38 N.A. 00:4, 99:85 99:73 N.A. 19.11 j2 .11 
)J 37 2'J 37 00:45 00:31 00:27 00:2j 99:71 99:78 99:S5 99:82 37 38 3:34 19:,~ 13:18 15:31 ).! 
25 1St 179 179 272 00:30 00:33 00:28 00: 11 98:95 98:87 99:03 97:86 24 24 922j 9S:lS S·U.J 18N2 


'" 
12 13 14 15 1, 
" 19 )) ~1 l' ~, 2' 
Tamil Nadu- 70 00:35 00:41 00:29 00:35 99:67 99:58 99:62 99:53 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
CD Tamil Nadu 
--.J 
Tirunelveli 
1iruppur 
Pudukkottai 
Aranthangi 
Villupuram 
Tlndivanam 
Chengalpattu 
Madhuranthagam 
Erode 
Kanchipuram 
Firuvellore 
Namakkal 
Tincheugode 
Edapadv 
Kumarapalayam 
Cuddalore 
Chidambaram 
Virudhachalam 
Panruti 
Nellikuppam 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
o 26 2; 37:'i6 38:12 33:18 41:08 65 
III 
36 
Jj2 
!O5 
30 
121 
32 
154 
83 
74 
2SO 
118 
113 
61 
184 
49 
33 
24 
116 
'i6 
139 
27 
168 
98 
25 
91 
18 
282 
66 
39 
225 
129 
138 
98 
178 
88 
51 
51 
178 
69 
21i 317 01:10 00:57 00:51 00:'>4 98:5 98:61 97:65 96:73 
22 25 
20 3-l 01:41 O~CO 01:58 01:1ll 99:31 99:35 99:55 99:59 
o 24 24 131:0-1 130:4: 206:08 286:51 
72 78 01:13 00:39 ()():41 00:58 97:88 98:TJ 99:14 99:13 
24 24 
70 184 00:28 00:28 00:27 0036 99:ll 99:47 99:S4 98:89 
o 60:31 'i6:lO 39: 17 35:47 
28 II; 01:21 01:)0 00:38 01:23 99:23 99:57 99:8 98:~ 
o 185:47 109:54 48:59 75:'i6 
167 70 00:49 ()():23 00:17 00:07 98:j7 99:60 99:46 99:91 
o -15:55 l6:12 31:51 97:28 
15 25 01:56 _ 00:51 OO:ll 00:18 99:3 99:82 99:88 99:92 
o 67:39 37:3-l 17:3-l 157:14 
III ISO 00:05 00:10 00:32 00:51 99:88 99:-14 99:12 98:2 
o 99:05 3-l:6O 47:35 08:19 
58 71 00:42 00:49 00:48 00:35 99:33 99:38 99:47 99:47 
o bU5 15:30 10:43 07:17 
13 l3 00:3-l 00:43 01:ll 00:54 99:51 99:01 99:04 99:06 
o 11:55 49:15 76:40 158:07 
169 216 00:16 00:16 00:02 00:34 99:17 99:34 99:93 98:62 
o 58:52 5):53 46:39 41:ll 
96 76 00:35 00:32 OO:~S 00:49 99:22 99:22 99:13 99:29 
o 42:38 31:18 31:-14 29:28 
212 130 00:38 00:33 00:21 01:10 99:19 99:13 99:05 98:01 
o 72:72 58:13 05:58 121:16 
Ill) 26 01:35 01:1ll 01:36 00:55 89:89 98:81 99:09 99:73 
o 68:07 68:27 76:39 62:06 
203 239 00:31 00:14 00:17 00:15 98:9 99:52 99:36 99:31 
74 45 00:53 00:18 00:23 01:01 99.5 99:70 99:68 99:48 
36 52 01:1ll 01:02 00:38 00:29 99:59 99:41 99:75 99:71 
138 247 00:09 00:03 00:0. 00:05 99:98 99:97 99:89 99:77 
237 329 00:23 00:14 00:11 00:09 99:48 99:52 99.5 99:13 
o 71:01 76:27 83:22 174:08 
o 97:30 104:24 79:55 24:02 
o 96:01 42:22 ;;:05 60:37 
o 13:30 26:lj 27:53 45:58 
o 35:41 51:59 2217 lj:09 
o 03:40 02:36 09:19 19:54 
o 43:25 41:52 44:11 49:56 


<D 
OJ " 10 12 IJ I' I' !: IS 19 20 21 !_i 2' I' 
Tamil Nadu 141 
Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu 
Tripura 
Uttaranchal 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Utter Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
West lkngal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
Udumaipet 
Pollachi 
Dharapuram 
Agertala 
Dehradun 
Lucknow 
Kanpur 
Varanasi 
Azamgarh 
Meerut 
Allahabad 
Ghaziabad 
Agra 
Greater Noida 
Kclkata 
Asansol 
Bidhannagar 
Durgapur 
Asanso! 
Haldia 
TNEB 
TNEB 
TNEB 
Elee,.. Deptt. 
Uttaranchal PC ltd. SC 
Madhvanchal V \'NL SC 
KESCO 
Poorvanchal II VNl MT 
I'oorvanchal V VNL 0 
Paschimanchal V VNl MT 
Poorvenchal V VNl MT 
Paschimanchal V VNL MT 
Dakshinanchal V VN!. MT 
Noida Power Company 0 
(ESC 
OPSCl 
WBSE Oislt. Com. ltd. 0 
WBSE Oislt. Com. ltd. 0 
WBSE O~It. Com. ltd. 0 
WBSE Oistt. Com. ltd. 0 
o 
o 
o 
-c 
MT 
71:10 lIS:E 116:)6 E7:'l! H % l,jS 01:17 01:14 00:;0 00:60 99.2 98:65 95:67 97:1J6 
15i21 186:59 123:25 225:01 138 
96:28 19l:l4 100:35 204:5(] 22 
198 1;1 304 OI:OS 110:57 00:49 00:14 98.21 97:87 98:59 9N3 
74 219 00:20 02;37 00:4) 00:49 98.S 97:78 9S:S; 97:66 
N.A. 1! N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A_ N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
139 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U 
246 'flO N_A_ N.A. 157:19 N_A_ N.A_ N.A_ 
~.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N_A_ N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N_A_ N.A_ N.A. N_A_ N.A. 
158 N.A. N.A. N.A_ 00:60 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:2 N.A. m 
22UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU N_A_ 
N.A_ 
N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A_ N.A. N.A N.A. N.A. N.A. NA. N_A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N_A. 
U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U 
86 N_A. N_A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N_A. N.A. N.A. N.A_ N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N_A. 
N.A. U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U 
MUAAAAAAUAAAAUUAAAAAAAAAAAAUUU N.A. 
N.A. 
N_A. 
N.A_ N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N_A. N.A. 
N_A_ N_A. 
22 21 1-1 N_A. E27:28 1718:06 N.A. N.A. 1-<0-1 IOS2 N.A. N A. OUS 01:35 N.A. N.A. 71:14 80:]9 N_A_ 
31 60 02:42 116:48 00:14 00:-16 99:96 99:88 99:74 99:48 sc 1l2'l 1151 1222 1331 03:26 10:36 2240 45:15 
113 113 N.A. N.A. 68:30 88:27 N_A. N.A. 
63 N.A. N.A. N.A. 05:51 N.A. N.A_ N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 122:10 N A. N.A_ N_A 
29 !I:.A. N.A. N.A. 183:35 N_A. N.A. N.A. 
17 N.A_ N.A. N.A. 1;;:56 N.A. N.A. N_A. 
91 120 N A. N.A. 00:45 00:42 N.A. N.A. 99:22 98:99 N_A_ MT 
22 N.A. N.A. N_A. 00: 16 N.A. N.A. N_A. 99:91 N.A. 
9; N.A. N.A_ N.A. 01:17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9S:bl N.A. 
292 N.A. N.A. N_A. 00::iS N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:9 N.A_ 
128 N.A. N.A. N.A_ 01:13 N.A. N.A. N_A. 9S:22 N.A. 


10 ;) 11 11 15 I, 17 19 20 ~l 16 21 ;~ 2j 
Wesl Bengal 108 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:22 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:31 N.A. 
Wesl Bengal 
Wesl Bengal 
Wesl Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
West Bengal 
<0 West Bengal 
<0 
Siliguri 
Kolkat. (part) 
Barasat 
Baruipur 
Howrah (part) 
Hooghly-Chinsurah 
Burdwan 
Sun 
Berhampore 
Krishnanagar 
M.ld,h 
Tarnluk 
Midnapore 
Bankura 
Purulia 
Raiganj 
Belurghat 
Darjeeling 
Ialpaigur: 
Coochbehar 
WBSE Distt. Com. Lid. 0 
WBSE Di~t. Com. Lid. MT 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
IVBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. MT 
WBSE Distt.· Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Lid. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Lid. 0 
\1'1lSE Distt. Cern. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WSSE Di~t. Com. Lid. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Di~t. Com. Lid. 0 
WBSE Di~t. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE DiSH. Com. Ltd. 0 
WBSE Distt. Com. Ltd. 0 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 
17 N.A. N.A. N.A. 148m N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 98;18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
1) N.A. N.A. N.A. 1>3:18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 117:15 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. 150:01 9~18 N.A. N.A. 
13 N.A. N.A. N.A. 34:36 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
14 N.A. N.A. N.A. 117:59 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 6H5 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N A. N.A. 108;35 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 93:16 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
11 N.A. N.A. N.A. 110:49 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 234:24 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 9;:45 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 136:20 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 148:36 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. llj:l7 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 112:18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 149:28 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A.· 139:33 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
N.A. N.A. N.A. 191:57 N.A. N.A. N.A. 
113 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:48 N.A. N.A. N.;I 9S:88 N.A. 
126 N A. N.A. N.A. 01:04 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:48 N.A. 
131 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:51 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:55 N.A. 
IS-! 96 N.A. N.A. 00:49 00:58 N.A. N.A. 98::!'I 98:94 N.A. 
60 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:55 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:37 N.A. 
99 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:18 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:34 N.A. 
57 N.A. :-l.A. N.A. 01:06 N.A. N.A. N.A. 99:29 N.A. 
158 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:09 N.A. N.A. I\.A. 97:,1 N.A. 
S6 N.A. K.A. N.A. 01:0; N.A N.A. :\.A %:94 N.A. 
10; N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:03 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:7.1 N.A. 
218 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:05 N.A. N.A. N.A. 97:)1 N.A. 
lOS N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:53 :-l.A N.A. N.A. 9S:91 N.A. 
168 N.A. N.A. N.A. lli1:52 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:.[.4 N.A. 
162 N.A. N.A. N.A. 00:55 N.A. N.A. N.A. 983 'J.A. 
107 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:10 N.A. N.A. N .~. 98:56 N.A. 
109 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:02 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:i2 N.A. 
97 N A. N.A. N.A. 01:32 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:19 N.A. 
94 N.A. N.A. N.A. 01:19 N.A. N.A. N.A. 98:41 N.A. 
119 N.A. N.A. N.A. 0):19 N.A. N.A. N.A. 9::S1 N.A. 


0 RELIABILITY INDEX-CONSUMER LEVEL FINANCIAL YEAR DATA 0 
State State Utility Type No. of Outage No of Average Consumer 
Capital/Urban Consumer duration Outages Duration Reliability 
Agglomeration per per of an 
Consumer Consumer Outage 
(hh:mm) (hh:mm) 
2007-08 2007-08 2007-08 2007-08 2007-08 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Arunachal Pradesh Itanagar Deptt. of Power SC 13643 NA NA NA NA 
Chandigarh Chandigarh Chandigarh Elecy. Deptt. SC 210571 00:01 5.86 00:00 99.9998 
Delhi Delhi (NDPL Area) NDPL SC 949100 00:03 0.02 02:18 99.999 
Gujarat Gandhi Nagar Torrent Power AEC SC 57034 02:27 5.82 00:25 99.97 
Gujarat Ahmedabad Torrent Power AEC MT 1350682 11:45 13.52 00:52 99.86 
Gujarat Surat Torrent Power SEC MT 503775 09:41 20.06 00:29 99.89 
Gujarat Vadodra MGVCL MT 501025 00:00 0.23 00:01 99.99995 
Gujarat Godhra MGVCL 0 39588 00:01 10.56 00:00 99.9998 
Gujarat Dahod MGVCL 0 27546 00:00 10.81 00:00 99.9999 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Gujarat Anand MGVCL 0 49078 20:08 86.82 00:14 99.77 
Gujarat Nadiad MGVCL 0 57880 13:54 103.75 00:08 99.84 
Gujarat Palanpur UGVCL 0 30001 NA NA NA NA 
Gujarat Himatnagar UGVCL 0 28907 NA NA NA NA 
Gujarat Mehsana UGVCL 0 49448 NA NA NA NA 
Gujarat Patan UGVCL 0 36245 NA NA NA NA 
Gujarat Kalol UGVCL 0 32994 NA NA NA NA 
Kamataka Hubli HESCOM 0 160515 NA NA NA NA 
Karnataka Dharwad HESCOM 0 77248 NA NA NA NA 
Karnataka Gadag HESCOM 0 43043 NA NA NA NA 
Kamataka Karwar HESEOM 0 21810 NA NA NA NA 
Kamataka Haveri HESCOM 0 16482 NA NA NA NA 
Karnataka Belgaum HESCOM 0 142728 NA NA NA NA 
Karnataka Bijapur HESCOM 0 69164 NA NA NA NA 
o Karnataka Bagalkot HESCOM 0 31047 NA NA NA NA ....•. 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 I\) 
Kerala Thiruvananthapurm KSEB se 352827 47:47 3.85 12:25 99.45 
Kerala Kollam KSEB MT 109634 NA NA NA NA 
Kerala Alappuzha KSEB 0 49498 03:38 0.59 06:12 99.96 
Kerala Kozhikode KSEB 0 141884 03:07 1.27 02:28 99.96 
Kerala Palakkad KSEB 0 52602 113:48 222.00 00:31 98.68 
Kerala Emakulam KSEB MT 208529 06:36 1.49 04:26 99.92 
Kerala Kesaragod KSEB 0 18509 00:23 0.58 00:39 99.996 
Kerala Kottayam KSEB 0 34148 31:32 0.14 232:50 99.64 
Kerala Thrissur KSEB 0 149709 03:31 0.67 05:13 99.96 
Madhya Pradesh Indore MPPK V veo MT 370923 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Khandwa MPPK V veo 0 35602 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Burhanpur MPPK V veo 0 35736 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Khargone MPPK V veo 0 22580 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Barwani MPPK V veo 0 10478 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Dhar MPPK V veo 0 17622 NA NA NA NA 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Madhya Pradesh Jhabua MPPK V veo 0 7743 NA NA NA NA 
Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur MPPo K V veo MT 206442 00:07 0.11 01:05 99.999 
Mizoram Aizawl Power & Electy. Deptt. SC 48198 35:26 31.33 01:08 99.59 
Mizoram Champhai Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 10620 00:11 0.08 02:14 99.998 
Mizoram Lunglei Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 7013 1851:31 0.51 3617:54 78.53 
Mizoram Saiha Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 3676 02:11 8.69 00:15 99.98 
Mizoram Lawngtlai Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 5077 01:20 10.15 00:08 99.98 
Mizoram Kolasib Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 4320 00:06 0.16 00:37 99.999 
Mizoram Serchhip Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 2809 144:11 211.80 00:41 98.32 
Mizoram Mamit Power & Electy. Deptt. 0 1296 292:11 173.13 01:41 96.56 
Maharashtra Mumbai (City) BEST SC 943099 01:24 1.78 00:47 99.98 
Maharashtra Mumbai (City) Tata Power Co. Ltd. MT 24109 01:11 2.28 00:31 99.99 
Orissa Bhubneshwar CESCO SC 117291 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Puri CESCO 0 30290 NA NA NA NA 
a Orissa Khurda CESCO 0 8633 NA NA NA NA tv 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 .j>. 
- 
Orissa Nayagarh CESCO 0 4137 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Cuttak CESCO 0 65670 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Dhenkanal CESCO 0 23600 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Angul CESCO 0 18575 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Kendrapara CESCO 0 20270 NA NA NA NA 
Orissa Jagatsinghpur CESCO 0 18200 NA NA NA NA 
Punjab Amritsar PSEB MT 256917 00:11 11.47 00:01 99.998 
Punjab Ludhiana PSEB MT 425124 56:29 1.21 46:46 99.35 
Punjab Jalandhar PSEB MT 23518 00:07 0.31 00:22 99.9999 
Punjab Patiala PSEB MT 112082 00:02 0.03 01:14 99.9996 
Punjab Bathinda PSEB 0 61586 00:01 11.17 00:00 999.9998 
Punjab Mansa PSEB 0 48194 00:00 11.91 00:00 99.9999 
Punjab Faridkot PSEB 0 20006 00:02 1.04 00:02 99.9997 
Punjab Moga PSEB 0 34650 00:01 0.73 00:02 99.9998 
Punjab Muktsar PSEB 0 25789 00:26 0.56 00:45 99.997 


2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Punjab Batala PSEB 0 36955 00:13 11.88 00:01 99.998 
Punjab Gurdaspur PSEB 0 19478 00:14 11.90 00:01 99.997 
Punjab Pathankot PSEB 0 39782 00:08 11.96 00:01 99.998 
Punjab Mohali PSEB 0 37520 00:08 0.62 0-:12 99.999 
Punjab Kapurthala PSEB 0 19298 00:01 0.06 00:17 99.9998 
Punjab Tam Taran PSEB 0 16457 00:10 11.38 00:01 99.998 
Punjab Sangrur I'SEB 0 22228 00:21 3.90 00:05 99.996 
Punjab Ropar PSEB 0 15382 00:03 5.70 00:00 99.9999 
Punjab Khanna PSEB 0 29012 04:53 11.17 00:26 99.94 
Punjab Hoshiarpur PSEB 0 47766 00:02 0.05 00:31 99.9997 
Punjab Nava Shahar PSEB 0 14812 00:01 0.03 00:26 99.9999 
Punjab Abohar PSEB 0 31217 00:17 0.33 00:52 99.997 
Uttar Pradesh Kanpur KESCO MT 459830 NA NA NA NA 
'SC -State Capital 
MT-Major Towns-Towns with population more than eight lakhs 
o 'O-other towns-Towns with population more than one lakh (]I 


ANNEXURE VII 
KEY FINDINGS OF THE lIMA REPORT ON "ELECTRICITY 
REFORMS AND REGULATIONS - A CRITICAL REVIEW 
OF LAST 10 YEARS EXPERIENCE" 
1. Competitive Procurement, ABT and Trading 
Issue: 
• High cost of traded power 
Reasons: 
• While long-term procurement is on the basis of "two part 
tariffs", the short term competition is essentially based on 
"energy-only price" or a single price. 
• Given no compulsion to procure adequate capacity and 
option to ration supply, utilities have an incentive to rely 
on UI under ABT or short-term traded power to meet peak 
shortages or short-term requirements. 
• Peak power or short-term merchant power is likely to be 
expensive due to uncertainty of capacity utilization and need 
to recover capital costs over a shorter period of time. 
• Competitive Procurement, ABT and Trading 
Recommendations: 
• There is a case for empowering the SERCs to insist on 
adequate contracting of capacities by the utilities rather than 
relying on UI and rationing for matching demand and 
supply. 
• High price for peaking powe!' and high prices through out 
the day are symptoms of different problems and should be 
dealt with accordingly. 
• Peaking power price, which is available on energy-only or 
a single price is expected to be high whereas high price of 
traded power through the day is clear indication of 
inadequate capacity contracting by the utilities. 
• Demand side management through different and higher 
prices during peak hours, should be used more aggressively 
to flatten the load curve. 
106 


• Trading margin regulations are not likely to be very helpful 
in dealing with the problem. 
2. Trading 
Issues: 
• Can the trading margin be regulated? 
• Should the trading margin be regulated? 
Difficulties and Recommendations: 
• Distribution utilities can retain or create capacities for trading 
to provide benefit to their consumers. 
• Generators can create trading arms and can byp.ass the 
regulation through suitable transfer pricing unless there is a 
cap on prices charged by the generators. 
• If the objective is that the traders should help in matching 
supply and demand, then trading margin regulations are 
not warranted. 
3. Creating Competitive Electricity Market 
Issues: 
• ABT based management of imbalances does not provide 
incentives over medium to long term for balancing the 
demand and supply. 
• While most of the long-term contracted power is dispatched 
on the basis of "energy charge" or variable costs, the traded 
power is dispatched on total costs. 
• In the absence of bidding for dispatch, the dispatch decisions 
are based on charges payable rather than the costs revealed 
by the bidding. 
• In the absence of a consolidated market revealing a single 
price, the short-term trades are on the basis of bilateral 
contracts with associated counter-party and contract failure 
risks. ' 
Recommendations: 
• An alternative to ABT based management of imbalances 
would be creating real time market (gross pool). 
107 


Caveats: 
• For developing the market, the existing bilateral contracts 
between generators and utilities can be honored. The 
transmission assets should be common carrier and be free 
from bilateral contracts. 
• The capacity and energy need to be separately contracted 
for in the real time market, i.e., capacity and energy 
contracted for can be sold separately and there is a single 
price for each during each slot of time. 
• All players payor get the same price for capacity and 
energy but the bilateral contracts as financial contracts can 
continue to be respected through settlement between the 
two parties. 
• Another alternative to above is to have real time imbalance 
market based on bids and offers (net pool). In such a case, 
the prices may be more volatile. 
• Care has to be taken against the possibility of exercise of 
market power. Gross pool with extensive long-term 
contracting lessens the incentive to game the market. 
• Price caps can be specified as in case of Australian market. 
But the price cap should neither be too low nor too high. 
• Extensive use of TOD meters wherever feasible would be 
required if the objective is to have a greater share of 
dispatchable load in the market allowing demand side 
response. 
• Real time markets require real time management and control 
of transmission network including assessment of losses at 
different nodes and congestion besides security constraints 
in dispatch. 
• Greater centralized coordination by the market operator and 
ISO is required for effective real time markets to operate. 
4. Open Access and Competition 
Issues: 
108 
• Open Access has been allowed but not availed due to­ 
• cross-subsidy surcharge and applicable tariffs. 


• Reduction in or expectation of reduction in industrial 
tariffs 
• lack of availability of firm and long-term power at 
reasonable prices 
• weak bargaining power vis-a-vis utility, perceived threat. 
• utilities' indirect control over STU and SLDC 
Recontmenda t ions: 
• Cross-subsidy surcharge and standby charged need to be 
reviewed and lowered. 
• Independence of STU /SLDC needs to be ensured to reduce 
threat perception. 
5. Independent System Operations 
Issues: 
• Transmission utilities and Load dispatch centers are expected 
to provide non-discriminatory access to transmission system 
by all eligible participants is necessary to promote 
competition. 
• SLDCs/STUs have currently too close a linkage with the 
other state utilities for historical reasons and administrative 
structure post unbundling are preserving these links. 
ReC0111 menda tion«: 
• STUs and SLDCs should be ring-fenced financially and 
administratively from direct or indirect influence of utilities/ 
State Governments. 
• SLDCs should report functionally to SERCs and the 
manpower of SLDCs may require training in system 
operations without commercial or political considerations. 
• STUs and SLDCs should disclose system related information 
and decision-rules in the public domain for facilitating non­ 
discriminatory open access. 
6. Transmission Tariffs and Competition 
Issues: 
• Currently, the transmission costs are recovered through 
postage stamp pricing, which are not sensitive to direction 
and distance of flow. 
109 


• Since the basis of pooling is geographical, it penalizes the 
consumers of producing areas. 
• Cost of expanding transmission network is not factored 
while determining generation costs/prices. 
Recommendations: 
• A substantial part of capacity costs of existing transmission 
assets should be allocated to consumers based on some 
distance related measure. 
• Losses and congestion costs should be based on typical load 
flows even if real time approach like "nodal pricing" is 
found difficult to implement. 
• Generation capacity costs should include cost associated with 
expansion required for transmission network. 
7. Competition among DISCOMS/through Multiple Licensees 
Issues: 
• Desire of the State Governments to keep tariffs same across 
state has resulted in no effective competition. 
• This has been achieved through dynamic allocation of 
generation capacity and subsidy distribution. 
• Administrative structure and HR policies preclude any 
effective competition and also make intra-State ABT 
meaningless. 
• In such a scenario, any attempt to introduce competition 
through multiple licensees would be difficult. In any case, 
open access to distribution system of competitor is not 
allowed. 
Recommendations: 
• Meaningful competition is possible only if the capacity 
allocations, subsidies are fixed for multiple years in advance 
and administratively the utilities are made independent. 
8. Competition through Captive Generation 
Issues: 
• Open access related issues affect use of captive generation 
capacity. 
110 


• Postage stamp transmission may become hindrance unless 
dedicated lines are used. 
• Terms are not as favorable as traded power and/or UI 
charges. 
Recommendations: 
• The terms of offtake from captive generators should be at 
least as favorable as short-term traded power lUI charges. 
• Despite problems in Pune, bringing captive capacity for 
peaking power may still be socially beneficial. 
9. Addition of Generation Capacity 
Issues: 
• Some of the States are not keen on adding capacity for 
exports outside the state whereas some others are keen on 
it. 
• 
• Lack of clarity on the basis of coal and rail linkages. 
• Gas availability problems. Existing capacities under utilized 
but no restriction on creation on new gas based capacity 
under gas utilization policy. 
• The framework for transmission charges being based on 
location of assets penalizes the consumers of exporting 
States/regions to the advantage of consumers of importing 
States/ regions . 
• No mechanism exists to ensure that utilities contract for 
adequate capacity. 
• Some of the States continue to have poorly performing 
generating capacity. Addition of new capacity is costlier than 
improving utilization of existing capacity. 
• Imported coal based capacity may be subject to price and 
supply risks. 
Recom menda lions: 
• To incentivise States 
• Collective (regional) framework such as UMPPs and central 
interventions. 
111 


• Alternatively, an incentive mechanism like free power. 
• Another alternative-to allow tax on production rather than 
on sale of electricity. 
• For creating incentive for the States to create transmission 
capacity, a framework such as "Uttarakhand Integrated 
Transmission Project" may be useful so that the transmission 
costs are paid for by the end consumers (of importing 
States). 
• Single-window clearance mechanism for capacity addition 
or prior clearances as in case of UMPPs for identified 
locations. 
• No new gas based plants should be allocated gas. 
• SERCs should have the power to insist that utilities contract 
for adequate capacity. 
• Tanda, Unchahar and Talcher experience suggests that 
takeover of State plants in case they do not perform 
adequately would be in the consumers' interest as compared 
to addition of new capacities. 
10. Distribution Loss Reduction 
issues: 
112 
• Improvement is limited to urban areas in some of the States. 
• While APDRP facilitated much needed investment in 
distribution network, its impact on loss reduction limited. 
• Metering at all levels patchy and agricultural connections 
remain unmetered. Even when metering done, quality of 
consumer metering data suspect (NA/NR). 
• Baseline loss estimates are still not available with the SERes. 
Data quality from DISCOMS remains poor. 
• Lack of consistency in reporting losses across utilities and 
time-periods. Inclusion of transmission losses, traded power 
in input energy etc. can bias reported loss levels besides 
assessed consumption. 
• Despite overall improvements in some States, it is still not 
possible to segregate technical and commercial losses. 


11. Role of State Government and Distribution Loss Reduction 
Issues: 
• State utilities have close administrative linkages with the 
State Government and are not functioning as commercial 
entities. 
• In some States, State Government has rolled back tariffs 
determined by the regulator. 
• In some States, utilities have not filed their ARRs and in 
some cases have asked for lower returns to keep the tariffs 
low, uncharacteristic of a commercial entity. 
• State Governments continue to either directly or indirectly 
intervene in HR policies of the State utilities undermining 
their independence. 
• Despite anti-theft provisions in the EA 2003, enforcements 
are weak and some States have not even created special 
courts as provided in the Act. Some States have informally 
directed utilities to be softer on first time violators than 
w~at is specified under EA 2003. 
Recommendat ions: 
• Direct subsidy to the beneficiaries would be required to 
target the beneficiaries without causing distortions in the 
sector. 
• Reporting by the utilities on loss has to be standardized 
segregating all losses. 
• Economics of AMR for all feeders and large consumers need 
to be explored. 
• Quality of supply (load-shedding) could be linked with 
collective losses on a feeder by the SERes. 
• Unless State Governments exhibit will to let go the State 
utilities as independent commercial entities and support the 
enforcement against theft, the problems will remain. This 
includes accepting SERe determined tariff, payment of 
subsidy on time as per sec 65 of EA. 
• SERes should demand proof of payment of subsidies by 
the State Government and not allow lower return while 
determining tariffs. 
113 


12. Privatization 
Experiences: 
• Four different models conceived or implemented 
• Orissa's sale of equity: Failed experiment 
• Delhi's privatization based on bids to reduce AT&C loss: 
By and large successful 
• Karnataka's proposed distribution margin approach 
• Maharashtra distribution franchisee: Successful 
Learning: 
• Sale of equity approach for a large heterogeneous territory 
will not work unless loss levels are brought down. 
• For large commercial urban centers, Delhi model is better 
in terms of risk allocation as it creates high incentive for 
the private sector and requires minimal intervention from 
State. 
• For smaller urban centers, franchisee model is less risky for 
private sector and consumers pay same tariff as in other 
pa rts of the State. 
• Regulatory Independence and Powers 
Issues: 
• Providing enforcement support to regulators by the State is 
necessary but there is an in-built conflict of interest when 
the State owned entities are to be regulated. 
• Ability of the regulators to take matters suo-mota to discharge 
their functions. 
• Governments, courts and legislatures have still not evolved 
the understanding of regulatory role and there have been 
conflicts. 
• Consultative processes between various levels of 
Governments and regulators are yet to be institutionalized. 
Recommendations: 
• Periodic review of regulatory independence and 
dissemination of such reviews would identify and highlight 
problem areas, 
114 


• There is a need for consultative framework between SERCs, 
MoP and the State Governments. 
• National level forum rather than State advisory committees 
to insulate SERes from direct pressures. 
13. Regulating Private Sector 
Issues: 
• Private sector has greater incentives to-- 
• Pad up costs in case of cost plus regulations 
• Under-report revenue or over-report expenditures 
• Exploit legal/ regulatory loopholes and inconsistencies 
• Walk-out if continuing is commercially detrimental 
• Capture "regulators" 
Recommendations: 
• Use of "price cap" regulations or competitive bids wherever 
possible. 
• Extra effort in .auditing (or cross auditing) and prudent 
checks. 
• Terms and conditions should factor in walk-out possibility 
and there should be a contingency plan. 
• Code of conduct for regulators 
14. Regulatory Resources: Financial 
Issues: 
• Quite a few SERCs are dependent on the State Governments 
financially despite EA allowing setting up regulatory fund 
subject to oversight by CAG and the legislature. 
• Financial autonomy and independence is prerequisite for 
functional independence. 
Recommendations: 
• ERCs should be financial autonomous and should build-up 
regulatory fund by charging fees from the licensees subject 
to CAG and legislature oversight. 
115 


15. Regulatory Resources: HR 
Issues: 
• Most of the ERC personnel are on deputation and retirees. 
• SERCs find it difficult to attract legal and finance 
professionals. 
• Some of the SERCs have successfully used consultants. 
• There has been little attempt to build capability / training 
for their existing staff in required professional skills. 
• There is a lack of exposure to developments in regulation 
even if there is exposure to the sector. 
Recommendations: 
• Compensation and career path needs to be reviewed to 
attract better quality HR in professional categories. 
• Adequate budget is required to take help of outside 
consultants whenever required. 
• A certain minimum training/ exposure/ capability 
enhancement is required for the staff with ERCs. 
16. Harmonizing Regulations and Building Case Laws 
Issues: 
• Regulations and rulings need to be consistent across ERCs 
and APTEL to reduce regulatory risks and to minimize 
exploitation of inconsistencies and loopholes 
• Building case laws and cross referencing is useful to 
minimize inconsistencies. 
Recommendations: 
• Building Repository of Rulings and Regulations with 
indexing would be useful for building case laws and 
harmonizing the regulations. 
• Research support and adequate staff may be required for 
cross-referencing in rulings and regulations. 
116 


APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITEEE ON ENERGY 
tv1INUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMIITEE 
ON ENERGY (2009-10) HELD ON 5TH FEBRUARY, 2010 IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. '62' PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 
NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Santosh Bagrodia-In the Chair 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri P.e. Chacko 
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
4. Shri Arjun Munda 
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
6. Shri M.B. Rajesh 
7. Dr. x.s. Rao 
8. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9. Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
11. Shri Shyamal Chakraborty 
12. Shri Veer Pal Singh Yadav 
13. Shri Govindrao Wamanrao Adik 
14. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt 
2. Shri Shiv Singh 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
117 


2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia, a Member of the Committee to act as Chairman 
for the sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members of the 
Committee to the sitting of the Committee and mentioned that the 
sitting has been convened for consideration of draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
30th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Role of Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
in Protection of Interests of Consumers'. After discussing the Draft 
Report the Committee adopted the same with slight modification. 
However, the Committee desired that officers of some of State 
Governments/SERCs who have not implemented the recommendations 
of the Committee may be called for discussion. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the 
above mentioned Report taking into consideration consequential 
changes and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
118 


APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE 30TH REPORT (14TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 29 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the' Government: 
S1. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 17, 18, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26 and 28 
Total 
Percentage 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies: 
S1. Nos. 1 and 13 
15 
51.72% 
Total 
Percentage 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of 
which the reply of the Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Serial No. 16 
02 
06.90% 
Total 
Percentage 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
. Serial Nos. 2, 5, 10, 11, 12, 14, 19, 20, 21, 
27 and 29 
01 
03.45% 
Total 
Percentage 
11 
37.93% 
119 


.. 


"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale atthe Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website 'www.parliamentofindia.nic.in'. 
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above." 
